https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=w9DWQrdXwT8

 I think this is working. I am trying this and there's not a conversation going on in the Bridges of Meaning Discord server right now. So I wondered if I just popped on, if anybody else would pop in. We will see. Just finished making a, making a, I haven't made the thumbnail for it. Making a video on continuing to think about the video that I released this morning. I can pull up the sub stack. Continuing to think about this in terms of, as is almost always the case, my thoughts continue to develop as I make a video on Friday and then Monday morning. I think about the video I made and have additional ideas and they continue to develop. So I wrote this this morning and yeah, just made another video about it. About basically church leadership, leadership of the American church. It's interesting to see what will happen. Oh, look, look, look, look. I am not alone. I am not sure how alone I would be. Let me turn on my camera. How are you guys doing? Good. Good. I just made a video that I can't wait to hear what you think of it, Jacob, because I was reading all, so I did that thing on Doug Wilson and these Reformed Reconstructionists. And they're, what do you know about these Reformed Reconstructionists, Jacob? Reformed Reconstructionist Jews? Are you talking about? They're not Jews. It's Doug Wilson, Moscow, Idaho. They very much believe that if you follow the plan of God, you will receive the reward for that plan of God. But they're Reformed Protestants. Okay, so they believe God is a divine vending machine. There's some of that to them. Yes, in a big way. So yeah, no, that's what prosperity gospel is. The idea that you are going to do, you know, that when you give God what he wants, he'll give you what you want. It's pure idolatry as far as I'm concerned. Okay, I'll be anxious to hear what you think about the video tomorrow because it's interesting stuff. How are you, Mark? I'm doing okay. I thought it was Monday. How are you doing a live stream on Monday? Monday is usually your day when you, you know, you're recovering from Sunday and you're... Yeah, it is. I, there's the masked man. I didn't go for a walk this morning because it was raining and then I did a few things around the house. And then I, my, the video I had to make today just only lasted 45 minutes. And so I have a little bit of time this afternoon. So I thought I'll pop in and see who wants to chat. And you guys did not disappoint. What's that? You did a 45 minute video? Yeah, only 45 minutes. That's awesome. Congratulations. Part of what bloats videos is if you do a commentary that commentaries are long videos to make. It just takes time. Oh, I thought Mark was making fun of the fact you haven't been dropping long videos recently. You haven't been dropping videos at much at all recently. See? That's my criticism. See? Are we live? If I drop these short little less than an hour videos, some people are like... Others are like... Less than two hours. It's not a real video. Bless your heart, Jacob. Bless your heart. I can't listen to ADHD man that long. I mean, it's fine if someone else is there to steer the ship in a good direction. But if he's just going off by himself, it's like he's going to go here and there and there. And I'm going to be like taking notes and trying to keep track. And then I'm not going to remember what the video was about because it was about 10 things. No, no. See, that's the thing. Until about into two or three hours into it. That's when you start actually getting into the meat of the matter. Like the rest of it, it's just background. I think that's true. I think that's true. And I just haven't had time for a lot of long videos lately. I mean, I've got... I've noticed. I have a list. I go to the list. I go, do I know about this enough yet? And if the answer is yes, I send it. I send it to the list. I set up the lights. I tune the stuff. I get the software rolling. I write on the board and I just go and I get a nice little 30, 15 minute. I've even got a 10 minute video. I don't know what's wrong with you guys. I'm just saying. What's the point of a 10 minute video? I have a bunch of them right now. Well, yours... No, but the thing is, Chad, yours are funny. There's a difference between a high production value, a thing that... And you make fun of that, but your videos are really high production value. When I first talked to you and you're like... And I expected you to have had professional video making experience because your videos are very, very high production value. The type of thing I would love to see people in our corner do more of, like my idea... We talk about Paul... But yeah, there's a big difference between those and actually the exploratory bubbling up things that Paul does. Those are completely different. I agree with that. I watch a lot of his ADHD videos. I quite enjoy them, but he does his best work, honestly, when he's focused in on his own ideas and he's already filtered through all that stuff and he goes in for like a 35 minute kill. And that's when you get the really good stuff, right? So you like his sermons? No, I don't like his sermons. But that's exactly what his sermons are. That's when he's actually like... Except they've got all this religious reference and theology in them that I don't understand. So no, I don't like the stuff I don't understand. Who really got it other than Jacob? Only Jacob really understands it. Hey, are we live, Paul? Yeah, we are live. I think. That's why I came on the phone with him. Okay, Paul, I'm going to hijack your stream because I found out about something just a couple of days ago, which I just... It's been bubbling in my mind. Hijack away, Jacob. So what's happened with Reform and Conservative Judaism, which are still the two largest denominations in Judaism, is they are having trouble finding people willing to enroll in their seminaries. They are not able to ordain enough rabbis. Their pulpits are going empty. And these are high-paying pulpits, right? Like, these are congregations with people, high-paying pulpits, and they just can't find people who are willing to go to their seminary. That's interesting. Now, again, we've got to do a little translation here, because most Protestants, when they hear Reform and Conservative, they're thinking one thing, but for the Jewish context, it's... This is like saying the main line, I guess. Right, yes, yes. Yeah, these are the leftists, these are the progressives, the ones that started ordaining women and now are having gay clergy. And really, from what I have been able to see, this is a crisis of authenticity, because people are no longer willing to be the pretend rabbis. And these, I call them rabbits, these pretend rabbits, which, you know, they dress themselves up in Judaism, and so Max posted this video from his rabbi talking to, who came from the Conservative JTS, and who was talking to a Reform rabbi talking from HUC, and the one thing the two of them agreed on was at least 90% of their classmates did not believe in God. Wow. Yeah, and so it's a crisis in authenticity, as far as I see it, because people are no longer willing to... So another thing, I call them like drag queens, right? When you see a drag queen, you know this is a man dressed up as a woman. Right. It's very obvious that this is somebody putting on femininity as a costume, and that's really what Reform and Conservative Judaism are. It's an atheist putting on Judaism as a costume, as a garish, and they're always the most garish. Like you'll see that what they put on is the most garish, like the women willing to fill in. It's obvious mockery of Judaism. I'm guessing they would disagree, but they can't find students. I just found out about this. This is interesting because it's sort of the reverse of liberal Protestantism, where the churches are empty, and there's all sorts of people who want to become clergy in those churches, and they don't have any trouble finding people, but the churches are just going away. So are these liberal synagogues flourishing? Well, I'm not sure I would say flourishing. The people who go to them tend to be Rosh Hashanah, Yom Kippur, people who go twice a year, and they want a synagogue for their kids to have a bar mitzvah at. So they do plenty of weddings and bar mitzvahs, and funerals and circumcisions, but for example, David Wolpe's synagogue, which, yay, he threw my sister out of the synagogue. I'm so glad. Who's David Wolpe, and why did he throw your sister out of the synagogue, and how does that interact with this? You know David Wolpe. He's very popular in our corner of the internet. He did debates with Sam Harris. He was recently on Lex Friedman. Oh, I didn't see that. I don't know who he is. He does film or something? He's in the film industry? Oh, no, no, no. He's a rabbi. Oh, he's a rabbi. Yeah, well, he's a rabbi. He's also the rabbit of the largest synagogue in Los Angeles, probably one of the largest. So describe for me his synagogue. What is that about? Because this seems to be where establishing Protestantism is going through the floor, but not the largest synagogue in Los Angeles, huh? So, okay, his synagogue is on the corner of Beverly Glen and Wilshire Boulevard, which really, I mean, this is the prime real estate at the center of Los Angeles, right? Hundreds of thousands of people drive past that corner on a daily basis, right? And every time I drive back past it, so right at the corner, it has in large Hebrew letters, L'edor V'ador, from generation to generation, which is a motto within Judaism. Yeah, yeah, yeah. And every time I drive past it, my blood boils, because the one thing that doesn't happen at that synagogue is L'edor V'ador from generation to generation, because they are an exit ramp on the freeway that is Judaism, because there's nobody there who's a third generation person there, very few, right? So is it like a megachurch, but for the Jewish? It's like a Jewish megachurch? Kind of, yeah, it is kind of a Jewish megachurch, except if you go there on a typical Saturday, you're going to see what? Maybe 100 people at the synagogue? Yeah, it's mainline. And those 100 people are all there for the three bar mitzvahs that they have every week, because that's what people join Sinai for. They have a school, Sinai Academy. I mean, it's a very expensive private school up to eighth grade, but people go there because they want their kids or they want to have a wedding in one of the nicest synagogues in the city. But that's all people go there for is lifecycle events that happen one or two or three times in their life, or they go for high holidays. So it's a service vendor, not a community. And that's your complaint. If it were a community, the words above the door would make sense, but instead it's just a service vendor. And yeah, I love your, I'm still in your vending machine analogy, Jacob. It's so excellent. Well, it's a service vendor for a community that doesn't meet weekly, and it's providing a service in some ways parallel to what Costco is providing in a different kind of community. It's a religious service provider, but you've got a particular, and I think it probably works to a degree because the Jews are a self-conscious minority. And so, correct me if I'm wrong, within that community, it's like we have to keep us together, but us involves certain ceremonies and rituals around the identity. And the part of the problem with Protestants is that at least in the post-Waspy America, I mean, Waspiness was what establishment Protestant churches were about. And it's a dating service. It's a dating service. How much does a wedding cost? What's that, Chad? How much does a wedding cost there? I'm not sure. Yeah, no, having David Wolpe himself be the officiant at your wedding, it costs more than a car, that's for sure. Okay. Okay. Well, and a lot of cathedral establishment Protestant churches are basically the same thing. They'll have a high-profile, beautiful building at the center of the city, and you can get married there. You can have ceremonies there. I mean, people do not line up out the door to have ceremonies at Living Stones. I mean, I'm just saying, stepping over the homeless dude in your wedding gown, not every girl's dream. Having your kids bar mitzvah at Sinai is a huge deal, which is why they have three bar mitzvahs every single week. Wow. At least. Yeah. My wife had a kid in her class, her last class. He had his bar mitzvah, and he invited his teacher, and so his teacher's husband went. And we had an absolutely lovely time, and it was fascinating for me just watching the cultural, religious layers, just fascinating stuff. But it really is amazing to me that they're imploding like that. Apparently, HUC, so they have three campuses. They're thinking of closing two of their campuses. HUC? Hebrew Union College. It's the reform seminary. Okay. Wow. So they just can't get students. Yep. And Ziegler, which is the, so, Conservative has two seminaries, JTS in New York, Ziegler here in Los Angeles. They've slashed their tuition to almost nothing for the rabbinical school because they can't get enough rabbis to fill the pulpits. Yeah. I think in Protestant circles, there's a weird dynamic between progressive Protestants and then evangelicals that in many ways, the fishing pond of progressives are the evangelicals. That's where all of, that's where they're drawing all of their leadership from, post-evangelicals, people who used to. And so then they still have a relationship with the faith. But I don't know that, I don't know that mainline Protestants do hardly any evangelism at all. They just basically feed off the conservative communities. That's funny because as far as congregants, I think that's what reform and conservative get a lot of people who were raised Orthodox or Orthodoxish. Yeah. And many years ago, 60, 70 years ago, it was actually somewhat common for them to kind of poach their rabbinets out of Orthodoxy, right? Some of the most prominent Orthodox rabbis, Aryeh Kaplan, for example, he translated a lot of texts. I mean, if you're reading basic texts in Judaism and English, Aryeh Kaplan probably translated at least some of them. He was actually the rabbi of a conservative synagogue. Orthodoxy, as it's coming more and more into its own, has become less and less willing to allow people to, you know, if you take a conservative, certainly a reform pulpit, now they're like, no, no, no, you're out of the club. You can't do this. And so I think that is a tiny part of it. But 20, 30 years ago, I mean, I remember I don't I was really when I saw this news and it's all over the Jewish press and some of them are attributing it to COVID. But when I look at it, this has been going on before COVID. But apparently, conservatives suspended its rules for this coming year that you have to get somebody from a conservative seminary as a rabbi. They're allowing you to hire from other seminaries because they just there aren't enough candidates. And these are high paying positions. Do you think like the more that they capitulate and move kind of the goalpost on on their rigid stance, the less people are willing to stick with it? Is that what you're saying? Oh, you mean as far as no, I really think it's a it's a matter of authenticity. Somebody like David Wolpe feels comfortable dressing in the garb of Judaism when he's really I would call him an atheist. Right. There's there's apparently this clip of where he was debating with with Sam Harris and Sam Harris keeps on bringing this up. He's like he's debating with David Wolpe and he says, well, you know, when you believe in an agentic God and will be his answers. What makes you think I believe in an agentic God? Yes. Right. So why did he debate Sam Harris? What were they going to talk about? So so this is Wolpe's thing. He he he talks about his deeper faith. I call it a six feet deep faith he has. Like he he was he was on the front page of the L.A. Times about 20 years ago and the New York Times. I think it made when he gave his Passover sermon was about how the Jews were never in Egypt and it's not true. And he believes he believes in Judaism, even though he knows that the Jews never there never was an exodus in Egypt. He's I guess you could call him postmodern. Yeah. No, these people. I mean, a lot of a lot of the congregants in conservative and reform synagogues get offended when I say things like 90 percent of these rabbits don't believe in God. They really don't. And what's changed, I think, is people no longer feel that it's justified. They don't feel comfortable fulfilling the position that David Wolpe does, which is he feels like, oh, I'm smarter than my congregants. I have to lead them. So I will tell them things. And when you if if you watch his interview with Dave Rubin from years ago, when he talks about when he started doing gay gay weddings. Right. For me, it was enraging, as almost everything David Wolpe says is, because his whole thing was, yeah, I had to ease my congregants into understanding that we don't really actually believe. In the Torah, basically. So then you just got to wonder. And that's you know, we see this again in in Protestant congregations, probably true of Catholic and other groups where there's this there's this. Yeah, it's the mission of this certain group of people to basically take people out of the faith, but they're they're standing within. They're drag queens. That's what they are. Queen. So you're saying that you see the numbers are dwindling. Is that what you're saying? The numbers of people willing to be rabbis is dwindling. How about the numbers of congregants? I don't think it's it's changed dramatically. And this is part of what makes me I mean, when I first read it, I was like, this is this is a miracle. Right. I kind of have always hoped for reform and conservative to go away, but not in a way that like, I don't want to see all these communities destroyed. But I would like to see that these communities come back to actual Judaism, which includes a belief in God and at least having your rabbis believe in God. Right. And that's what's happening, because I really think it's authenticity. I really think it's people who have more ethics than somebody like David Wolpe. So what do you talk to Lex Friedman about? I mean, why does Lex Friedman have a guy like that on his channel? Because to me, it's like, I mean, Eric also had him on his channel. I did listen to that one. And I thought I was listening. I was thinking, why would I listen to this guy? Then I stopped. Glad to hear it. And yes, David Wolpe is my nemesis. People listen to him because for the people who want to believe in an Aaronic God and only an Aaronic God. And the fact is, look, I don't think you can be a reasonable person who doesn't believe in an Aaronic Jewish God. The Aaronic Jewish God is just plain. Look, if you believe in reality, you believe in an Aaronic Jewish God. Right. And for those people, David Wolpe is the perfect rabbit. So he's creation. So he's admitting that much. But see, that's way too much. Creation, kind of like he believes that there is such a thing as a sumum bonum. Right. You have to like you have to believe that there is an uncaused cause or something, or you have to believe that there is a reality. So the type of God that Eric Weinstein believes in is the type of God that David Wolpe believes in. Right. The type of God you get to from Jordan Peterson, but it's not an agentic God. I think rabbit is not a good name for it because rabbits multiply. You're saying that they're not. OK, you have to understand part of the reason I say rabbit is because you could argue in Hebrew that Rabit is the feminine form of rabbi. And yeah, Jacob's throwing shade with the Hebrew. John Mullen here. I think I have a relevant comment. I recently watched a lecture by YouTube pastor Mike Winger. You might know him, and he had a very relevant conversation about the progressive church. And he was bringing up basically the point that the progressive church was using Jesus as a gateway drug to atheism. And that was incredibly illuminating. And it's very relevant to your recent like when you went through Carl Truman's book on personality and Jean-Jacques Rousseau, because basically progressive Christianity is an outgrowth of Rousseauian thought. And he was saying that these progressive pastors were using Jesus as a puppet from which you can let you a personal talking bubble that allowed you to speak yourself out of faith and out of Christianity. And that was very, very like on topic in relation to what you guys were talking about in what's going on in Judaism. So I think that there's something going on that's broader. It's not just in Christianity. It's in Judaism and in everywhere. And at some point, I actually got the impression that you can just summarize progressive Christianity as a form of Satanism. Because in one of these progressive leaders were saying basically that Adam and Eve did the right thing when they were sort of chewing the apple. So that's like taken straight out of Gnosticism. So very scary stuff. Interesting. Yeah, I've got that one queued up, John. I haven't. I was going to do that today, but I had a nap. So I didn't get to it yet. It's interesting. This authenticity thing came up. I did a Clubhouse Room with Manuel. We do them on Mondays at noon Eastern here. And you were talking about authenticity in respect to the intimacy crisis, right? Because you need to be intimate with yourself to be authentic. And I do have to object to John's statement of Rousseauian thought, because I didn't see any thought in Rousseau. I don't know where you get that from. It was so obviously dumb that I was like, well, really? It's kind of obviously not. And I think, Paul, you did a good job at that video pointing out it's a theory. What's a theory? A theory isn't real. It's a thought that somebody has. My comment on Paul's video was you spend too much time giving credit to stupid ideas. Just call them stupid and move on. No, we really have to do this. We have to be dismissive. Like I have every time I talk about the Black Hebrew Israelites on my channel, I actually get Black Hebrew Israelites on my channel. Spouting absolute stupidity. And I just insult them because that's all you can and should do for something that's that stupid. I'm sorry. Jacob, I have to disagree. I think what Paul is doing is right. And for this following reason, if Jean-Jacques Rousseau was all alone in his little rabbit hole talking about these personality things, then I would agree it's stupid. When the whole world believes him and follows him, something else is going on. That's spiritual. That's something else. Well, without without knowing it. But what to what extent? See, this is what I've realized to my great shock. When you have a debate, the majority of the people who listen to the debate are triangulating because they are not actually evaluating the thoughts. They are triangulating between, OK, I have two experts. These are two smart people. I am going to see where they agree. And that's definitely true. And where they disagree, the truth must be somewhere in between. In the middle. Right. And when you so this is this is what the postmodernists have right about platforming. Right. When you do a debate and you platform an idea, you there are there is at least a third of your audience at the very least. And what's been absolutely depressing is I would say 80 percent of your audience are not actually evaluating the thoughts and going, this is right. This is wrong. They are triangulating. They're saying these are the goalposts of rational debate. Let me stay in with stay in the middle and the middle path is the correct way to go. Right. To avoid conflict. Right. Because conflict is the only sin in the atheist landscape. And what is conflict? Conflict is the thing that that's inevitable that always happens. That's what intimacy is. You don't you don't resolve conflict. You accept conflict because you just move it around. You can make all these tradeoffs. So that's why the intimacy crisis video is so important in my opinion, not just because I'm the I'm the person in the video with Andrew with the bangs, but because we're talking about that in the clubhouse talk that I posted to on BOM in the in the Cherokee in the promos channel there. Same same same thing. You know, it was two weeks in a row we were talking about intimacy and conflict and the fact that you can't get around conflict. So you need to accept the choices that you make rather than trying to avoid conflict by sitting in the middle of something that has no middle. And that that's where this middle out thinking stuff comes in, too. It's all kind of wrapped together. Very it's very pernicious the way it's played out. And I heard I was listening to Break the Rules mainly because Catherine Brodsky was on there. And I really like Catherine. She's she's an interesting person. And they brought up the word intimacy. They brought up Gnosticism. They brought like all the terms you would hear here. They they brought up, you know, one ops. And they're talking about film and culture. You know, they talked about novelty. They did that. They did that. I don't know that they did the members various thing, but they did the member thing. I assume they were they were copying stuff. All of that is in that video. That video is nothing to do with religion. Right. It's nothing to do with anything except film and film industry people there. So it's interesting. It's creeping through everything. These themes are creeping creeping everywhere. So I have a question. I was been thinking a lot about this about how. So so the idea that, you know, the Peterson idea where he doesn't believe that atheists are exactly atheists, that they're probably religious in their atheism or whatever. And I was thinking about what happens when, like, say, a Christian deconstructs their way out of Christianity and then they move into whatever spaces they move into, probably something like the culture or something of that sort. What happens when you deconstruct out of that? And then, like, where does it stop? Because I don't know. It's been on my mind lately. And I feel like this has something to do with kind of like the culture's madness right now is it's itself is deconstructing itself because it can't seem to, I don't know, provide what it thinks it should be able to provide its own values. And they can't they can't seem to agree on anything. And I don't know. I haven't been able to formulate this question very well, but it's been on my mind. There's something to do with that video you posted today with these these aggregars when they started talking about creating. Well, what do we do to create this like religion or something like religion? It's like you guys. It doesn't like it's not how religion happens. Right. I'm going to let Paul answer this because I want to hear Paul's answer to this. But I would say the answer is nihilism. Yeah. Right. And how do you deconstruct out of nihilism? Well, and what this I mean, people leaving nihilism because it cannot be lived within is exactly what this little community has come from, because people lived in nihilism and it was like, you can't do it. You can't do it. And so then you go back looking for somebody's crunchy religion and the crunchier the better. So it's going to be a hardcore orthodoxy or Calvinism or Judaism. It's going to be something that has depth and meaning. And it's also going to have bite because Paul. But Paul. Yes. Isn't Calvinism just nihilism? No. Oh, here we go again. I was thinking about it like, you know, how Nietzsche talks about whatever we killed God and there's not enough water to wash away the blood and all this stuff. And then I was thinking, well, yeah, then if you killed God, then this modernism started to step in as the as the God, modernity, the materialism and the idea that we could create our own destinies and things like this started stepping as the religion, as the God. And then it's like now they're back to, oh, we we killed God and now there's not enough water to wash away the blood of this killing our culture. As you know, I don't know. How do I know? Ask. Yeah, they went to the bottom. Right. And they see the abyss and they're like, oh, no, that's way worse than we need to never come back to the abyss ever. And then they go too far in the other direction, Paul, to your point. And that's the problem with postmodernism. Like postmodern deconstruction is only deconstruction. It can't build anything. And so once you step in that hole, you're done. That's why I tell people the way out of postmodernism, the movie War Games had it right. Right. A strange game. The only way to win is not to play. Just don't play postmodern deconstruction. And that's the problem. That's the problem that you can actually probably control that. I don't know if you can. Well, well, see, the reason people play postmodern deconstruction, I think, is because of the pluralism that we live within now. And what the. Well, right. And so you have this pervasive pluralism. So that leads to the skepticism. And and I think that's part of what we're trying to sort through. And and the turn to modernism was an attempt to address that by saying, OK, we can't we can't agree on the upper register. So we're going to just keep things down here at the lower register, the physical layer, and we will build our ontology from the ground up from the physical layer. And that can't be done either. Right. So the bottom line is you can't hide from the abyss because really the ultimate abyss in my estimation would be God because you look hard enough and it's like, oh, shit. Like, you know what I mean? Like, because even the so-called abyss that stares back is terrified by the ultimate abyss. The abyss is what the tree of life grows out of. And the abyss is what I'm talking about when I'm trying to perpetuate the idea of the great testimony and reintegrating the great testimonies into the church, because everybody without them or they can't have a place to put them. You can't grow the big trees that aren't growing out of the abyss. Like the little trees get swept away when hardship hits and the trees that have grown out of the abyss won't. Anyway, this is a lot of visual imagery, but it's hard to define great testimony for me. Trauma. She's talking about trauma. I'm using great testimony as a term for all the testimonies that aren't the testimonies that end in and then we lived happily ever after. And that the church is uncomfortable with. So if you did trumes and saw Jesus and that's your testimony, that's a great testimony. If you were saved when you were four and now you don't know where you're at and then you were saved several more times in high school and then you don't know where you're at, that's a great testimony. If you got hit by a bus and then decided you were a shaman and then also Christ is part of that, that's a great testimony. It's a testimony of your real life broken and it's just not the one that people mean when they say please share your testimony. They don't tell you you can't say it, but it's not what they're looking for. But I think those are the ones that's the separation I see in a lot of mainstream Protestantism anyway, is there's not the integration of the testimonies that aren't. And then we lived happily ever after. So what I would say is those are the stories from the Old Testament that Protestants don't talk about. I think that those testimonies are too jarring for a large group and they need to be done in a smaller group. And actually what I've been seeing on Bridges of Meaning lately is at night, that's what's going on. People are coming in and talking about their great testimonies about whatever trauma they had in the church and it's working. It's really bonding them together. But I think you can't tell that to a much larger group. Unfortunately, I think you can't because enough of these people haven't really been in AA meetings. And that AA meetings are full of great testimony. Right. We actually learn to laugh at him because it's like, oh, there's so much identification. I mean, you can't be afraid. Well, I don't know. I can't speak for the church because I don't want to be the asshole that destroys the church. But like, there's so much to identify with in somebody's character. The struggle, Dad, because I'm trying to figure out how do I reintegrate myself without accidentally fracturing the ever fracturable Protestantism? And it's like, I don't want to. So what do you do? You need a smaller group. You need people who are ready to hear that. And maybe Sunday testimony is not the time to give great testimony. Maybe that maybe because you're there at the exalted time doing the exalted thing and the exalted tradition. That's not the time for the great testimony. And you need something more like an estuary, more like late night BOM, which is a totally different discourse here from my perspective, at least sometimes, not all the time. Last week was amazing. Just coming, popping in and listening to people just they're just blurting out this this trauma story with the church. And, you know, some people I know pretty well and I was like, oh, really? That happened to you? I didn't hear the story before. How interesting. Maybe maybe we just need to pull a Will Smith on everybody. That's all. You know, he's just here's my testimony. And then, you know, you let it out and then, well, God should be able to handle this. But like, that's the one thing I thought was good about that whole Will Smith thing. It's like, maybe it wasn't such a bad thing that he did what he did. I mean, maybe so many people won't be so cavalier or talking shit. I don't know. I really think this is about including that your entire Bible, including the Book of Lamentations, including Ecclesiastes, including the whole life of David, including all the parts of the Bible that nobody ever wants to talk about. Well, I think you're right. And I think part of this is where the storytelling part comes into the culture, because there are I mean, the only movies that have great testimonies, nobody goes to because they're the art house films that a certain group feels esoteric and advanced because they feel a certain ennui about life. You know, they're like they're just like slurping up their existentialism with a spoon and enjoying it, which is which is different from doing what you see. What what job what job wants to do and his friends are unwilling to do with him. Are you saying that artists suffer from melancholia, Paul? If we didn't have melancholia, we wouldn't have artists. And that's true. It's where it all comes out of. Well, it's interesting, too. And I think Peterson sort of touches on this, although maybe he doesn't go far enough. Right. You know, the real hero and critical drinker, as you know, Paul really nails this. The real hero goes through goes through some ups and downs. Right. Well, and yeah. And so this is where, you know, I really appreciate Jacob, because, you mean, the Hebrew canon just sort of leaves it there. And of course, the Christians come along and end with the Book of Revelation nicely resolves the story with a usape structure. And they're the Jews kind of in the middle. And they're on. We, you know, God chose us to suffer. Oh, but it's not just that. I think part of the problem and I'm going to do it is Jesus, because Jesus is God and Jesus's story is the perfect story. And you Christ the logically read the entire Old Testament and you destroy the Bible when with that type of idolatry. Oh, I'll tell you what. Listening to you talk with Chris Petco damn near deconstructed my ass. Who? Because Jacob like that. What's that? Yeah, talking to Chris. OK, man, that that scared me because by the end of that, I was like, I don't know what the hell to believe. Time to ban Jacob. Here we go. Where's my button? What button can I press? Kick, kick, I turn Jesus back into a human. I anti-divinize Jesus. This is who I am. It wasn't that as much as it was the David Ben or whatever the hell it was. But whatever it was. Oh, oh, yes. Yeah, I was deep, had felt what deconstruction felt like. And let me tell you, that's shit and fun, dude, because I was like, dude, and really at the end of it, I found that I'm just again at the end of it. I found that I'm just making excuses so I don't have to be submitting to something greater than myself. That's at the end of it. That's what I came to. But so thanks for. Yeah, thanks, Jacob. He's going to be drinking before you know it. It's all be your fault. No, no, realizing that Jesus is a human being shouldn't lead you to drink. The church says he's a human being. But yeah, then you have to actually believe it because there's no such thing as fully human and fully, fully God. There's no such thing. Church says there is somebody be 100 percent human and 100 percent God. It just doesn't work. That's what the church fathers wrestled with. We were wrong. Oh, Ted, if you if you drink because of Jacob, you make sure you call Jacob during that time. I'm just saying my cell phone number is freely available. You can find it. Just Google Jacob Fadarajee. It's right there. Text me. Call me. Nobody cares. My phone is not ringing. So if I drink, it would be from something. It would be for me falling asleep about six months ago. So I'm OK. I'm I'm on safe ground. See, that was also the benefit of actually being an alcoholic. It gave me the ability to wrestle with whatever God seems to be. Being that I call God, just God forever and really whatever it's God. But then the trouble came in once I did actually. What once I was actually given a name for God, that's where the trouble came in, because it takes a lot of maintenance to pursue him and to seek him and and all that stuff. So but then you come along and say, well, maybe it's like this. Yeah. I think that the one of the traps that results in nihilism is to take a perspective that is too demanding. So I hear people saying in the greater scheme of things, your life does not matter. But the problem is you don't live in the greater scheme of things. So you can you might as well just respond that the greatest in your life, the greater scheme of things do not matter. Right. So in other words, by taking that perspective, you are opening yourself to unnecessarily to an abyss into nihilism. And the people who try to lure you into that are are doing everyone a disfavor. And I think that's what happened in in the culture with nihilism is that we're taking on this materialist viewpoint. That's what modernism basically boils down to. And that is to take a stair into the abyss, taking this great, great scheme of things viewpoint. And it doesn't lead anywhere. Good. Yeah. Individualist, objectivist, you know, worldview. You're tricking me now. It puts you in the position of the of the neutral observer. I'm just going to do the thing that Paul is too nice to do, which is say there are people waiting to join this chat. If you are not speaking at all, please consider leaving the room so that other people can join. Also, please turn on your video if at all possible, because that makes for a much better experience for everyone. So for me, the greater scheme of things would be boiled down to me focusing on me trying to get to heaven. And that was just a nightmare. It can never do it. It can never be good enough for it. And so that's where a lot of the angst was coming from. Like I could feel nihilism rush right back in once it became about me trying to be good enough so that I can get to this other place. When it's like it's it's that greater scheme thing. What if I'm better off more focused at how I can be of service to others? Right. Like if I can be more focused on how I can be useful to others, I don't have to worry about getting to a certain place or whatever. So, I don't know. I'm just rambling. But I just want to share that. So if anybody out there is feeling like that, don't worry. I mean, that had a lot to do with my my recent existentialism was knowing damn well I ain't good enough to get there. And, you know, and then focusing on that, it's like, yes, yucky. Paul, you ever deal with these types of things in terms of myself? Yes. Do you listen to my sermons? Once in a while. My sermons deal with this because and again, now this is where Calvinism, I don't believe, is nihilism because we very much have a belief in that we are saved apart from our works. And that's and then I mean, every single one of my sermons, you'll see misery, deliverance, gratitude, misery, deliverance, gratitude. And that addresses exactly what you're talking about, that you are free to serve your neighbor because in fact, you are empowered to serve your neighbor. By God, by God, by God. But in the end, it still doesn't matter. What? Serving your neighbor doesn't matter? Well, there's God is sovereign and I make no decisions and God decided everything. Everyone's trying to tell me what I believe as a Calvinist and that's not what I believe. I want you to tell me what you believe as a Calvinist. And one of the things you ultimately say is Calvinists never actually act like they believe that stuff. Exactly. Which makes me wonder, which makes me wonder, then then what is it like if if your beliefs are not the reason you do what you do, do you actually believe it? That's a good question. I don't I don't believe what I do doesn't matter. I don't believe that. I do believe that what I do matters and matters eternally. And Calvinists have always said that too. That's this idea that Calvinists believe in a in a blind divine pre-existential lottery. That's that's an attempt to try to make sense of Pauline language about election. And our election is part of Israel's election. I mean, the the biblical idea of election begins with Israel. Christ means anointed one elect. We're elect through him. OK, so why do you use this word double predestination or do you? It is it is a word that's used. If you don't want me to believe that you believe in double and even single predestination, then stop telling me you believe in double. I go ahead, Skyler. You can help Calvinists at least be framed. It's also a response to Newtonian physics where everything has that that worldview had just been ratified and they could kind of see it. And now that Newtonian physics was provable. Well, God must line up with this, right? Therefore, where everything is, if we go back, it should all line up and God must afflict that first hour. Now, do common nowadays Calvinists stop at Newtonian physics? No, their theology has moved forward. But if you see right where they were at the time of what they were responding to predestination is a response to Newtonian physics. So there's a lot going on there. I disagree with that because, first of all, Newton was came far after Calvin, if I'm not mistaken. I get that. But he clarified what was being proven. They were seeing Imperial science. These things have cause and effect. But then Newton ratified when Newton ratified it. The Calvinists were like, oh, that's what we were. We knew that. The enlightenment was to a very large extent also a reaction to predestination. The idea that God's ways are unknowable and that whatever will happen will happen. So the people who did the investigation of nature were trying to find out how can we do that. So the people who did the investigation of nature were trying to find out how can we understand nature in order to influence the future. OK. Well, a little bit of history with respect to all of this drama around this. Calvin essentially is a second generation reformer. He tries to rearticulate basically what had been standard Roman Catholic Augustinian ideas about election. And Calvin in his institutes basically says, well, logically speaking, this is the implication that doesn't really start to grip the conversation until later centuries where, like he said, in terms of new to it, it starts to it's not say, OK, but then and this whole thing starts rolling about this. And and this is where I mean, look at look at Tim Keller. He belongs to a denomination more conservative than myself. People throw this at him. He says, I prefer to just go back to what Paul has to say, because all of those tensions are in there. And like I always say, I mean, this is never should have said the word Calvinist, because this then becomes an enormous distraction to everything. And everybody then wants to talk about, oh, don't you believe that so and so is damned through no fault of their own. My denomination has talked about this plenty over the years, and that's not the position we hold. But Paul, see, this is this is why I made my video Heidelberg Catechism Exposed, because because it is very important what your theology is. It is very important what the basis of what your three forms of unity, which I still haven't gotten all the way through, tell you your your theology matters. And it's it's it's absolutely like mind boggling to me that as a Jew, I'm sitting here telling a Protestant that your theology matters. Not just what you do. It's not just about ortho praxis. It's also about orthodoxy. It's like a steel man. I mean, it's to a degree. It's like, where is our language at now? If you go look at the cutting edge of any real group, even the Calvinists, they're lined up kind of with where the scientific language is at. So you can look back and always cite the dummies that everybody can keep up with. But as someone who's going into the Orthodox Church, I read the Nicene Creed every morning when I wake up and every night when I go to bed. So well, and I think the art of Christian theology is much better than later Christian theology. Exactly. I think Jesus theology is much better than Paul of Tarsus theology. No, they're the same. The thing is, is that the shack had it right, because I just watched that last night and it fixed everything. Oh, there's Sally. I've come all the way back to argue with Jacob. Good. I don't think that what anybody says about what they believe is worth a damn. People don't know. You just live your life and then you notice maybe you get really lucky and you might figure it out, but you don't get the I don't know that you get to pick. I don't think that being egghead about it proves anything. So like, stop it, I guess is the point. I don't know. I would agree with that. I'll even quote the Old Testament. God get God resists to the proud but gives grace to the humble. So I mean, Sally is usually scary. Look, Sally is making a very important point. And in fact, it is I would say the Jewish point against Christianity, which is yes, what you do matters more than what you think. One hundred percent. What you do matters more than what you think. But Christianity has a point. They're not wrong about everything. What you what you believe, what you profess has a real influence on how you act. Both of these things are true. I don't think you know what you think that often. That's why you need liturgy. That's why you need liturgy. I mean, fair enough. But it's just there's this thing where you get to say what you are and that matters over how things have played out. And I don't know that it does. I do think you can affect your trajectory. And I'm not saying that you should just give in the circumstance. It's just being caught up about what people like you're trying to pin to the wall. And it really pisses me off because I don't think it's useful. And that's divisive. And it's it's what's I mean, it's just like it's a continually divisive thing because it's like it's like fighting about the versions. And it's like it's not that some versions are obviously better. It's just I don't know. It's it is definitely divisive. There's no question about it being divisive. But that is part of what we were talking about earlier and Mark was talking about. That's I see that as being the core of the problem in our society right now is too much fear of division and discussion and disagreement. And and people are abusing that. And there's a reason I decided to come down all the way to the theological level because I realized at the practical, like political day to day level, this is the rot has got a postmodernism has gone down too deep. And so it does matter. It really does matter. And look, if it if you call yourself a Christian, then when Jesus says the first commandment is here, God here, Israel, God, our Lord is one. Right. That's there is a reason why that needs to be the first commandment. Right. That there is a reason why it is the foundation of Judaism. And if you believe in Christ Jesus, it is the foundation of Christianity as well. It matters. Being a monotheist matters. Well, for me, one of the greatest gifts that I was given before I was ever captain like, you know, captured by Christ or anything like that. Like, so I burnt my life to the ground and got to a position where I didn't really have any other options. Right. And so then the damn sponsor that I had. So let's let's take these steps. And then in the in the whole program, the program, the fundamental bottom of all of it is, is God could and what if you were sought. So it's like, go seek God, clean house and help others, clean house, help others, clean house, help others. That's it. Go seek God. We don't know. It doesn't like giving a name or having a name for it isn't like the anywhere near the highest principles. But go seek him. And that to me has always been the most freeing thing. It was like I said, it was only once I found a name for it became even more difficult. You know, because now I now I'm starting to project my ideas on to God. Whereas before it was to seek him and help others. And those things were like kind of like like the same thing. You know, I don't know. It's a weird thing or weird out by it because they're like, oh, you can't do that because it's a good thing. But then you got this and that. Well, you're you're your relationship with women when you found a wife instead of just seeking one certainly got more complex. Oh, yes. So you can throw that one at me and I'll say, yes, that's true. But I still have to seeking is about finding. It's not about always seeking. Well, I still have to seek my wife every day. Yes, that's true, too. And you still have to seek God every day. Yes, exactly. So like I can say, yes, Christ is my God, but it doesn't mean anything if I'm not seeking him. So I think I upset her. Yeah, you chase Sally away. She's so fragile that just chased her away. I'm sorry. Anyway, anybody. No one around here is going to say Sally is fragile at all. So, wow. Why is it that the Trinity just keeps coming up? It's just it's just amazing. I want to read Luke with you, Jacob. I just am so interested because we've spoken about this more than once. But in Luke, it even has the answers because Christ does things without prayer that should require prayer and then gives thanks. He does both moves. He is man and God. And so. OK, but he's not just the image. He's not just the image. He's not just the image. He's not just the image. He's not just the image. I'm not going to completely hijack Paul. I don't want to go totally, but I'm saying even when you go carefully read the Nicene Creed, he's unmade. I have discussed all of this many times all over my channel. I think it is perfectly clear that from everything I have read in the entire. You didn't know Stephen and Paul had the same name. I have read it all over my channel. I have read it all over my channel. I have read it all over my channel. I have read it all over my channel. I have read it all over my channel. You didn't know Stephen and Paul had the same name. You thought I was crazy in making that up. Stephen was teaching Judaism. Paul was teaching pagan polytheistic statements. No, wrong. OK, so. Because I can read the Book of Acts. I can just say no because the guy, the Jewish guy who tells them, hey, maybe don't make a move against the Christians here. He's the one who. Chapter 21 of Acts. I mean, we can have this discussion. I'm not going to hijack this discussion. OK, but I'm 100 percent putting myself in there because you're welcome to come on my channel. You're welcome to come on my channel and we will discuss it. OK, so Jacob's channel is. It's just me. Navigating Pulkets. F-A-T-U-R-E-C-T-I. Navigating Rabbits. You should rename your channel Navigating Rabbits. I like navigating pulpits better. I thought that was a good. I'm surprised. I'm surprised that that you said that synagogues have pulpits. Is I just not. They call them pulpits. Yeah, I mean, so reform and conservative synagogues. So you have to understand. Reform Judaism. Reform Judaism patterned itself after reform Christianity. They many of their original synagogues actually moved Saturday services to Sundays. Really? I'm not even joking. Yes, they brought they brought in organs. They started dressing like, you know, reform, reform Judaism is Christianity for the for the Jewish masses. It was a Christianity that that Jews could accept. Wow. That that that process of what happened to that what Jews did with their religion in modernity fascinates. I mean, obviously, partly because I don't know. I don't know how my father's line. So my mother's line were freezians. I guess they became Catholics and then and then somehow, you know, but they just took care of cows. My father's line, the Jewish line. You know, I always wonder how they wound up with the Dutch reformed. I mean, and so I'll be honest with you. A reform synagogue is far closer to a Protestant church than it is to a synagogue. That's fascinating. And and yes, half half of the Jews in the world will well, no, actually half of the Jews in the United States because thank God reform and conservative haven't made their way into Israel. But they it started in Germany. It flourished in the United States. That's the only places where reform and conservative Judaism really exists. Huh? Yeah, I would say it tracks the language very much, especially if you can see that because Geist words like that from German, it translates much more. Even Christ, when he says, I'll have them today, you'll see the son of man lifted up. He quotes Daniel in the German translation. It's actually just like beautifully rich and layered because that means so much more. It's like a preserving sacrifice. Something is kept. Something is lost and something is picked up and taken with in one word. And so when you translate that down one more, it starts to scatter. I'm not sure I understand what you're saying. Well, the limitations of theology will be where our thought and philosophy is. And so some people think philosophy hasn't moved, but they can't keep up with philosophy. Go read how to be a bat or thinking like a bat or seeing like a bat. OK, Nagel is really smart. Nagel is a common philosophy. Like he's talking about mind today and you could use him. So the conversation isn't dead. Like it's fun. The new theologian in the Orthodox Church was in the year 1100. There's three theologians and the new one is in the year 1100. It's like I love these people. They just get it. OK, so I have to say. The language needs to slowly move. I agree. What's the cutting edge so to keep falling off cliffs? Language is definitely what affects it. And the fact that reform and conservative moved to first German and English, I think, is a big reason why they've lost the Hebrew character. Plug for my discussion with Michael last night. But the yeah, I mean, translation makes a huge difference. That's why religion in translation, I don't think, works very well. Well, it's cultural. That's cultural cognitive grammar, right? That's for Vickie's one of her Vickie's excellent points is that cultural cognitive grammar matters. Right. And that's why we need more people talking about what are the actual definitions, not the meanings. Meaning arises from definition content. See navigating patterns. My YouTube channel for more where I'm dealing with cultural cognitive grammar and sense making. When we can't have these things really well understood and when you think, for example, I was in Clubhouse last night and they were talking about the thesis ship philosophical thing, which is, you know, it's a four year old toy, toy, toy problem. Right. It's well, if you every year you replace one board of thesis ship, but you have a ritual that around thesis ship. At what point did it stop becoming his ship? And it's like at the point at which you stopped being a materialist, you didn't have this problem anymore. So that solves it right there. It's like just don't be a reductive physicalist. And you never have. And I actually pointed this out to them. I said the whole it's in it's in the story. The point of the ship of the ship is that they are using it in a celebration every year, not the thesis walked on those particular boards, which has no relevance to anything at all. And so once you reenchant the world by adding in the non material elements of reality, philosophical quote problems or contradictions like that vanish. They go away. You no longer have to solve them because they're not there anymore to be solved. And that's not a cognitive grammar is don't define reality as physical reductionism. Can I point out that Mark and Eric both are wearing shirts that have really long slogans on them? The shirt contains content that some viewers may find disturbing. And Mark says, what does your shirt say, Mark? Yeah, I'll get closer for you. How's that? If things get any worse, I'll have to ask you to stop helping. I think that is not coincidence. I think that's that's actually kind of important. Why is it important, Jacob? Because that's because ideas matter. Because slogans matter. Cool. Because we are identities, how we dress ourselves, how we present ourselves and who and what we say about ourselves. I dress like a homeless home. And I work with the homeless and I make PB&J sandwiches, as Tim the Marylander would put it. So like my rest, like I'm not I hardly dress up for church unless I'm asked to. Because they know I want to be barefoot and they'll let me in my sandals slip off and be barefoot in the church because they know that is what I prefer. But I'm the weirdo who lives in the mountains and have to drive. And how would I have to go to church? So, so, Paul, what are you putting on those shirts I bought you? You need to wear your identity, Paul, loud and proud. Out there for everybody to see. So you can see your authentic. I'm not going to prove your point. I'm leaving the United Methodists because they're completely political and I can see the two rift happening. They have the traditionalists who want to go back to the year like the Puritans and then just be like, OK, let's move forward properly. Instead of doing everything randomly at an impulse, let's just follow the scripture. They look like they're savages. And then you have the liberation Methodist connection, which is liberation theology plus Robin DiAngelo. So it's like that 30 minute Robin DiAngelo video. That's the United Methodist Church. So it's like the church thing we wear. They want me to wear. They bought me the shirt because I want to buy one is a bright red shirt that says the church has left the building. And I'm like, church means ecclesia. It's a gathering. Wherever I'm gathered with people. That's where I do a homeless shelter. That's my church because I do a gathering and I pray over the food, even if they don't want it. I still pray over their food. So, yeah, to your point, yes, it's a big deal. And my mom used to buy me big t-shirts like make do it yourself makeover kits and it had a paper bag with holes in it and stuff like I used to wear shirts that were just mean to people offhandedly. And when I stopped wearing those, they definitely changed my my whole drive. Wow, that's interesting. I wanted to go back to something that was sort of brought up earlier that, you know, weaves into what Sally was saying. I think, you know, now I get to be the outsider here so I can I can critique all this crazy evangelism and stuff from the outside. Right. What I see, it's something that Jacob sort of pointed to is when you leave out the bad stories of the Bible, what's the bad stories of the Bible? When you leave out the bad stories of the Bible, what Sally would probably call great testimony, right, kind of indicated. Yeah, that's where the great testimony is. It's in the trauma that you get put through in the Old Testament as the result of believing in the in the God of the Old Testament. Right. When you leave that out, you get happy, friendly Christians. Yay. I'm so happy. Come join our churchy thing. And it's like my life is kind of, you know, not like that. Like, I don't I can't relate to you people. You're too nice. Like, what are you talking about? Like, where is all this happiness coming from? Right. Because they're not telling they're not telling the whole story. Right. Because this is that middle out thinking. See my video and navigating patterns. That's YouTube channel ever. Right. Middle out this middle out thinking. You're not starting at the beginning. You didn't start as a happy go lucky Christian. You went through something for sure. And that's the thing we're hearing at nights or at least last week we were on VOM was these traumas that people had as the result of their faith. As the result of their belief or the result of their interaction with the church or the result of their misunderstanding or whatever of the Bible at the time. Right. You don't hear that with evangelism. All you hear is come join us. We're all happy and friendly. And it's like, I don't know if I like that. I wonder I wonder if the happy clappy came out of a lot of the Jesus movement stuff in the late 60s and 70s. Because when I look at churches before that, I think it was a lot of I think it was a lot of people who were hippies and you know people were having a lot of trauma and chaos in their life. And they found the church and they started settling down and getting married and having some order. And it was just a relief. And so then at that and so then evangelism for a lot of evangelical churches sort of became very a very happy thing. Come here and Jesus will make you happy like Jesus made me happy. And I see the same wave coming right now because we had the 60s before like you said the 70s and 80s. What were they catching? They were catching the people who had been burned by the 60s. A lot of them. And a lot of them wanted to return to stability. But all those bridges are gone now. So then the church they returned to actually has like a 20 30 year gap in tradition. And that started that 60 year church life cycle where all the other churches have 60 years. That's one of the impetus for it. And I see that happening. Sorry. That's OK. I was going to say people are also coming out of world wars and stuff like that and like a military. Very disciplinary and hardcore stuff and sort of thing. So having an alternative that's a little bit more loosey goosey is was probably restoring balance to the force as it were. OK, Josh, I know you have things to say. Start speaking. Now he's out. Well, and I think the 60s, to your point, Paul, like that was that was they didn't want conflict and they found a way around conflict. Look, they believe BF Skinner, who was a great guy, like he really changed a lot of things. But his one big thesis that everybody wants to believe he could never prove because it's wrong. And we know why it's wrong, by the way. And he tried and tried and tried and tried and tried. It's not positive reinforcement only positive reinforcement only doesn't work with humans. BF Skinner mistakenly said that with you put that hypothesis forth, but could never prove it every time he tried to prove it. It just fell apart. Instance son did it, too. And but they kept that in the church. Right. It bled through from the 60s. I think you're right. Because of that whole attitude. Hmm. No, I never I never put Skinner in with that, but that's quite interesting. No conflict. We can resolve conflict. We don't need any conflict without conflict. You have no intimacy. That's why it's the intimate crisis. You see the meaning crisis. I would even say Carl Rogers. Carl Rogers. What did he want you to do? Well, look at his religious life when he was young. He wanted to be a what priest. He wanted to like he was evangelical when he was young. He died an agnostic or atheist. We don't know. And it's like that energy stayed. And then I know a lot of people who quote Carl Rogers to me from the church. And I have to stop and be like, wait, you guys do know that like he left the church openly and never like I don't disagree with him. But he's not good ideas aren't married to people. Yeah. Well, but that idea didn't. To Mark's point, I hate when I have to agree with Mark, but still meaning really truly like you have to like you have to have something to run away from and something to run towards the cybernetic model that Peterson has. Made so easy and accessible. What does he talk about? He talks about a mouse. Well, if it goes to cheese, it goes to the cheese. But then if I walked in cats, the scent of a cat, that mouse gets to the cheese. Like you actually need these dual parameters. And yeah, I mean, that's kind of why I think grace just needs the Protestants just need a new definition of grace. God is grace. Stop trying to reify. Put grace in things you can't you can't the whole way the what they were fighting against and protesting against is silly in and of itself. You can't like imbue grace into something. So you need more than grace. Yeah, it's God's grace. It's not ours to imbue. I can't be like you need peanut butter and jelly sandwiches to pass out. Well, lots of those. What's the point of that? You need more tools. And that's the thing that Catholicism and Orthodoxy give you is more than just grace to solve all the problems. Right. So you can you can have gratitude. Right. You can have these other engagements. There's all this symbolism so that you don't have to sit there and profess things. Right. You can just enact things. And it makes it a lot easier. I think when you have more handles in more ways into into the faith, I think you can do more things. You know, I think that's it. You know, I think that's it. You know, I think that's what we need to be able to put our faith into into the faith. That seems that there seems to be something to that. Or you might say there's saints that can show you many different paths to Christ. Jonathan Pajot talking about think Christopher, he can't give arms. He can't fast. Cannot abstain. He can't do prayers. He's Saint Christopher. All right, cool. channel too. Why did you say the name of your channel, Michael? It's my name, Michael Sartore. There you go. Yeah. Oh, we lost Jacob. One came and one left. We have a light replacement going on there too, so that's cool. I'm taping them all off because I've got to spray paint the ceiling. All right. How are you doing, Michael? Good. I just had a chat with Jacob last night. My question about Bible translations sparked a whole thing. Really? Who would have thought? We came to a good understanding because he liked my problem that I had, which was academic elites telling people that don't know Hebrew that they have no right to interpret the Bible. Not Christian scholars. Which is interesting for Protestants because Protestantism was sort of founded on having people interpret the Bible and not just receiving what the church told you the Bible means. Yeah. I don't know if it's that big, but when you go into certain echo chambers and I got into some of these, the Michael Heizer tribe, it's almost like a hierarchy of elitism based on how many letters you have after your name. That's how important your theological arguments are, regardless of your actual relationship with God. I say, no, I don't agree with that. Everyone's always telling me I have to pay more attention to Michael Heizer, and I haven't because there's not enough time to pay attention to everyone. I don't know much about the Michael Heizer tribe. I think his fiction books are the best ones. This is what I would say in a nutshell. The good thing Michael Heizer is doing is he's trying to bring high-level academic scholarship to a more evangelical audience. A lot of this is liberal scholarship. I think he does a pretty good job of trying to discern with what is helpful and what is nonsense. The problem is that the people one level down just then will grab any random liberal scholarship and go run with it. Some of your theological presuppositions or what you actually believe about God has to come before your academic ideas, I guess. And so it's a little bit of a clash there. I kind of got frustrated because I don't like the idea of people looking down on the regular good-hearted people in evangelical churches just because they have less sophisticated views about the Bible. My point to Jacob is that I think we should just translate the Bible into every language possible, give it to all the people, have everybody read it, and then whatever crazy stuff happens, God's in control of it. That's my Calvinist background take on that. That's been working out really well. We have to remember what Martin Luther thought. Martin Luther genuinely thought to a degree, hey, everybody's going to translate it and have it the same thing as me. But people also forget that Martin Luther, when he put his 99 Theses on the Wall, they weren't written in common. They were written in Latin. So he's extremely studied. And then he goes, oh, when normal people read, they'll be... He kind of missed that judgment a lot. And that's the repercussions we're dealing with. Yeah. I wouldn't classify people's understanding as sophisticated. I might classify their articulation as sophisticated. But I think sophistication should be wrapped up in practice. Right? How well do you practice? What is the implementation that you're using? Rather than relying on things like sophistication or articulation. Because I don't care how articulate you are. I care how nice you are. I've done three talks with Chris Petcow. And I was kind of like, yeah, I don't care how you translate the Bible. I care how you care for me as a human being. I care about the intimacy. I don't care about your ability to explain to me why you're nice to me. That seems unimportant somehow to me. In fact, if you have to justify all your grace for all of your works, then you're kind of lacking grace. Because to forgive is a word that most people have never thought about. But it means to give before. So when you become a Christian, you've already decided you're going to betray me and I forgive you. When you betray me, it doesn't shock me that much. Right? Raviky freaked everybody out a couple of Q&As ago or whatever. I was like, saw this one coming. That's why I've been reading his books. Everything he ever recommends to us, I'll sit and read. So now I have read his fictional book that blew open his mind or whatever. I've sat and read that book now for like months. And it's like, yeah, that was probably where if Raviky never had someone explain what the blasphemy to the Holy Spirit was and take them through Acts and be like, here's a couple that sold their belongings and lied to the church. But they also lied to God. They said they sold it for X amount, but they really sold it for this amount. He falls dead. And then the wife isn't there. She doesn't get blamed for his transgression. She has her own. Peter walks up and says, Hey, how much did you sell the house for? And she goes this much. And he goes, I'm sorry, we're already preparing your husband's grave, but I guess we're gonna have to do it today. And then she comes over death. Well, so what book did verveky talk, what fiction book did Raviky talk about? Oh, Lord of Light. Yeah, it's it won the Hugo award and then whatever. It's a second one by him that won that. But it's amazingly. I don't want to go into it unless you would like, but it's it landed why verveky has such a clear way. So that's what I want to talk to him. His Q&A is on right now. So I was thinking going over eventually. But that's what I want to ask him about is like, okay, I've now led Lord of Light for six months straight. Like I read the Bible and Lord of Light and books people recommend. There's two books entitled Lord of Light, one by Catherine LeVeque and the other by Roger Zalazny. Yeah, Roger Zalazny. So Roger Zalazny had just won the Hugo award. This is like a second or third novel and he won a second one. So he just won like all the science fiction novel awards. This book is about like a spacefaring colony way in the future that has all this technology to transfer consciousness into new bodies and to do whatever they want. And then they set up the Vedic structure from the Hindu gods. So the original people who landed on the colony are now Vishnu, Mara, all the different gods. And they have a Buddha. So you follow Buddha and it's really I could see why Verveki is where he's at when he talks about he has mentioned this book numerous times. So I sat and read it over and over and it was like, oh, well. Then when he talks about this rationalist movement, I've read all the science specific papers also it's like, oh, perfectly rational. In fact, it's airtight. Doesn't have Gdel's completeness theorem involved at all. And Gdel's incompleteness, you have something coherent and complete. But if that's your goal, you're going to close this closed system. Yeah. Yeah. Interesting. Or if you have a small arena, then you can like manage it. That's how I've been using Verveki's to even talk about these things. But like, I think those ramifications have like Jacob's point earlier, if well, if that's the thing that blew Verveki's fundamentalist world view and shattered it was reading that book Lord of Light by Audrey Zalazny, then well, I've listened to that man talk for hundreds of hours. So I need to be careful because that's that's yeah. But I'm with his goal is cultural cognitive grammar. That's Verveki's goal that I'm 100% religion. That's not a religion. Not so much. Not not with that one. You can see Mark and I in the discord for at the very beginning just being like, Hey, and then Struan is like probably the smartest guy in that group. Struan is just too smart. Like, he's blown my mind many times. I'm just like, uh, yeah, yeah. Interesting. So Verveki is doing his Q&A right now, huh? He is. He is. Are you gonna bomb? I guess I could go over there. That'd be awesome. Let's do it. I'd have to stop. I'd have to stop this though. I love you guys. It's always interesting. He's getting crazier and crazier in those Q&A. So I just saw it coming. It doesn't bother me at all. He's just being more honest and not like, like, wow. Yeah. Watson and Chris like pan scrimmied. I mean, come on, like some of this stuff is so. Everybody who's smart has these glitches like object oriented ontology with oh, it's not going to have any of the problems of object programming. What are you, high? Like, where do you get that from? That's crazy talk. Crazy talk. All right. Well, maybe this is a good time to land the plane. This has been wild. Thanks, Paul. So thank you all. Thank you all for watching and thank you Anselman and Rick for keeping an eye on the, on the comment section. So, um, all right, maybe we'll, we'll shift over there. Navigating patterns, navigating patterns and, and the intimacy crisis on Andrea with the bangs. Yes.