https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=blsI6xBoRFs

 Hi, this is Paul. I've been doing a lot of thinking about politics and religion lately, and I wanted to do a video on successor religion, sort of analogous to Wesley Yang's successor ideology. Let's begin with Jordan Peterson's rule number seven, do what is meaningful, not what is expedient. Now, this admonition often assumes a meaning crisis or an absence of meaning in someone's life, and so Jordan is admonishing young men to do meaningful things instead of expedient things because they're wasting their lives on expedience. But there's sort of a reverse to this Jordan Peterson internal gyroscope of dead reckoning truthiness. The reverse is that you need a hill, and sometimes any hill to drag your randomly selected cross-up will do for you in order to achieve the psychological outcome of the meaning that you need. If meaning is something like food that you need, then pretty much any cross, any hill can accomplish this, and this is part of what we see in people. I see this all the time. Angry people look for things to be angry about. Anxious people look for things to be anxious about. People often come to pastors because we're sort of easy targets for whining and complaining and commiserating and venting, and what I notice is that when people's things that people are angry about or anxious about or need to talk about are resolved, they just come back to me with new things, and sometimes the things they bring to me are legitimately large and catastrophic, and sometimes the things they bring to me are petty. But the way that these things function in people's lives, the magnitude of the anxiety, isn't necessarily related to what I would imagine would be the importance of the issue that they're actually dealing with. And so you do need a hill, and sometimes any hill to drag some cross-up will do, even if, and sometimes especially, if it leans against the expedient. In other words, as the old, oh, bye-bye, Miss American Pie, McLean song says, the more you pay, the more it's worth. The community intensifies meaning and very much intensifies the experience of meaning. So finding a hill where lots of people are Bitcoin mining meaning by dragging up their self-chosen crosses makes it more meaningful. The competition makes it more meaningful. The cooperation makes it more meaningful. The encouragement by others in the community makes it more meaningful. None of this has much to do with the truth of whatever it is that hill stands for or the great need that whatever it is that community is pursuing. And there's lots of examples of this. Sports, people derive terrific meaning from sports. And it was interesting when Jordan Peterson talked to Sam Harris. Sam Harris said, well, football. And Jordan's like, yeah, but that's important. And it is important. But how important is it? And that's sort of why Sam Harris plucked that out as an example. So you can construct a religion this way. I mean, Scientology. I mean, just, just look at, just, just do any research into Scientology at all. Even its name is a con because science, oh, we all believe in science. So Scientology, Scientology. I mean, it's just, it's just brilliant as a scam. And if you build a hierarchy, they will come. There's a sucker born every day and they will work for MeaningCoin. Now here's a little graphic from the UN COVID campaign, spread kindness. Now this will work better if you connect it to a sense of wellbeing and you can tell you connect it to a mission that somehow blesses the world because that then affords the conceptualization that I am a good person and a generous person. And so all of the, and in our culture, Christianity that's been built into our, our, our value systems and our meaning systems over, you know, centuries and centuries of exposure to Christianity, all of this is basically built into the system. So, so you're, so, so now that you've constructed a hierarchy of world betterment, that, that betterment does of course have some implicit and explicit selection of some goodness. You know, it's less COVID is better than more COVID. Less hunger is better than more hunger. Less poverty is better than more poverty. I mean, there's, there's lots of different things in the world that generally speaking, most of us can agree on it is better for the world. And so to participate in that is, is a perfectly legitimate thing and can derive sort of the meaning coin that we need inside ourselves for our own wellbeing. Now, kindness is better than cruelty, but kindness is sort of a, a substitute. It's sort of a methadone for love. It's a discount version that we use to increase our status and to reduce social friction. But anybody who knows someone who is a particularly kind liar knows that in the long run, maybe having a kind doctor is worse than having a frank doctor and maybe having a kind parent is worse than having an honest parent. Now speak your truth and love. There's a Christian admonition, but kindness is sort of a knockoff love. Now I was, um, Netflix has a new series called the one, and I couldn't look at that and not think about Brett Weinstein because supposedly people are taking in this series, in the sci-fi series, people are taking genetic tests to find their perfect partner, but it never answers the question perfect partner for what? Well, the person that you will fall in love with, oh, the person who's maximally attracted to you, you think that's going to correspond one to one in the world. Well, I think the creators of OkCupid would beg to disagree because they know very well they have the data and there's a good bit of genetics built into that of exactly who the men are attracted to and who the women are attracted to. So what they're constantly doing is trying to breaking, break down the hierarchy instead of saying, oh, men are reliably attracted to supermodels and women are reliably attracted to, uh, charismatic billionaires. Doesn't seem hard to me, but now if you're going to break it down, oh, there's one perfect partner. You know, you know, what do exactly do our genes want? And so, well, you'll find the most fertile person. You'll find the person that's most incautious with birth control. Um, what do my genes care about romance and happiness anyway? And, and, and what this shows is that we sort of have these implicit hierarchies out there that we imagine are obvious, but you can even pull off a stunt like this Netflix show and, and pass it off and get people to watch it when, you know, anyone who I think sits down for five minutes and thinks about it will say, well, it's the premise is not only absurd, it's, it's beyond absurd. Um, you have multiple competing goods at the top of hierarchies. And, and this is part of an issue. And this is why, again, to have something at the top of your hierarchy, which is not physical, which is not inside the economy, which is not inside the system actually makes a great deal of sense. And it's sort of analogous to Jordan Peterson pointing out that Christianity puts God, which is outside the system at the top of the hierarchy so that the King is always answerable to the God. Um, the president is always answerable to the law. These are the way systems work because we understand the limitations of most of the stuff down in the atmosphere where we are. And, and so what's, what's at the top of the hierarchies blind us often to other goods. And in this case, you know, the romance God, now Jordan Peterson, of course, began maps of meaning with his personal experience of the Cold War. And, you know, some of my favorite Jordan Peterson videos continue to be the, um, the classroom videos. Uh, you know, those are, those are some of the, those are the videos that I first watch and thought, wow, this guy, this guy's a lot of interesting things to say. And part of me really wishes he had the, um, life situation that afforded sort of a, a disciplined approach that the classroom offered him and what he did for year after year was continue to perfect and, um, and, and lay out his, his basic, the basic structure of his thought. Well, civilizations ramp up around these hierarchies, you know, Marxist schemes of wellbeing that purport to prioritize a vision of the good of the collective. You know, the, many have noted that Marxism is sort of a wonderful dream. The chief problem with it is it doesn't, not, not the chief problem with it, but a significant problem with it is that it just doesn't work. Um, capitalist societies have, have huge problems with them, but in many ways, well, the Cold War was basically about the fact that capitalist societies outcompete, you know, were out competed the Marxist ones. And so then you get China with sort of a, a hash between the two of them, a single party system that is, that is ruthlessly capitalist and, um, as well. So, so you get multiple nested value systems, however, to contribute to the overall schema. But how much do we know about why we almost nuke the world and, and how much in fact can we know about ourselves? This, this situation of nested competition and cooperation actually goes quite deep. And so you have, you know, it's, it's vitally important that I think you have presidential candidates who on one hand, when they're on the two podiums will be frank and figure out a way to speak within norms, to debate ideas with one another. Then at the end of the meeting, shake hands. Um, my favorite illustration is something that I found on Twitter one day with two dogs and a fence. I love this illustration because it actually makes a really fine point about well, what's built into the dogs. And if you've ever had a dog that loves to fence fight, um, I've had Rottweilers over the years and they run back and forth across that fence and just bark their head off and people on the other side of the fence, like, Oh, if they ever barge through this fence, you know, they'll kill me. And I had one in the Dominican Republic and an iron fence and I would open the gate and the dog would still run back and forth against the gate. That's, that's what the dog liked to do. And then so here are these two pooches and close the door between them and here they go. I can, I think there's, I think there's even sound to this, uh, to this video. And you close it back. There they go. And that's actually a pretty good system. It's you're signaling, but you're not destroying. And Peterson makes similar points with some of his videos. Now, in a number of my videos lately, I've been talking about dread pirate Roberts, Christian nationalism. Now, why do I call it dread Christian nationalism? Well, I'm obviously ripping on the princess bride and the dread pirate Roberts. Well, who was the dread pirate Roberts? Well, it was, it was sort of a scam where, well, someone was going to be proud. There was going to be pirate. And basically they, they worked on the sheer terror that the dread pirate Roberts would, would have. And so they would never actually have to fight. It's the same scheme that if you're old enough to remember happy days and the Fonz and the Assyrians sort of worked it, except the Assyrians were quite brutal is that if you basically scare everyone by your reputation, you never have to fight. And then, you know, Wesley here was abducted by the dread pirate Roberts and, and Wesley impressed the dead dread pirate Roberts. So, and what they did at one point is that when the dread pirate Roberts wanted to retire with all of them loot that he had over the years, he just dismissed the whole crew and left Wesley on and Wesley hired a new crew and posed as the dread pirate Roberts. And it's a scam that goes on and on and on and on and on. And in many ways, without someone at the middle of it, we run these scams on humanity over and over and over again. And, and lately in the American religious political scheme, Christian nationalism is sort of a scam like that. That's why I call it dread Christian nationalism, because it's always there. And, you know, I, I look at this and I think a lot of the, a lot of the people I hear now, they're saying, Oh, Christian nationalism. I mean, it's, it's, it's Trump comes along and now everybody loses their stuff over some things. And it's sort of like saying, well, you know, American racism really didn't start until Jim Crow. You think? I really don't think it works that way. Christian nationalism, and this is a point that I've made in multiple videos in the past, Christian nationalism begins with the puritans. And it's been, it's morphed like the dread pirate Roberts, how many different ways? And I'll talk a little bit about it. And in some ways, the much more interesting story is the attack on Christian nationalism as in a sense, now its own version of the dread pirate Roberts. And I saw a terrific example of this in a, an op-ed piece in the New York Times by Nicholas Kristof. Now, Nicholas Kristof has done a lot of good. He, he wrote one column about porn and, you know, all sorts of, you know, porn websites suddenly cleaned up their act. And he wrote a very appreciative column once about Christian doctors in Africa. And now he writes, it's been fascinating to watch all of the excitement that, well, Joe Biden goes to church. Now this, this really struck me because Barack Obama went to church too. And, and even in this, even in this, even in this article, Barack Obama doesn't get a mention, almost makes me suspect, I don't know, white supremacy on the part of Nicholas Kristof in terms of, well, let's, let's just dig into the article and see what he has to say. And I know this is going to trigger a bunch of you, but, you know, there's your trigger warning. The first thing to know about notice about these two, oops, it's not up on the screen. The first thing you notice about these two camps is one likes to have God, God number two, especially front and center. And the other likes to play a much more secular game. We're going to, we're not going to pay any attention to God number two and God number one is slowly receded. And so this works, whether you're a God or not. And as my, I was really surprised that the, the conversation on Christian education didn't get more views. I think part of it was probably just titling and, you know, put Jordan Peterson in a, in a, in a video title and whoosh, you need a little extra traffic on the channel. That's no big deal. He just pushed a little of Jordan Peterson into the channel and up the, up the stats go. But that conversation that I had with kale and, and Brett was really, I thought a, an important conversation. So Dread pirate Roberts, Christian nationalism, you know, has God front and center and large and in charge and very obvious and talking about God. And, and frankly, and I'm going to critique some of that in a little while. I think that a lot of Christian nationalism, Dread Christian nationalism really violates the third commandment. I think it takes the name of God in vain because what you're basically doing is having God somehow underwrite all of your petty political projects. Now the Dread Christian imperialism on the left doesn't really do that. It sort of keeps God behind the curtain and we won't talk about God. We're just going to have all of these, all of these moral values untagged. We're just going to act as if these are just self evident. And so the self evidential list, you know, sort of covert Christian ish imperialism just sort of gets passed along. And this article is a great example of it. Progressive Christians arise. Hallelujah. Well, part of the problem with progressive Christians is that they sort of start progressive and the whole Christian thing, they get so used to hiding it. It's almost as if they've lost it someplace and can't find it anymore. Nobody better tell them what word is smuggled into that word. Hallelujah. Anyway, with a church going Democrat in the White House, a Roman Catholic, we might add, faith has become more complicated in America. And again, I think Barack Obama got a whole lot of press early on with his pastor from his more radical days. And, you know, well now Biden is more overtly religious, more overtly Roman Catholic. Okay. Young and middle-aged Americans could be forgiven for thinking that Jesus was a social conservative who denounced gay people and harangued the poor for lifting themselves up by the bootstraps until he was crucified for demanding corporate tax cuts. This paragraph annoys me. Why? It's true that young and middle-aged Americans could be forgiven for thinking that, but who instructed them in that? You know, it's the same media who has sort of made that point. Now, okay, media on the right, Fox News, they've made it too, but, you know, it really, in many ways, the image that many Americans have of the Christian church is a production of the media. I remember well into the 90s and aughts, you'd find these breathless newspaper articles with things like Christians are playing guitars and rock music in their churches. And it's like, yeah, they've been doing that for 20 years and using screens. I mean, it's the amount of, this is another, this is a regular conversation in Christian communities, the amount of ignorance that secular media has with respect to religion in America is appalling. Faith Angle Forum is one of the better outfits, I can pull them up, is one of the better outfits that actually brings in high-status journalists and says, get yourself an education on national views and they'll bring in serious religious figures to discuss things with journalists because generally speaking, journalists do a horrible job with religious news. And part of the reason that many Americans think that, well, the church is just sort of this cheap, stupid, political right-wing thing is, well, is there a lot of that out there? Sure. But a lot of it's just been fed by the journalists. That perception might arise because since the 1980s, the most visible, visible how? Visible through whom? The most visible Christians have been conservative evangelicals who often emphasize issues that Jesus never explicitly mentioned. Is that going to be our standard? Is that really how churches work with respect to these things? Such as abortion and homosexuality. Oh, I guess because we can't find a proof text in the gospels about abortion, then Jesus just kind of takes a pass on it. Oh, that would put Jesus taking a pass on pretty much the entire agenda of the left as well. I mean, not a lot about carbon emissions in the New Testament. But now more progressive Christians are moving into center stage. A lot of Christians try to keep politics at arm's length, not because they're worried they're going to ruin politics, but they're worried about what politics is going to do to the church. Enter Joe Biden, one of the most religious presidents of the last century among Jimmy Carter, George W. Bush. Well, those guys weren't that long ago. And I guess by religious, they mean he actually goes to church. And I'm glad about that. Biden attends mass regularly and inhabits faith as Donald Trump merely brandished it as if speaking to two Corinthians. And absolutely, does Joe Biden appear to, you know, I'm not going to have any complaints about that. Donald Trump's religiosity seemed to me to be politically expedient, whereas Joe Biden seems to be sincere. But let's pay attention to the whole thing here, because there's a lot of complaining about the religiosity of all of those people voting for Republicans and, well, the religiosity of the people voting for Democrats. I mean, the complaining just really isn't consistent. Likewise, Vice President Kamala Harris is a Baptist who says she has regularly attended church. Good for her. But okay, she's a good person. Trump said he regularly attended church. Trump had womanizing affairs in his past. Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez is a Catholic who says her faith inspires her to address health care and climate change. I'm not sure how much Jesus talked about government health care or climate change. That's the standard. Just notice, but this stuff has basically become political templates in the way that we talk about these things. And I just think it's a lot of crap. Elizabeth Warren taught Sunday school. Good. Raphael Harnick, a new senator, is an ordained Baptist minister. Great. Other Democrats, including Cory Booker and Pete Buttigieg, speak the language of faith fluently as well. See, from studies I've seen in terms of churchgoing Americans, they're pretty evenly split between Democratic voting and Republican voting. Now there's, again, think about the African American community, one of the most reliable Democratic voting communities out there. Also quite conservative politically and religiously. And pay attention to, you know, I've lived my whole life in either African American communities or for a while Caribbean communities. Deeply conservative communities. And part of the thing that really surprises me is sort of Democratic open border policies on one hand, I think has been injurious to the black working class. And on the other hand, likely will continue to make American population less progressive. They might continue to get votes as long as they can continue to sort of argue that, well, there's sort of a racism here. One party is more racist than the other. Okay. But truth be told, more immigration is probably going to mean less concern about abortion or more concern about abortion as Roman Catholics come up from Latin America, Roman Catholics or conservative Latino evangelicals, another big group. You know, I watch the politics going on here and I think, is anybody paying attention because when I read the news, they don't certainly imagine that they are. At the same time, conservative Christians have taken self-inflicted hits. That's true. Not the least the way some invoked religion while invading the U.S. Capitol. Okay. After seizing the Senate for insurrectionist parade. Okay. Thank you for filling this chamber with patriots that love you and love Christ. Okay. While human motivations are complicated, they are. The subject in the massage parlor murders in Georgia is a Southern Baptist who a former roommate described as having a religious mania. Okay. So let me get this straight. You can basically take Bill Maher's tact and say, oh, it's all of this religion, sexual oppression. But then when you look at the new laws of the right, which I think frankly, aren't so bad. I think men should hold their tongue. I don't think men should leer at women. I think men should work on lust as a moral cause. And I mean, that's standard Christian, traditional Christian sexuality. So when you get a case like this with this guy, you know, okay, you're always yelling about purity culture, but what purity culture is only for men. These, these, there's just so much inconsistency with this stuff. Some prominent Southern Baptist pastors jeer referring to, to Harris as Jezebel, a biblical reference to a woman who is wicked, wanted and manipulative in her, in her drive to power. That backfired and underscored how out of touch they are. Okay. Well, in politics, I hear a lot of jeering and name calling both ways. Oh, but, but that both wayism who does worth, I don't care who does worse. It's, it's a part of the process and both sides should cut it out. Another blow to the Christian right came when Beth Moore, a bestselling Christian author, who may be the most prominent evangelical woman in America said this month that she was leaving, leaving the Southern Baptist convention. Is she denying the resurrection of Jesus Christ? I don't think so. One of the things I want to dive deeper into is, is just the funny ways that this whole Trump moment changed it. On one hand, you sort of have a woke light posture from some evangelicals. And I've said this before in a video, it strikes me as very strange. Beth Moore is six years older than I am. I didn't grow up in the South. I grew up in the North, but I grew up knowing a lot of racism, a lot of sexism. And I saw it all my growing up years and I've seen it. It's pretty much a constant thing. It's part of the package of human depravity. Now in 2021, she wakes up to describe that, to discover that the Southern Baptist convention might have problems with racism and sexism. You didn't see that in the seventies or eighties or nineties or aughts. It took Donald Trump to expose that for you. It took Donald Trump to expose some of the ways that Christianity and nationalism get fused together. I've seen it all my life. In fact, one of the most conservative, a guy who, a guy in Grand Rapids, Michigan during the first world war, Herman Hooksama, led a split in the Christian Reformed Church over common grace. He didn't believe there was any of it. So talk about far right. He wouldn't allow flags in the sanctuary during the first world war when at least one Christian Reformed Church was burned down because Deutsch and Dutch sounds a lot alike and Americans didn't know the difference. And most Dutch immigrants were still speaking Dutch in their church. So during the first world war, they plastered their sanctuaries with flags to say, we're patriotic, we're patriotic. Old Herman Hooksama, man of principle, wouldn't do it, wouldn't let a flag in the church. Why? Because Herman Hooksama understood a hierarchy, understood that it's not the job of the church to carry water for politics. And people complain about churches on the right and I don't allow any of that stuff in my church. Every now and then, election year, someone will come out with a voting guide, say, Pastor, could you hand this out in my church? Sure, I'll hand it right into the garbage can. Doesn't belong in the church. In the black community, black politicians regularly take the pulpit in a black church. Okay, it might be your tradition. It isn't mine. When politicians suggest to me, well, they usually don't suggest to me because my church is so small, there's lots bigger churches that they could spend their time in going to Sundays looking for the votes. Now, I think in the black community, the history is quite a bit different because especially in the Jim Crow South, the church was one of the few places that African Americans could actually mobilize politically. And so in many ways, I give the black church a pass on all that, partly because of their unique history in America. Yet, if a politician comes to my church and that's happened a couple of times, I'll say, you're welcome to come on Sunday and maybe during the prayer request time, I'll have you stand up so that everyone can see you and know that you're here. And after the service, you can talk to whomever you want, but you're not walking up onto the pulpit. We're not using a pulpit, but you're not walking up onto the stage or giving a mini sermon because that's not what we're doing in this room. There's a hierarchy here and politics is below what we're doing in church. And I frankly would not want to serve a church that wasn't diverse politically. In my church, there are people who voted for Trump and people who voted for Biden and people who voted for Obama. And I want to go to a church where politics does not define or divide us because people can have different political opinions and different political strategies and worship together. Does that mean their faith shouldn't inform their vote? No, their faith should inform their vote. Am I going to tell them how to vote? No. Do I hope that my sermons get calculated into their political matrix? Yes. But this business about church and politics, it is bad for the church. Yet Trumpian right-wing evangelicalism is doubling down. I think they're idiots for it. But the other side is doubling down too and you just don't see them as much. Well, why not? Well, part of it is because most of them are not actually in church. And so I read, I was reading, I didn't finish it because how many books do I start and how many books don't I finish. If you want to read a book on this, read American Prophets by Jack Jenkins. It's, you know, similar to Jesus and John Lane. There's a whole bunch of books out there that basically market to progressive Christians. Some of those Christians have fairly orthodox beliefs, beliefs in the incarnation, beliefs in the physical resurrection of Jesus Christ. Pro-life Democrats have been in many ways sort of squeezed out of the party, but you'll find a lot of stories in here about exactly what Nicholas Christoph is writing about. And frankly, it's been around for quite a while. It's not ended. But again, I think if you read history, you'll find, well, this goes back to the 19th century. Reverend William Barber, Jerusha Duford, so a granddaughter of Billy Graham. Boy, thanksgivings have to be fun. You got Franklin and this other woman. The share of Americans identifying as Christians has shrunk in recent years. Yeah. Which group has shrunk faster? And that's getting into the dynamic. And I don't mean that to make political points. I mean that with respect to institutional points. And I'll get there in a minute. The progressive wing of Christianity is not, of course, new. It began with Jesus. Now who's playing the Christian imperialism game? This is a standard move. This is Jesus. Oh, just but earlier you were talking about what Jesus didn't talk about. And here's another thing that's annoying. I know many deeply politically conservative Christians who care for the poor. And okay, who gives money for the poor? People who go to church or people who don't. The data is clear. But the insinuation that, well, woe to you who are rich. Oh, the Republicans of the party of the rich? And this is very standard stuff. And it's not honest. It's not honest. He advises the rich ruler to sell everything you have and give to the poor. Okay, so the Republicans are hoarding money and the Democrats are living lives of chaste poverty. I know some Democrats that do. My parents did. You know, my parents were, you know, very much did this. But in the 1960s and 70s when progressive Christianity was far more prominent, yes, where did it go and why? Leftist cited such verses and carried pocket booklets like the radical Bible and quotations from Chairman Jesus. I think it'd be healthy if progressive Christians reclaim a part of Americans public square and mix things up. They're still there and they're still making noise. Again, you can read Jack Janssen's book. They're out there. They just don't make so much noise because there's not that many of them left. Not that many of them. My hope is that we move into a season where Jesus followers are no longer seen as synonymous with hate, exclusion, and hypocrisy. Well, I'll agree with that. I hope they're not synonymous with that. But as beacons of love and grace, I agree. But are you tying hate, exclusion, and hypocrisy to particular political things that may or may not actually be connected with it? Where actually others are attempting to, they simply have a different strategy for love and grace. This is Billy Graham's niece. And again, I don't have a problem with that. I hope they can sit down across a meal and debate their politics, debate their political strategy. Can they both agree that the poor should be fed and taken care of? I hope so. I hope so. What they differ on is strategy. So maybe instead of saying, I hate the, you hate the poor and I don't, they should say, how can we talk together to actually have strategies where there are fewer poor, where there are fewer where there are fewer abortions, where, where, you know, because what I see is that often both sides can agree to a degree on certain outcomes. Okay. Debate the strategy, find common ground, work together. In the past, secular liberals sometimes stereotyped Christians as intolerant bigots and conservative Christians sometimes stereotyped liberals as working to suppress freedom of religion. Sometimes seems to be going on pretty much now. And when the religious secular divide doesn't neatly overlay the political divide, it may become a bit more difficult for either side to demonize each other. I'm hoping so. But again, the demonization, I don't think is a function of reality as much as it's a function of the political food fight we want to get going. Right and left aren't so helpful here as, as father Greg Boyle, who runs a highly regarded Catholic programs for gang members in Los Angeles, the more reverend we become, we see things not as black and reverend will become. We see things not as black and white or left and right, but as complex. I'm all for that. Hallelujah for complexity. Are we, are we arguing about nuance? I didn't see a lot of generosity in this article. It might lower America's political temperature. I pray, I pray for that too. So now again, I am no fan of Christian nationalism. I'm also not a fan of Christian imperialism. The USA is no more chosen than Mexico. God uses the USA, the Mexico, and I keep making this thing because, you know, to be against Mexicans is racism. Mexican isn't a race just like American isn't a race. Mexico is a highly diverse, multi-ethnic nation, as is the United States. God uses any nation state he wishes to do as he wills or any kingdom. Look up God using Nebuchadnezzar to destroy Judah and the temple in Jerusalem. I do love my country. Living overseas made me far more appreciative of a lot of what is good and unique about the USA. At some point I should do a video review of Jesus and John Wayne. I spoke with the author and I should go into that more, and I've decided that before I talk to any author about their book, I am going to do a video review of their book in advance so that the author knows what I think about their book, and if they want to debate the review, they can. They'll have a chance, but I think it's highly important that we not straw man or straw woman the authors of these books because they all have their own story and the book should be understood within the context of those stories, and I agree that God has shed his grace on thee in terms of this country. The United States is a tremendously privileged nation that has certainly its share of racism and sexism and all of those things. I was just reading yesterday a biography of C.S. Lewis was going into a bunch of history about the UK and Northern Ireland. You know, they basically saw the Scots and the English and the Irish as different races, and okay, fair enough, but we don't think about that when we talk about racism, do we? People's nationalism and religion are going to blur together, and so a lot of what we're seeing is exactly that dynamic. People aren't particularly careful. It's sort of what we're in for, but I'm no fan of Christian nationalism. Figuring out how to place your politics and your religion in your hierarchy is a difficult task, and this is where the, I would say, the devolution into folk religions of the right and the left has probably contributed to exactly what Nicholas Christoph is complaining about, because instead of having, well, we just had it in the Brett Sockold conversation, he noted that he was speaking with a woman who was in her 70s about the issue that he's writing his book about, and he was deeply impressed by the amount of sophistication that she had with respect to many of these issues, and what does that mean? It meant that in a day when churches were probably more ghettoized, there was a lot more formal preparation done by church which helped people manage their hierarchies of politics and religion. They were much more self-consciously religion, which I think helped them be quite a bit more politically flexible, because the problem is that when you don't have a formal religion, it's very easy for your politics to become ultimate, and that is a recipe for disaster, and I think this is one of the deep differences in America from the 50s, 60s, and 70s to how it is now, that with fewer and fewer people actually participating in formal religious structures, that people's religion has basically become increasingly folk religion on both the right and the left, and they're doing the kinds of things that their parents and grandparents would never do because they had actual formal religious formation, and so yeah, should you be surprised that Donald Trump, who had near zero religious formation, isn't cautious about the lines? No, you probably shouldn't be surprised at all. You might be offended that clergy aren't particularly careful about the lines, but in many Christian denominations, education has not been a priority for clergy either. Pragmatism is probably the scale you want to look at in some of these. Now Joe Biden, that's an interesting case with respect to his Catholicism. How about AOC? Well, you got the radical priest, and well, you know, I'll leave it to Kale and Sokol to worry about their own houses, but these are the issues. It's been the lack, it's been the reduction of formal religious institutions that I think has led to a lot of this folk religion, which I think is actually the cause of the problem. If you don't have a formal or well-formed religion, things are going to get more disorganized than it usually is, and people are probably going to be less disciplined. Look at the amount of discipline that Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. brought to his demonstrations. They were highly disciplined. Why? Because Dr. King understood full well the disaster that would happen if he had only a mostly peaceful protest. It had to be a 100% peaceful protest, and the institution of the church afforded that discipline so that they could actually make progress, and Dr. King understood that. Riots where things get burned down, usually your own community, where you're going to lose your supermarkets and Walgreens and the institutions and stores actually owned by the people in the community, that is a disaster, and it's actually the formal religious institutions that have a hope of forming the people and helping them achieve that. Without a formal and well-formed religious framework, you basically run on your unchecked biases, and that's a lot of what we're seeing, a lot of moral dead reckoning out there. And so this article that I've pointed to many times now in my videos, which I will link to again, I think is critical because what happened was white progressive protestants left their churches, and part of the reason that conservative Christian nationalist types of churches are so prominent is that they've actually managed to maintain their churches as formal organizations. In the black community, they have too, but it's mostly been the white folks that have contributed to the nuns and left their institutions because their religious zeal budget was filled with political causes, and what that has led to are folk religions on the right and the left, and not a lot of institution or tradition or formation and discipline built in very young to the people or understanding of lines, because if you actually have a good religious system, you should be able to pull up the platforms from both American political parties and do plenty of critique. That's a degree of independence, and that independence should also afford you to say, okay, we've got a lot of ultimates here in the political space, can we dial it down and maybe, in fact, find some pragmatic solutions that might engender compromise? Now, the question about political polarization is a whole different question, which I'm not a politician, I'm going to leave it alone, but this issue I am going to talk about. Now, religious atheists, they don't have a god either, but what fills them with zeal? They look tremendously religious in the zeal in which they attack god number two. So what's so bad about losing religion S? Well, religions get things wrong, they do, but religions actually slow down cultures and make them look at bigger, bigger picture windows, higher issues, broader periods of time. That's what religious traditions and religious institutions do. They apply a degree of discipline to what otherwise might simply become an instinctive, bias-filled, glandular posture of which we don't need more of in America on both sides of the aisle. Religions are costly, they are, they force you to discipline yourself, to make sacrifices, that's what they are intended to do. They intentionally cut out a degree of well-being now in order to pursue a greater well-being, individual and communal, later. I think some of the real, some of the things I've appreciated most about Peter's, and it's when he talks about sacrifice, how integral sacrifice is to all of this. Part of the reason you often find religious people, now I mean people who participate faithfully and regularly and submit to one degree or another to a religious institution, why these people are so often voted up the hierarchy in politics, because the discipline that they've learned from their religion, they bring into their politics and they actually have deeper and firmer motivations in, filled by their religion, motivated by their religion, right or wrong, that they bring into the political sphere. Apathy just won't march you up the hierarchy very well. So, you know, the points about sacrifice are deeply important in this. I've been covering up my slides. Oh, see, oh the beautiful slides I didn't show you. Oh well, I'm not going to go back and redo it. Religion is always politics is now. Religion is everything. Politics is this thing. It's a matter of scale and scope. They work on different time scales. Democracy tries to make people happy now and democracy has issues, many of which we're seeing very short-term motivated, very short memory. America is a very old democracy and it has a very short memory about a lot of things and that's part of the problem in this conversation. Monarchies try to make the king happy or the nobility happy or the god happy. Religions at least push it further up and push it further out. Communism tries to bring in utopia and was another failure. Trying to please god or the gods or the divine opens up the frame dramatically and can hopefully temper the now and bring more sacrifice into the equation. There's always, but there's always expedience corruption. Well that sets up the problem. Well which religion, religion in terms of the secular perspective of religion, which religion is right? Well that's a continual conversation and religious communities are always doing it within their attempt to purify themselves and get it right. All of the competition and cooperation that happens at that level. But if you if you really want to do this you're going to have to work harder. You're going to have to find a religious tradition to at least try to submit to and see how it goes. Because now you're dealing with bigger problems but you're also probably dealing with more personal problems because what part of what religions traditionally do is try to say, excuse me, the problem isn't all out there. The problem is in here. I have to address the problem in myself. It's a far more credible and networked pursuit. It helps to submit to something that will make you more disciplined. It'll give you more independence from the politics of the now and the urgencies of the moment that people are using in a sense to replace their religious motivations. It scales to the individual. What massive political effort will your individual participation impact? You get a vote. Congratulations. You pay your taxes. There you go. You're going to put up a law and sign. What your religion will tend to you is bring the drama much more closely into it and therefore afford a much higher degree of meaning. Because at least in Christianity you have a relationship with God. You have a relationship with each other. The drama isn't just up there in Washington or over in the capital here in Sacramento or some other place. There's plenty of drama that you can participate in. I'm not telling you not to be politically active or to have a political opinion in a democracy. People should be politically active to one degree or another. Everyone is entitled to a political opinion. If the system works, we won't kill each other over it or imprison each other over our political opinions. Please, let's not go there. But what you get in religion is quite a bit more participation. And that then affords you're not deriving your meaning from the politics. You're deriving your meaning from the religion. And that way you can tolerate, at least or at best, forgive your political enemies and have relationships across the political aisle. That's what we need actually if we want to maybe do some compromising and hopefully make progress on things that aren't dividing us instead of having everything divide us. To live is to act and to act is to choose. And hopefully your religion will inform all of those choices. Now this is where I want to get into a little bit of American successor religion. And I'm borrowing Wesley Yang's term here. I usually call it progressive liberationism because what my biggest disappointment with a book like Jesus and John Wayne and from a historian that should have known better, I'll put the browser down a little further, is that the real, in my opinion, the real story, the real change is not so much the Christian nationalists. That's been around forever. The real story is the American successor religion. But that religion is sort of, it basically likes to wear religious clothing. And now people will rightly say, I agree. No, the other side is bringing their political ideas and their political ideas and their political ideas and their political ideas and their political ideas and their political ideas and dressing them in Christian clothing. I agree. I think violation of the third commandment is a terrible thing. Don't ask God to underwrite your political agenda. Hopefully you're working on refining your political agenda according to your religion. That's a good thing, but have a little bit of humility with respect to, well, how you think it should be applied and don't blame God for it. And I think this actually is the best tradition of the Old and New Testaments. And you can see that. I love the story at the beginning of Joshua where Joshua bumps into this guy and he's a warrior and, you know, I'm commander of the armies of the Lord. You know, well, are you on our side? No. God is independent. And the whole point of Jesus not being able to be recruited by the Pharisees or anyone else was Jesus basically says, that's a sin of hierarchy. I'll never work for you. I might open myself to, I'll listen to your prayers and I'm concerned about your welfare, but you serve me. So don't sign your political checks in God's name on either side. Please worship your God and absolutely your religion should motivate and inform your politics, but make sure it's your politics. But at least the Christian nationalists are upfront about it. They're at least easy to spot. What's been happening on the other side is much more this other new religion that sort of inhabits things. It's an implicit religion. It goes under the radar partly because, well, there are some activist institutions that perhaps inhabit it, but they will all say this isn't religious. This is political. And then now it maps onto other religious expressions. The difficulty you have here is that does Jesus make you free? Yes. Jesus also invites you to be his slave. And so the themes of liberation are very complex and nuanced in the New Testament because slavery, my yoke is easy and my burden is light. You're still wearing a yoke. Well, how do these things work? And part of the difficulty with progressive liberationism is it doesn't take both sides into account. And you have the same, you have, you know, the one side says freedom and the other side says liberation. It's like, well, how and why? Well, that's going to be a much larger conversation. What is the hierarchy of bondage, of bondages we need to be liberated from? If, now I'm owning my Calvinism here, part of Calvinism begins with Heideberg catechism. I am not my own. What is your only comfort in life and in death? How am I to know this comfort? I begin with my misery. Well, what is my misery? That in fact, I'm steeped in sin. I've got racism. I've got sexism. I've got just about any kind of ism that can spring out of a bias. I got some. And you know what? When I'm not paying attention, it seeps out of my mouth. And if you want to say, well, Paul should be canceled because he's a sinner. If we're canceling all the sinners, I guess you got to cancel me. The difficult thing to find is the pure one. And this is where purity culture, when it runs amok, always defeats itself. And we're watching that play out now. The bondages I need to be liberated from, the most important bondages that there are around me, are in me. And that's the heart of Christianity. So where's the real story? It's sort of, well, the religion that's acting like it's not a religion at all. And well, there's no institution, there's no formation, and it's sort of all over the place. And it's just not honest. Again, at least the Christian nationals, they're not going to be honest. Again, at least the Christian nationals, at least they're saying who they are. The other group, well, they're not in church, they're not in training. And not all of them again, because again, I, in many ways, I'm from the left wing of the Christian Reformed Church, which isn't very far left. But these are, this is my tribe. These are my people. I'm not a Republican. I'm not. I tend to be much more of an independent voter. And if I were to lay out my presidential picks over the past years, some of you would be appalled and might even unsubscribe. So be it. But what I can't tolerate is basically signing God's name on our political checks. And what I think we get is a reduction of religious to expedience. Now, I was sent this book and I haven't read it yet. And so now I'm going to do a review of this book before I talk to the author. If she wants to talk to me, I don't think she's watching my videos. But this tweet disturbed me. Do you realize that the same folks fighting against critical race theory are also fighting for male headship? Some of them, yes, are. And I think that's a good point. I think that's a not all of them. Racism and patriarchy are part of the same oppressive system. Which system is that? Pull on the thread of one and you start to, and both start to unravel. Really? What hierarchy is working? Isn't it time to get rid of both? And Christian patriarchy? Well, I'll read the book and I'll look at our arguments. And again, my views on anybody who knows me, anybody who looks over the archive of who's preached at Living Stones, you won't find any politicians. You'll find some women. How intersectional can your liberation scale? And that's part of where a lot of Christians are sort of, well, we're going to sort of be down with the anti-racism stuff. But then Black Lives Matter takes down from their website how the nuclear family is part of the problem. Oh, everybody's got their limits. And I think, again, and I wanted to make a video about this and I probably will, Jonathan Peugeot's observation about parasiting, I think is really important. Because if you only are able to derive your enthusiasm, I'm not saying this about this book, I should probably put the book down because I haven't read the book yet. But if you're only able to maintain your religious political zeal by being against someone, your house will never stand. It's just that simple. Because you have to keep, you know, it's 1984. You have to keep the war going. You have to keep the war going to legitimate your own cause. Well, once the enemy is gone, and I think this is part of the reason with the departure of Trump, we're seeing certain groups within the church keep yelling about Christian nationalism. Because, well, the Christian nationalist, to the degree that he's a Christian, lost. So now suddenly, oh, we're going to be so proud that now we have a church-going man in the White House. Wait a minute. Wait a minute. What about that Christian nationalism? But again, it's the secularity. And so, no. And again, I'm there. If I decided to change careers and run for political office, well, in a black community, it'd be okay to be recognized as a minister. In a white community, not so much, because that's not the hat you're wearing. And I agree with that. I don't think we should have ministers as ministers running the country. I don't think ministers should be excluded from public office, but it's a different institution. It's a different vocation. And so, if you're going to lay one hat aside, do that before you pick up the other hat. Don't put one on top of the other or keep sort of switching them. You need something in your hierarchy that's above your anti-patriarchy and your anti-racism. And part of what we're seeing increasingly is that there's no forgiveness because there's no one in your hierarchy that can grant it. So again, I don't have a fight in Teen Vogue. Look at me. But when she was 17, she tweeted some things that don't meet today's mustard. Ten years ago, what are you going to do? Exile her? Banish her? This simply isn't going to work, but it's a function of where we've been going. And again, it's a function of the loss of religious institutions. We've been running legacy Christian code, but as it decays, we are losing functionality in the matrix. And this is another way of talking about where we're feasting off the decaying carcass of the past generations. And unless we rejuvenate it, it's not going to be there. And a lot of this is the anxiety behind Tom Holland or Jordan Peterson. The success of religion will fail. It's a parasitic religion, and it can only patch and hack for so long, and it takes out its own people. That's part of the problem with with purity cults. Christian purity cults have the same problem, but political purity cults especially, they burn out too quickly. And again, why? Because remember, politics is very nowish. So it tends to race through things and burn them out quickly. Part of what happens with religious institutions is there's so much there, it stretches it out, it slows things down, and hopefully, if people are paying attention, the full menu of what is needed, or at least most of the menu of what is needed, is there. So there can be forgiveness. This is why religion isn't going anywhere, because the more politics burns itself out, the more you're going to initiate the meaning crisis. People are going to be going back to church. That's probably what we're going to see happen. I think for individual advice, I would look at the end of a particular chapter in Screwtape Letters. You will say that these are very small sins, and doubtless, like all young tempters, you are anxious to be able to report spectacular wickedness. But do remember, the only thing that matters is the extent to which you separate the man from the enemy. Of course, this is Screwtape Letters, so the enemy is God. It does not matter how small the sins are, provided that their cumulative effect is to edge the man away from the light and out into the nothing. Murder is no better than cards, if cards will do the trick. Indeed, the safest road to hell is the gradual one, the gentle slope, soft underfoot, without sudden turnings, without milestones, without side posts. And I think that's part of what we're seeing in our culture, that more and more people will simply look at this and say, this doesn't work. The anxiety is building up. Now, hopefully, when the anxiety builds up, there will be avenues available for them to pursue it productively. Just following the drama until you expire won't work. Meaning from drama is cheap. Keep the whole world dueling with their incessant culture wars. Culture wars will always be there, just like the angry will find something to be angry about, the anxious will find something to be anxious about. If you fundamentally derive your meaning from politics, you are on a treadmill, and you can follow this treadmill until the day you die and not change a thing. There will always be political drama. There always has been, there always will be. If you actually want to step out of it, you're going to have to step out onto a deeper, broader, more long-lasting platform. And actually, from that platform, you ought to be able to derive perspective by which you can actually be politically creative. Why? Because you'll have a bigger perspective, which will inform your short-term political goals. And again, I think part of the reason we see religious people at the top of the hierarchy in politics is because they're out competing the people that are living in the political now. Once you no longer are anxious for daily survival, your anxiety budget looks to fill itself with other greater conflicts to participate in. And I think we see a lot of that in our present culture. So there's my rant on this, the folk religions, the loss of institutions, the meaning need that we tend to fill with politics. Hopefully we can do better.