https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=BDXUhMfbXXM

 Good, how are you? It's a pleasure to meet you. I enjoyed your email that you sent me. Yeah, thank you, thank you. I know I was like the email's getting kind of long and there's so many things I wanna say so I had to keep it kind of brief or I could have said so much more. So, yeah. What would you like to do? Do you wanna use this time to tell your story? I am recording this so we can. Okay. That doesn't mean I'll have to share it or post it but it's just that if I don't record it then there's no second chance at that. Sure, totally. Yeah, I think it would just be really good for me to maybe share a little bit more of my story and I kind of find myself kind of stuck and kind of lost in this journey a little bit trying to find my way and I've just really appreciated your videos and would love to get some feedback from you on kind of where I'm at and what you think about it. Okay. Yeah, so a little bit more about my story. So I grew up like in a very strong kind of Christian background. So my dad was a pastor in a Pentecostal church when I was really young and just kind of like everything I was surrounded by was kind of Christian related. So grew up in church, super involved with youth group. My friends were all Christians. So just kind of very inundated in that world and it was a very big part of my life. So I went to college a few years ago. So I'm 25 now. So in 2013, 2014, started going to college. And even in college, I mean, faith was still a priority number one. It was like, I want to find Christian. You go to a Christian college or a secular college? It was a private Catholic college. Definitely more on like the liberal end of the spectrum and some of their interpretations of some things, but technically Catholic. So kind of going to college and faith was still a really big part of my life. But that was kind of the time I would say that kind of some doubts or some questions started to kind of get dropped in just through some of the classes and things I was taking. So I just kind of grown up in this world that was just so trusting of the Bible. And it was like, the Bible is God's word. So you should never really question these things or we just know it's true because it's God's word. And then I got into these religious studies classes or these philosophy classes where these professors were just kind of challenging that notion where they were looking at the Bible through a very different lens than what I was used to looking at it through. And they were asking really good questions of me. And it kind of, at the time, I was still pretty confident in what I believed, but it was like, well, it kind of dropped that seed in there. I'm like, well, maybe there are other ways of looking at the Bible or maybe it all doesn't kind of quite fit in the exact narrative of how you were raised. So those kinds of questions and things kind of started to chip away at me just a little bit kind of through my college experience. In college really kind of started to find myself getting kind of, starting to wrestle more with following God's way of living. So in college, this is pretty common. You start to get kind of more exposed to drinking and hookup culture and some of those things. It's like kind of growing up, it was like, well, those things are bad. And even if you did them, you wouldn't enjoy them because it's miserable. And it's like, you kind of believe that. And then I got, yeah. It's like, oh, this is quite enjoyable. It's true though, it's true. And I kind of got exposed to it and I was like, wow, this is a lot different and a lot more fun than I thought it would be. So it sounds kind of silly, isn't it? Cause you would think like, why would people do it? I completely understand. So anyway. Why would it be so popular if it wasn't so fun? Right, right, right. So that kind of started to chip away at me where I was like, man, you know, I started to kind of really wrestle with, you know, living God's way or like living this other way. And it wasn't quite as clean cut as it maybe was in high school for me. And then another kind of element on top of all this too was I started to become more and more kind of disenfranchised with just the church as a whole. So, you know, growing up, it was like, you know, it seemed like Christian history was just like perfect. Like Christian, like I knew Christians made mistakes, but we never really talked about those things. So kind of once again in college, getting exposed to those ideas and how to just be more. It's what Jonathan Peugeot calls our nakedness. We don't really talk about that. Yeah, seriously. So it's like getting exposed to some of the things that Christians have done that in the past that have not been good. Some of the more even contemporary examples of like maybe higher profile Christians who are living in ways that are very hypocritical. So I don't wanna name names, but you know, some of the prosperity gospel teaching and some of the mega church pastors and things going on that it's like, oh, something seems really off. And it was kind of this frustration building of me of like, if this is what Christianity stands for, I don't necessarily want to be a part of it, you know? So it was kind of, you know, it was some of those, it's kind of a mix of all of those things started to build. So there's kind of those intellectual things that were becoming harder and harder to reconcile. And the answers that I'd gotten before weren't quite satisfying me. But then there was the emotional kind of, you know, torn between, you know, what I kind of wanna do versus what I know God's way or the Christian way, and then some of the hypocrisy. And even on top of, if all of that, maybe the number one thing that especially recently I've just been wrestling with is just the concept of hell and eternal judgment. And especially, I know you come from a reform tradition and I grew up in a very strong reform tradition. So I guess I could kind of take a step back. So my dad was a kind of a coastal pastor when I was really young, but his ministry came to an end, probably when I was like eight or nine. And then we started going to a Baptist church. But it was very like reformed driven. So I started getting a lot of that type of thinking in me. And as I've started to kind of wrestle through these things and, you know, think about like the concept of hell and it's such a heavy topic, you know, I kind of find it hard to believe sometimes that, you know, it seems like kind of like one of those topics that a lot of Christians don't wanna talk about or kind of just like push underneath the rug. So it's like, I'm kind of questioning, do these other people like even really believe it? Like they say they do, but they're not really acting as if they do. And then I'm trying to think, well, you know, if you believed it, you know, think about how heavy that would be just on how that impacts all of your friendships and you're thinking about man, every, you know, most of the people that I know are going to be destined to this place for eternity. And it's a very, you know, if you take it seriously, it is a very heavy topic. It's kind of hard to kind of deal with. So anyway, that's kind of a, just kind of a kind of a shotgun blast of a lot of the things that I've been wrestling with. And kind of over the last year or two, I would say like my commitment to faith has just kind of slowly started to kind of wane and like, and die off. And I've really kind of found myself in the last year, almost just kind of like a kind of a crossroads point of like, man, I don't know what I believe anymore because I've been kind of slowly detaching myself kind of intellectually and emotionally and spiritually from this thing that was so important to me. So that's kind of where I'm at right now is like, I'm like, okay, well, what do I believe now? Where am I going? That's kind of where you come in because I've been listening to a lot of different thinkers from different perspectives on YouTube, listening to people who have had deconstruction stories, listening to you, Jordan Peterson, some of these other folks, some interviews with Sam Harris and things, like just trying to get some different ideas and perspectives from people as to, what do I kind of really think about the world, not necessarily just what my parents kind of gave me or what I grew up with or what I was expected to do. So it's kind of that type of a process. And that's, I ended up really falling in love with your channel because I seriously have watched like, I've watched like dozens of your videos and I'll just kind of put them on in the background while I'm working. And I'm just kind of thinking to myself, how many 25 year old guys are listening to these three hour, two hours, two hours, super intense videos and actually enjoying it? Like I'm hanging on every word because I'm just eating it up. So. Well, thank you. Yeah. I really loved your channel. And yeah, that's why I wanted to talk to you today. That's really helpful feedback for me because, I'm just kind of throwing this stuff out into the world and for me to find out what's helpful is really helpful for me because it helps me kind of gauge how I can be more helpful. Now, what kinds of things are you thinking about now and wondering about? And what kinds of listeners? I mean, were you into Jordan Peterson? I know Jordan's kind of been gone for a while. And how, I mean, what's been going on for you in this? Yeah. So the Jordan Peterson piece, so I have a friend and this is another tidbit that's kind of led me down this path too, but I had a really close friend from college. He's one of my best friends who started to kind of walk this deconstruction journey even before I did. So, and he was like kind of a rock of an individual for me in many ways. So I can't deny that that's, that had been a big influence on me. But anyway, he was walking this journey and he was the first person who told me about Jordan Peterson. And then he had sent me that big three hour lecture or a debate with Sam Harris. I just said, hey, you should really check this out. This is really interesting. And I remember listening to it and just being like, wow. Like it was very interesting to me that somebody could take, somebody could use, someone with that kind of level of intellect could use the Bible and see all of this deep meaning and these things coming out of it. And it wasn't just some silly kind of like backwards way of thinking, but there was like real deep value here. And just kind of seeing that that just really sparked my interest. So I started listening to him more and I've been listening to him a lot. I got his book, 12 Rules for Life. And I just started reading that actually a few weeks ago. So he's been a big part of my story, especially of the last year or two. But kind of where I'm at now, as you had asked, I think I've been listening to a lot of things and I've been kind of like almost like letting myself, trying to take myself outside of my body and almost kind of like look down and say, okay, let's try to really figure out like what you believe now. And it's been kind of hard because I feel myself kind of lost in that wasteland of being kind of disconnected from it. And it's been kind of a big identity crisis in many ways because I'm just, when something is a rock for so long and you really question it really for real for the first time, it's very disorienting. So I've been kind of struggling in this place of I kind of in between these worlds. And it's like, well, I've thought about and listened to enough secular perspectives to know that, okay, I don't know if that's really who I am or what I truly believe, but then some of the Christian things that I used to hold so dearly don't seem quite as appealing either. So I kind of find myself in this weird middle ground where I don't really know where I am. And that's another reason Jordan Peterson has been so interesting to me is I think he kind of lives in that middle space a little bit where he doesn't really fit in any box. So it's like, I kind of feel myself there where I feel the tug of both worlds. And I'm like, I don't really know where I belong anymore or where I'm going. One of the things that I've noticed about your younger generation is that one of the things that I see different from let's say when I remember being 25, I don't know that my generation looked at ourselves with as much intensity as your generation does. I don't know if that is a product of the, because the internet didn't exist when I was 25. I don't know if that's a product of social media where in a sense with social media, we're always sort of looking at ourselves as, so very self-consciously trying to identify ourselves, discover ourselves, and not just in this conversation, I've noticed this quite a bit with members of my local meetup and talking to them more in depth and getting to know them. So the attention to, and I could very much understand it given how you grew up, given just how you laid it out, I mean, both a Pentecostal background and then a Reformed Baptist background. I mean, huge identity stakes on fidelity to these definitional categories. I mean, that's a really big deal, especially when you throw hell into the mix, because in a sense you're, I don't want to use this word, but I think it often sort of implicitly plays out this way. Your qualification, your qualification for heaven and hell is riding on your bona fides, your credentials of being a Christian. And so I think this is part of why, not only some of the celebrity deconstructions, but other non-celebrity deconstructions that I've known quite closely, these categorical issues really intensify. And especially I think, and I don't know you at all, but especially with certain personality types that can, I mean, I've found that people can in some ways really begin to obsess over these things. And that then sort of creates its own weather, creates its own anxiety, and can in some ways intensify the whole process. And I think in some ways prematurely force people into categories that might not for the moment feel authentic because of, hey, tomorrow's and promised you, what if you were to die tonight? There's this sort of intensity that can take over. So my Calvinist tradition is a little bit more historical. A lot of the Reformed Baptist, this new wave that came about sort of in the 90s, the Young Restless and Reformed that sort of swept over certain parts of the Southern Baptist churches, Mark Driscoll and some of these, John Piper. My pastor actually knows John Piper is really good friends with him. So there's a ton of John Piper in me. Okay, okay. And I've got a lot of respect for John Piper. I think, especially John Piper's first big book, Desiring God helped a lot of people. I think it was in many ways sort of a trailblazing, a trailblazing application of a certain segment of Calvinism in a way that, I mean, a movement doesn't grow like that unless it applies, unless it really helps people and sticks. So, I've got, on one hand, I've got a lot of respect for that movement. On the other hand, I've also got some critique and my critique basically comes out of the fact that our Dutch Calvinism tended to be less, so part of the difference between the English and the Dutch Calvinist traditions was a cultural difference between the English and the Dutch. The Dutch often had a certain intensity which really bore out in my specific sub-tradition of that tradition, but it also had a certain degree of tolerance that there was a, the Netherlands was sort of the rump end of Europe. It was the low country that nobody wanted, and so it was always a very diverse place, and so the Dutch sort of developed a toleration and a flexibility with a degree of diversity that the English Presbyterians didn't really have. And so, whereas theologically, the English and the Dutch Calvinists can map on fairly closely, culturally there's some differences. And I usually see this in terms of, if I look at these doctrines of grace, as the Presbyterians like to call them, I had to learn a whole new language learning, the Young Restless and Reformed language, these doctrines of grace, as they like to call them. A thoroughgoing consistent, a thoroughgoing consistent vision of divine election also not only affords a degree of introspection, which is what is often noted in, well, in kind of the Weber thesis about Calvinism, that Reformed people are intensely preoccupied with the status of their own confession, and this doctrine which is supposed to afford, supposed to afford assurance, for some people affords anxiety, because how do I know whether or not I'm saved? And so the Weber thesis was, well, that's gonna drive them out there to be successful, and that will be external signs of one's eternal security. So I always look at it sort of the other way that, if I'm in God's hands, and when I read the Bible, and I look at the sorts of journey God takes his saints on, look at Moses, Moses, okay, Pharaoh's killing all the sons, so you're supposed to throw them into the river. Yeah, I'll throw them into the river in the basket, and it gets adopted by Pharaoh's daughter and raised in the court, and then has this woke moment, and then is gonna liberate his people from the enslavements of the people from the enslavements of Egypt, and goes out there and kills an Egyptian, and sees two Hebrews fighting, and says, no, we're comrades of the solidarity, and you Hebrews shouldn't be fighting, we're all together in this liberation cause, and the slave says, what are you gonna do, kill me like you killed that Egyptian? Suddenly Moses realizes the jig is up, and he gives up the whole woke liberation thing, and goes out into the desert and says, nuts to this, I'm gonna become a shepherd, and I'm gonna leave the whole garbage, does that for 40 years, and then God's like, let's try a burning bush thing on this fella, and Moses tries every way to get out of it, but you know, and so I look at that, and I say, well, I'm a Calvinist, this is the story, these are the kinds of things God does. Now, if you have a really narrow introspective view on, you know, God's call on Moses' life, well, it's enormously messy, because Moses didn't know who he was talking to, he was sort of a woke liberationist in his young life, and then he was a nobody shepherd out for, then that second part of his life, and the third part of his life, God says, you're gonna be my servant, you're going to accomplish what I have for you, and okay, well, let's think about divine election and perseverance of the saints, well, yeah. But God sends people on really long, weird journeys, and so this sort of intense, on one hand, there's a very healthy aspect to introspection, saying, am I on the right path? The Christian should always be saying that. On the other hand, boy, God gives a lot of rope, and God sends people on weird journeys, and that's, you can't read the Bible or read histories of, you know, saintly Christians, and you know, for the most part, yeah, some people are sort of locked in and they follow the track their whole life, but some of God's most remarkable servants, yeah, look at the apostle Paul, and as I mentioned, you know, I mention often, you would think that, well, while Jesus is making a show at the stoning of Stephen, and Paul's there holding the cloaks, you could think Jesus could glance a quickening ray over to, you know, Paul, and convert him there, and save all the bloodshed of the persecution of the people he's gonna do, but no, he doesn't. He lets them go off and persecute and kill and imprison and do all that, and then his timing is road to Damascus. Now, that fits very well into a Calvinist framework because, hey, this is God's show, it's God's script, and so, to me, I sort of flip that around and say, you know what, if I'm in his hand, and if my faith is the product of his work, you know, so I think it's healthy what you're doing in terms of being honest with yourself, and actually, quite frankly, unless you feel the pressures that are deconstructing people, even celebrity Christians who play guitars and Christian rock bands, unless you feel those pressures, can you really actually have a conversation with people? And for me, I mean, you know, what am I doing on YouTube? I don't know, I just, I sort of plug, I'm sort of plugging YouTube into, often, my wonderings and my anxieties, but I'm a little bit older, and I've thought about some of these things for a few years, and I wrestle with them all my life. I had a similar experience in that I went to college, and my father was a pastor, and I was a good Christian, I was a good Christian son, and a good Christian in Christian school, and a good Christian in Christian college, but Calvin College was a little bit more loose with this stuff, and Calvin, basically, went there, and they said, we're not gonna be your parents. Go to church, don't go to church, it's up to you. And so I had to wrestle through these things, but my life has had lots of different twists and turns, often in ways that I don't like, and then I have to ask, and sometimes in ways that don't follow this imagined Christian script that we all think are supposed to happen. Yeah. And so for me, actually, I find my Calvinism very convenient in that because I think, okay, Lord, is this what you're doing with me? Is this the road you're taking me on? All right, I'll trust you. And that's kinda how I run. Definitely, yeah. What you were saying about, I mean, that's definitely comforting because I think, you're talking about social media and how introspective folks are and how much comparison and maybe internal thinking we're doing. That's a huge stressor for me, so it's when I, I kind of see all these other friends that I have who are at a place, either in their career or in their spiritual life or in their relationships, that it's like, they're at this place that I'm just definitely not at, that it feels like something is wrong, that I'm somehow deviating from some plan, which is where a lot of that pressure and that anxiety comes in because it's like, okay, well, you need to get back on track. I need to get things figured out. You're not following that, like you were saying, that Christian script of how things were supposed to look in your life. But then it's an encouragement to think that God often uses kind of like unpredictable storylines or paths for people. And then the idea being that in the end, he uses it for their good and for the furtherment of his glory. And I even think about, I know someone else that you talk about once in a while, and I'm a huge fan of him, it's C.S. Lewis. So part of the reason I respect C.S. Lewis so much is that he came from, I mean, he grew up in a religious home, but then he kind of turned his back on the whole thing and just said, I'm done with this. I'm just gonna be an atheist and I don't believe in any of it. And he was pretty fierce in his convictions with that. But because of, in the end, he ended up becoming a Christian and kind of walking away from his atheism. But because he went through that journey, that's part of the reason why he's such an effective ambassador for Christianity or did such a good job in the climate and the day that he was in is that he knew how to kind of think through from that other perspective, because he walked through it. He not just, there weren't just a bunch of things he read from a book, oh, this is what atheists think about this topic. It's like, oh, I was an atheist and this is actually what I thought. So that kind of gives me a little bit of hope when I'm walking through this, because sometimes it's like, man, I just wish that, I wish I wasn't walking this journey because it's very hard and emotionally taxing. And it's like, wouldn't it just be simpler just to have a simple faith and not be so introspective all the time and have to try to think through things and understand things. But like his journey and like others like him gives me hope that going through this journey and kind of, it's sort of a refinement process and that hopefully in the end, you're gonna be in a much better place because you went through it, even though in the short term, it's gonna be painful or disorienting and things like that. So. People, I get very annoyed when Christian ministers and churches and other Christians like to present the Christian life as sort of this pain-free, secure, easy path. Where do you find that in the Bible? No, nowhere. You know, just- I mean, who in the Bible had that? Yeah. Wasn't Jesus, wasn't Moses, wasn't Paul, wasn't David, wasn't anybody. Yeah. And that to me is part of the honesty of the Bible. And so, you know, if God, I think it's important. I, when I, so I've done my share of mental wine and I've done my part of the work of wandering all over the normal places that we go in terms of doubts and insecurities and questions and all of that. But part of what has helped me and kept me in the faith, and even many who deconstruct, I note, often, often their deconstruction is a lament. They, I basically hear them say, you know, I'd really love to stay a Christian, but I can't because of intellectual honesty. Oh, okay. Well, I understand that. I have a degree of respect for that. But in many ways, even if you're, I have more respect for people who, whether they started in the church or somehow landed there, who hang in with the community of faith, even with their doubts. A friend of mine, Jim Schop, who taught English at Dork College, wrote a biography, a little brief biography of Mother Teresa. And I got a chance to read it first because he asked me to do a blurb on the back and I did a little short blurb. It was a remarkably powerful little biography because as it turns out, Mother Teresa, her internal life was tortured. I mean, she had no, she had no faith, she had no sense of what a Calvinist would call eternal security. She thought God had turned his back on her. You know, and this isn't in the book, but there's another quote about her. Once a Christian leader from North America said, came to her and asked that, would you pray for me? And she said, yes. What would you like me to pray for? I'd like to pray for basically clarity. And Mother Teresa says, I won't pray for that for you. He was a little shocked, you know, because usually Christian leaders are quivering masses of availability and all whatever you want, I'll do just to satisfy you. I'm here to please. And she says, no, I'm not gonna pray for you for that. And he's like, why? He says, because I've never had it. And she said, what I will pray for you for is trust because you know, clarity is in a sense, idolatrous because what we're really asking God for is to do our work for us. And maybe, may I not doubt anything? May I? And it's like, I think that's being lazy as a Christian. Now, having said all that, I remember Tony Campolo talking to his son. There's a great video out there. That's a video sort of about the book that they wrote together, he and his son about his son's deconstruction, Bart Campolo. And one of the things Tony says at one moment in that video, I've played it in some of my videos is Tony Campolo says to Bart, he says, you know, I knew you were wandering away cause you stopped going to church. And Bart is kind of like, well, you know, I wasn't believing it. And it's like, church is the place to go when you can't believe. And you might sit there through the whole service and think, I don't know, I don't believe this. But you know, if you wanna be a Christian, go to church and find one you can tolerate if that's possible. And because, you know, our mental lives, and I think the internet has just sort of exploded this because the range of voices now available to us are enormous. And there's a lot of smart people out there with a lot of good arguments. But at the same time- There's no way you can say to automate through it. There's no way that, you know, that's my kind of mindset is like, I wanna hear every argument, what every single person has to say. And there's just no way, there's no way you can do that. There's not enough time in a lifetime to do that. And the Rhett and Link videos, which I watched, I found fascinating, you know, Rhett, was it Rhett or Link? I think it was Rhett. Rhett made an excellent point. He said, I've seen all the arguments. And I thought, well, probably not all the arguments, but you've probably seen enough of them to realize the internal struggle is not simply going to be resolved by argumentation. And that's again, part of my critique about science. It's all data. Ah, no, you're, because I know this, because, you know, I trade in this a little bit. And I know that most often than not, people don't decide to follow Jesus or decide to walk away based solely on an argument. It's far more complex. It's the vervechian four Ps. It's propositional, it's procedural, it's participatory. I can never get all four of them at once, but they're all there and that's how we are. So I, you know, I'm deeply gratified that you find my mental meanderings that I impose upon the internet helpful. But, you know, basically, you're hearing me do my own wrestling with God in a sense. And I'm now in my mid-50s. I have no plan on giving up the faith. I have no plan on, on, on, on, on, on, on, on, on, in fact, COVID taught me how much I dearly need and love the church because suddenly when it's all closed down, that, that, no. So, Yeah. No, I, and, and I, I, I want to encourage you, I want to encourage you to, to continue to wrestle, but, and I think you're doing this. I can, I can hear it in you. You know, I knew when I started my Jordan Peterson journey, I sort of wanted, I sort of wanted, I sort of wanted someone who was going to guide me through and walk with me. And that's why I picked Lewis because just like you say, Lewis has the quintessential meaning crisis story. And on one hand, he's read far more than I ever will. He's far smarter than I'll ever be. He knows and can argue and can articulate all of this stuff are better than I ever will. But yet his faith, I think as we see in his biography was living and human. You know, when, when Joy, when Joy, his wife died, you know, that shook him to the core and he had to work through that. And it's interesting if you read problem of pain, which comes fairly early in his career. And then, you know, a grief observed, which is later, you see a real human being wrestling with God and what better different definition do we have of the people of God? Yes. Yes, he's, I mean, that's another reason why I love him so much is just that he's honest. And I think that's something that I appreciate about your channel too, is just how honest that you are, you know, and that you were saying how important it is to still, you know, if you are still interested in Christianity and, you know, I think it's a path you wanna go down, finding a way to involve yourself with other Christians and going to church and things like this. And that's been really hard for me because so many of the times I, when I go to church or I'm with other Christians, I'm seeing the things that the exact thing that's kind of the obstacle for me, you know, problems that I have with Christianity or things that are challenging. And one of those things is this kind of honesty or authenticity piece. So, you know, churches are kind of notorious for being places that you can kind of go and then put like the smiling face on on Sunday morning when you're around people, but really kind of inside, you have all of these questions and things and really, you know, deep struggles that you're wrestling with. And it's more common than not, if you try to talk with other Christians about these kinds of questions or things that you're wrestling with, to kind of not really get a very great or authentic response, kind of like a generic, well, you just need more faith or like, well, you just gotta trust God more. And it's like, when you hear that, and I know you're laughing because you're familiar. And that just kind of started to burn me out of like, man, are there any Christians who are just honest and they wanna walk this journey and understand that it's a wrestling, but they still wanna walk that road. They don't want to shut it all out. Which is why listening to your channel and listening to, you know, reading CS Lewis are like, okay, you know, there are Christians out there who are still faithful and holding on, but are still honest with their questions and kind of this wrestling and this journey. And that there's something so beautiful to me about that, that it's hard for me to completely let go when I see that, because it's like, well, that's, there's something that seems right about that. And that I really admire, but that I do find really lacking sometimes in the local church or other Christians. And I don't wanna throw it up all Christians. I mean, I do have some good friends who are, you know, who've encouraged me in this time and have kind of walked it, did a really, done a really good job of walking with me through it. But more times than not, I just don't really tell people about it, because I just don't think that, I won't get the response or the engagement that I think is really kind of appropriate for what's really happening. It's usually so, yeah. Yeah, that's a real problem in churches. And it's this problem of losing status by saying the wrong thing. Yes, yep. And church, there are certain impossibilities that we live with. And one of the impossibilities we live within the church is that on one hand, membership is for believers. On the other hand, to be a believer as a human being isn't quite a simple thing. And there are people out there who don't have doubts. They're there. You know, it's clear, it's obvious, it's in, that's how they are. And it's, then if you're over on the doubting kind, sometimes you can look at them dismissively and ironically, then they lose status in your eyes because everything is black and white. I've done that. Yeah. I thought that way. And so, you know, and that's why, again, that's why I think Jesus, that this enormously difficult and challenging command that Jesus gives us to love is that it's like, okay, so I gotta love the Christians who never doubt and like have, you know what precious moments are? No, what's that? They were big in the 80s. A guy named Sam Butcher had these little cutesy Christian trinkets and it's like, and you know, for me, I look at these things and it's just like, this kind of Christian kitsch and the shmarmy music and then it's like, Paul, no, you need to love those people too. You can't just love the angst-filled existential doubters who are reading books by smart people. You have to love the folks who are collecting trinkets and participating in all the evangelical kitsch. You love them too. And you love the non-sister, the non-Christians and you love the sinners and you love the, I mean, it's when Jesus says, you know, love your neighbor as yourself and he says, love your enemy. It's like, I'm not sure who I can exclude in that group. Yes, yes. So it's, and that takes time in the church because we all have instinctive reactions to, we all have people or things that annoy us and so then it's like, okay, I gotta, that annoyance is my issue and so I'll have to work through that myself and try to guard my tongue and figure out how to be generous towards everyone. But no, it's, but they are out there. And sometimes because a lot of them aren't in church anymore, it's just a problem. And because they haven't found a place where they could be. And so, you know, one of the things that I, you know, one of the things I stumbled upon with this whole Jordan Peterson journey I was on was when I started my meetup group, I found some of them there and people like yourself who had grown up in the church and some of them had left the church or couldn't stand it anymore or, you know, maybe their father, their parents were in church and so they visit church when, you know, they were visiting their parents or something like that just to keep their parents off their back. But, you know, and I wanted a place, I wanted a place for them to explore and basically say whatever was true for them and have it be respected and engaged with integrity. I think the church desperately needs that. Yeah. And it's scary because not everybody who engages in that will land back in church. Yeah. Right, and that's what's scary about going on this journey too of like, man, if you really honestly open yourself up to the possibility of being wrong, it's scary where you could end up. So I've kind of felt that too, where I'm like, I really want to explore these things, but there's this kind of this fear of like, well, work and that leads you, but you're not really being honest with yourself unless you kind of take that step into the unknown, you know? So I could see what you're saying kind of from the opposite of going on that journey, but you're talking about with leading these groups and, you know, and that's where I'm sure you just kind of have to trust God with those conversations and just say, you know, not every person who comes to these meetups is going to become a Christian. And you just have to be kind of faithful with what you believe to be right in that moment and then leave the rest up to God. So I'm sure that's where you find some of your comfort and working through that. So, and that's kind of where I'm at. It's like, if I'm going to walk through this journey and I'm just going to be fully honest and not hold back at all, you know, if God is real and this whole thing is real and his word is true and it says that if you seek him with all your heart, he'll reveal himself to you, like you have to trust that, you know, and just be as honest as you can and see where it goes. It's scary, but that's where I'm at. And actually as a Calvinist, my Calvinism helps me with that because, and what the story I told you about with Moses, now I know it's, that's, and I have to navigate that with my church because some people in church, they're not very comfortable with that because they're like, pastor, we're paying you. And if you're going to be spending time with people who are not from the church, well, that's okay. As long as you get them into the church and they'll become, they'll tithe and they'll become like us. And I tell them, no, that's not, that's not. And then others will say, well, why don't, why don't those people come to church? And it's like, oh, yeah, I could explain it to you but you probably wouldn't like the explanation because in a lot of ways, what we're doing here on Sunday morning is sort of an acquired taste and they might not like it. They certainly might not understand it. And in fact, if they do, and I've had this experience many times, if they do become a Christian, they very well may go to a different church. But again, all of this to me, that's what Paul says, some plant the seed, some water, that's what he says at the beginning of the book of Corinthians. And so as fortunately as a pastor, I can make arguments from the Bible and then they push back on me but it's usually not a fair fight because I know my Bible better than they know it and I'm their pastor so they sort of defer to me. But those issues, when I first started my channel, I used to get some angry emails, mostly from Christians who were very annoyed with me that I didn't conclude a random conversation like we're having now with an appeal to Jesus and invitation to the sinner's prayer. And I simply refuse to do that. And it's not that I'll never do that but I will only do that if I believe that it's appropriate at that point in the conversation. Otherwise, it was so funny when Brent Weinstein, he had Matt Taibbi on his channel and right at the end of the conversation. So can I get you down with committing to Unity 2020? And I thought, oh, Brent. I saw that, yeah. Yeah, that's a gospel presentation right there. Cause if everyone hears that Matt Taibbi is in with us, it's like, oh, Brent. You're more evangelical than you know. Yeah, that's it. I'm familiar with that. Yep. And I believe, okay. So I'm not even the author fully. I am to a degree, but how that works out is kind of mysterious, but I'm a Calvinist. I believe God is the author of the story. And I'm a co-author in some ways. I'm a sub-author, it's a, you know, Tolkien. And I believe I have agency. And I mean, I'm not a determinist, but I've lived long enough and had enough sharp turn. You know, as a pastor, you see people's lives take unexpected turns. Often with some calamity or tragedy, someone dies, someone gets cancer, someone has an affair, someone gives up the faith, someone steps over a line and whoosh, everything changes. Oh, God didn't see that coming. Come on. You know, if God is, any God who can create a world like this is way smarter than I am and can anticipate anything that I can think of. So, so I, so again, I go back to Mother Teresa and am I gonna pray for clarity? You know, I do plenty of, Jesus never says don't pray to get out of your misery. You know, right there in the Lord's Prayer, you know, you know, keep me from the time of testing, basically. And you look at Job, I mean, Job basically loses his family and his belongings on this trading places bet between God and Satan. And, but Job, you know, and Job gets really, you know, he wants God to come down and answer for the mess that's been made and, you know, and God takes it. God takes it. And it's Job's friends with their simplistic theology that God says to the friends, and Job's gonna make some sacrifices for y'all because I'm not terribly happy with what you people have done. And this is in the Bible. And it's people who say, I believe in the word of God. I believe what it says. It's like, okay, well, read it. Because this is in the Bible. And it's apply it to your life and say, okay, Lord, you're gonna take me down a road I don't like? That's normal for your servants. All right, if I, and I ain't gonna like it probably, but I'm gonna do my best to trust you. And to me, that's the Christian life. Yeah, for sure. So I know we only have a few minutes left, but I appreciate your encouragement to me on this journey and just some of your insights that you've shared. And are you able to share the video of this talk with me? Is that possible? Oh, this video right here? Yeah. Oh yeah, if you want me to share it, I'll happily share it. Okay, yeah, I would love to. I would love to if you could just, you can decide whether you think it should be shared on your channel, but you can send it to me just because I would love to have it just to listen to. And I'll definitely send this to you, but I, you see, this is why I started recording and sharing videos on my channel, because you're not the only one who has contacted me with this. And I don't take anything away from you, but this is not uncommon. And now there's often a spectrum and everybody's story is different, but many, many people are dealing with what you're doing and many have left the church. And so now suddenly they find me or somebody else on YouTube and well, they can't, and it's really hard to find, and I don't wanna say a good church, because that makes it sound that there's all these bad churches out there, which of course, there are some bad churches out there, but it's really hard to find a good fit. And that's partly because we have such a, people love diversity. Well, let me tell you, diversity is complex. And so you started out Pentecostal and then reformed Baptist. And then went to a Catholic college. Went to a Catholic college on the liberal end of things. And you've got access to YouTube. So you're gonna listen to Sam Harris and Jordan Peterson and Jonathan Peugeot, who went from evangelical to Orthodox and holy cow, you're not some peasant in Europe in the 13th century. If stuff wasn't going through your head, you wouldn't be thinking. And I believe God, again, this is the stuff God does. How can I say that with so much confidence and authority? Because I read the Bible. Yeah. And I look at these guys, you look at David, the story of David, good grief, gets plucked out of, I mean, his father doesn't even tell him to show up for the probable insurrection anointing when there's already a king thing that Samuel is doing. Yeah, there's one more and he's out of the way. All right, go get him. He's the one and Goliath and then he's living with the Philistines but he's conning both, he's living with the Philistines but he's not attacking Israelites, he's attacking other campments. And then he plays the crazy guy. And I mean, and okay, these are the stories my God tells and he uses people's lives to tell them. So one of the people that broadly speaking, everybody recognizes as a saint, Mother Teresa, read James Scop's biography of her. And she's the woman's in torture. She thinks God has abandoned her and yet she's spending her life picking up the almost dying people and then she's living with them. Picking up the almost dying people from the streets of Calcutta and nursing them into eternity and they're all Hindus for all she knows. There's no greater storyteller, which is why fact is stranger than fiction. And so I believe in that kind of a God and I don't find that kind of a God inconsistent with the theology I was raised with. So that's why I do what I do. And your story fits in that whole picture. So I'd love to share this video and I think people will be encouraged by it because they will know they are not alone and they will know that it's... So I don't have a lot of anger at the de-con... Those who have deconstructed because number one, all right, you deconstructed. Fair enough, you're thinking, you're engaging, good for you. Number two, you didn't plan the deconstruction for your future. I'll tell you something, the closer you are to Jesus, the harder it is not to follow him. Judas being the exception. So I'm happy to share this video because I've had a number of talks like this privately and if it's on my channel, the right people will see it and I think this is how God makes servants and saints. Definitely, yeah. Go ahead and share it and if you know of anybody, I don't know if there's different groups kind of going on, if you know of any, because that's part of my struggle is wanting some of that community. If you know anyone else who's kind of in a similar spot who could be a good kind of ongoing conversation partner and maybe a small group or something, I would really love that, just some people to unpack these ideas with. So I don't know if you know on top of your head but. Well, one thing, I don't know if you've connected up with the Discord server at all, that's a great community, the bridges of meaning Discord. I'll have to check that out, yeah. Check that out, that's a Discord server, it's a sort of platform. I'm always trying to figure out what online stuff. So there might be something coming down the road through my church too for this because I don't know, I don't know. I don't know if my church is gonna survive COVID and then it's like, well, what am I gonna do with all these online people? I mean, I don't wanna go and become, get called to some church with three, 400 people or get called to a council that says, well, Paul, that online stuff was really quite impressive and we're really happy to have you here but you're just not gonna have the kind of time to spend with randos on the internet because after all, you're employed here. Yeah. I don't wanna do that. Yeah. And I don't wanna be a celebrity pastor that's like, my name's Paul VanderKlay and I'm a pastor on the internet but I don't really do it in real life. I don't wanna be that either. So who knows, maybe something will come down the road because I understand your need and whatever I start, I don't want it to necessarily be a substitute for face-to-face church because I don't really think you can have a church online, bread, water, wine, I can't push it through the screen. When Jesus says, eat this bread, it doesn't mean have a good Protestant thought. So anyway. Sure. But keep following the channel and maybe, I'm working on some stuff at church now and I'm just trying to figure it out but stay tuned and maybe stuff will come down the road to be helpful but check out the Discord server because there's a whole bunch of people like you there. The only problem is we don't have enough agnostics anymore because too many people are becoming Christians so we need more atheists on the Discord server. We need it. We've got a. We've got a. It's a good problem. From your perspective, sure. It's a crazy group on the Discord server but Discord isn't everyone's cup of tea. I mean, it's basically a whole bunch of chat rooms and that's not for everyone but. Yeah, I'll check it out, definitely. Well, thank you, Michael. This has been a joy and I'll probably post this tomorrow. Okay, sounds good. I have no organization, so. Yeah, okay, sounds good. Well, thank you for your time, Paul. I really appreciate it. I hope you have a great day. Well, thanks for sharing your story. It was wonderful. Yes, thank you for listening. Okay, bye-bye. Take care, bye.