https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=Qn-CuBcoIzc

 Hey, let's, there we go. What a deal. What a deal. Well, I don't think we've ever met. Nope. So why don't you tell me a little bit about yourself? Well, um, I guess I'll start with kind of where I found how I got here and how I found this kind of corner of the internet. Um, I'd say, uh, maybe 2017, 2018 or so. Um, I, I was listening to Joe Rogan and I kind of, I had really been interested in the kinds of conversations that Joe was, was having the long form discussions and the, w his willingness to go deep into topics and talk to people that, you know, the mainstream media or other people just wouldn't talk to at all. And then through that, I think is where I found Jordan Peterson and he was the same way. And then kind of at the end of 2018, I started a job where I was driving multiple hours and, um, started listening to lots of Jordan Peterson lectures and, uh, dug into his Genesis lectures and really found that fascinating. And, and the Genesis lectures, uh, really spoke to me because it was, it was approaching biblical knowledge in a way that I had never heard it approached before. So that kind of leads into how I grew up, which is in a more fundamentalist Christian household. We were, my family was definitely religious. We went to church every week. Um, we, uh, we're a Sabbath. We keep the Sabbath. And so, you know, had some, some different beliefs than maybe mainstream Christianity or something. I'm not explicitly Protestant or Catholic or Orthodox or anything like that. Uh, I would say non-denominational Christian, but, um, like I said, fundamentalist. So I, I grew up with a very literal understanding of the Bible. And, and I would say in looking back, it's a very, I've always had a very intellectual and academic relationship with God. Um, which according, now that I've heard John Vervecky, it's a very propositional way of knowing God. And so, um, that's kind of, it's been very interesting to explore Jordan Peterson and, and John Vervecky and, uh, Jonathan Pagio and, and your work. And so it's, it's been, it's been pretty interesting in that respect. So that's kind of, it's kind of how I got here and, um, kind of my background. So, so do you still go to church? Um, well, that's kind of an interesting question because with the COVID, the whole COVID thing, it kind of became a, a convenient reason to not really go to church anymore. And I had been struggling. I, I, one of the things I'd like to talk about a little bit is deconstruction. And I had been kind of going through a period of, over a number of years of, of deconstruction, I think. And for a couple of years prior to COVID, I was, I had pretty much acknowledged to myself that I was only going to church because I didn't have a good reason not to, and I didn't want to just jettison it, um, willy-nilly. And I was also pretty involved with the technical side of things at church. So I had a skillset in, in video production and audio and that kind of thing. And like, well, maybe I can just go to church and, and use my skills to help out the congregation and maybe while I'm there, I'll hear something that will help. And so, um, I, I think that's one of my, in the, in the, in the process of deconstruction and understanding, you know, um, more about participatory knowing. I can, I'm starting to see the value in church and in the, the rituals and some of those things, and yet I'm still struggling with the propositional aspects of it, because it does seem like, um, Jordan Peterson and John Vervecki notwithstanding, um, there are in fact, propositional aspects to, to religion that kind of really matter and like, and I don't know, I'm, I don't know how to, how to deal with those kinds of things. So, um, I'm still trying to sort, sort that out. I guess I'm, I'm, I'm wrestling with those kinds of things. So what kind of church have you been going to? Um, it's the same church that I've, I grew up in. So it's, it's a non-denominational Sabbath keeping church. So, okay. Okay. Um, I thought I had put down some notes here about, um, kind of my, the process that I went through of deconstruction and maybe some of my steps back into reconstruction that maybe would be useful to walk through. I'd like to hear them. All right. So, um, I think that my deconstruction phase kind of started with questioning the role of the Holy Spirit. And so that's given on, on baptism and the question is something like, what is the role of the Holy Spirit? So, you know, I have to submit to God, I have to choose to submit to God. But the scripture talks about that the carnal mind is enmity against God. And so in my natural state, I wouldn't want to necessarily choose God's way. But then God is, am I, am I, am I choosing, am I choosing God or does the Holy Spirit now choose God for me somehow? And so what's my role in this and what's the role of the Holy Spirit in this? And then, um, I was also obviously influenced by science. I'm, I'm a civil engineer by schooling. So I have a more analytical way of looking at things, which, and I'm fairly high in openness, and so I tend to question things a lot and, and sometimes that's not necessarily good for me, but. You know, this science seems like, like, look, I can see these things that you can observe this thing. So, you know, it doesn't always, didn't always seem to jive with the propositions that I was being taught in church. And so I got interested in apologetics for a while to address the question. Does scientific evidence actually point to God's existence or are we just wishing this to be true? And the conclusion that I gave to you, so I read the case for a creator. And I don't remember who that's by at the moment. It was, if it's a case book was at least trouble. Yes. Thank you. Okay. That's how he, he was a, he was a lawyer, so he always writes his book, the case. Yep. So I read that and looked through a lot of other things and I was like, yeah, so I read that and looked through a lot of other things and, and kind of the conclusion I came to was that while there might be issues with any individual scientific or philosophical argument for God's existence, if you take them all together, that seems to present a pretty reasonable case for at least the. An intelligent being that created the universe. And I've, I've, I guess I determined at some point that I'm willing to take a leap of faith because I don't think you're ever going to prove exactly for certain that God exists or doesn't exist, but I'm not, I'm not taking a blind leap of faith and it seems like there's, there would be some reasonable amount of evidence that you could, that would point to it. So that's kind of where I got to on that. And, but eventually I got kind of concerned that I was trying to be right. We're trying to prove other people wrong. And, you know, having gone to church for so many years and, you know, every week and definitely, you know, very involved in, and academically pretty, you know, I'm more of an academically focused on it. You know, it's like, Oh, I know all these doctrines and I can prove this and I can prove that. And, and I can prove you wrong and I can support your points. And at some point it's like, well, it seems like I care more about the rhetoric rather than the content. And I thought it was interesting that Jordan Peterson talked about that in his recent Cambridge lecture. So that was kind of interesting to hear. But at some point it's, I realized that I didn't seem to care about the message and, you know, this, it, it came to me at, at the point where I was doing some, I was involved with the technical aspects on a pretty big setup for an annual event that we do. And it just occurred to me at some point that, you know, if it wasn't for the content, if it wasn't for the message, I wouldn't have a job to do here. And so if I don't care about the message, then what's the point. And along with that, I realized that I've, I've never really experienced or understood the personal relationship with God. And I, I realized that I never, I don't think I've ever had an experience in my life where I thought, wow, that was obviously God's hand in my life. And I've never had a religious experience per se. Not that those are the be all end all, but you know, not even like, I don't have a, I never felt like I had a personal relationship with God other than an academic understanding that the Bible tells me that God is looking for a personal relationship with me. It's like, well, I look around, like, I, I don't, I don't see that. Um, so I, I had a, I had a friend in college who, um, she was, she was sort of bucking evangelicalism. And she said, you know, there's nowhere in the Bible that it says I need to have a daily quiet time. And, and she was also somewhere in the back of my mind, I think this, the language of personal relationship is something that comes, no, clearly you can find it attested throughout the history of the church, but it's something that really comes into our culture in a strong way in the seventies and that timing isn't incidental. And I think, I think that in many ways actually gets at, um, a reaction to the overemphasis on the propositional P at the expense of the participatory and the procedural and the perspectival. So, um, well, let me ask you this. Do you want a personal relationship with God? Well, you know, that's a, that's a good question. And that's kind of one of the things I started thinking about in terms of, of reconstruction phase, um, it's like at some point, what more do I need to know propositionally to accept God? And, um, if I could have the answers to my most burning questions, would I then be willing to submit to God? And, and so like, those are, those are really difficult questions to answer. And I guess I kind of, I think I, I think I want a relationship with God. And it's like, I would like to believe that, that God is there and that he's personally involved in my life. But, um, at the same time, it feels a little strange, you know, I guess I, I get influenced by the materialistic side of things that like, well, that means that somebody else's involved in my life. I'm giving away my agency in terms of, you know, maybe now it makes me sort of helpless and, you know, um, something like that. So I don't know. Do you, do you have a wife or a girlfriend or a relationship like that? Okay. One of the differences, and again, this, a lot of her vacu's work gets at this. I mean, let's say there was a woman or someone that you were interested in. You could know a lot of things about her. You could know how she looks. You could know her birthday. You could know where she grew up. You could know her school or education. You could see her transcripts. I mean, you could know all of these things, but persons are such that in many ways that the knowledge of a person always has propositional. You can distill propositions from, you can look at me and say, Oh, Paul VanderKlay has a big beard right now. He's bald. He usually wears this black fleece during the winter. You know, you can say a lot, he's got bookshelves, right? You can say, you can distill a whole lot of propositions, but to know a person is fundamentally and to be in relationship with a person is, is really running on a different track, right? It's, it's, and it's, um, you know, I, I often use Pascal's spirit of geometry or spirit of finesse because with a person it's always, you know, engaging it's back and forth, it's, it's I do this and they do this and I do this and they do this and, and all along the way, you can sort of harvest propositions out of it. If you want to, and propositions are really nice because they're fairly stable. They're sort of upper register things. Um, they don't change in time so much, although, you know, my beard might change, but that I had a beard and you're talking to a guide with a beard. Now all that propositional stuff is really useful because it's sort of static and sort of fixed in the air. But the, um, the living stuff is, is the stuff that tends to hold us and keep us longer. And, and I think it's, it's for that reason that the proposition, the propositional isn't an enemy or problematic necessarily, but the propositional at the expense of, um, the others is you won't really, let's say if you were fascinated by a particular pop star or an actress or something, you could, you could know all these kinds of things about her, but to be in a personal relationship is an entirely different thing. There's a vulnerability to that. It's much more of an adventure. It's much more of a living thing. And so, but, but it's also the case that let's say there was a particular celebrity or someone out there that you wanted to, you wanted to, you felt yourself want desiring a relationship with this person. That's always. You can't, you can't, I mean, for sort of the way agents are, you can't force them into that, right? You can invite, you can ask, you can set a table. You can even sort of try to capture them in some ways, but, and that, I don't mean that physically or in a kidnapping sort of way, but you know, if I, you know, I would, you know, when I was, uh, when I was single and in college, you know, I would, I would, you know, encounter some, you know, some women that I might be interested in. And so then it's like, okay, propositionally, I was, I was fairly logical and rational. Okay. I tend to bump into them here. Let's, uh, I'll make sure that I'm always here at this point so I can make eye contact and I can smile and then, you know, just they're like little bids and then, okay, now we have had a little conversation, can take the conversation deeper. And, and then I might have a little bit more of a conversation and, and getting to know them a little bit more than it's like, yeah, okay, well, I've lost interest and then I move on. And so it's, it's very much a, uh, a living thing. And I think the, the passion and the fun and the endurance and the, the living nature of, if, if a religious, yeah, if a religion is only sort of static, it's just sort of sitting on the shelf, like a bunch of other static things. Yes, exactly. And that's kind of where I got to with the apologetics thing and with the, it's like, well, I can, I can make all these arguments, I can prove all these points and then I can put the book back on the shelf and continue on with my life. And it didn't really do anything. It doesn't change my life. And so, you know, what you're describing there is like the propositional aspect is that the relationship with God is the important part. And then the participatory part is actually having the relationship. But I guess where I, where that breaks down for me is in the relationship part. It just seems very one-sided to me. And so I say that, how so, yeah. Oh, it's like, if I have a relationship with a woman, then I can, I can see her, I can speak to her, I can, and then she can respond directly. And there's a tangible real person there. And, and so the tangible real part of it, and, you know, I pray, I read the Bible, I meditate, you know, I'm doing all these things, but there's, doesn't necessarily seem like there's any relationship part coming back to me in the sense that I think of a relationship. And so when I, you know, when you talk about God, number one and God, number two, the, the relationship aspect and the way I think most Christians understand God is the agentic God. Is that God number two? Is that correct? Yep. So, and, and so I have trouble. I think I've always had trouble believing in that, believing in that real, the really real tangible being that I can't see that is a spirit, but then number one, a lot more. And the spirit of the spirit of a group or the spirit of a conversation or the non-theist way of looking at God or the archetypal view of God or the mythological or something like that. And, and I can see those aspects a lot more in the way that I believe in God. And so, and so I have trouble believing in that, you know, the spirit of the spirit of the spirit of God or the mythological or something like that. And, and I can see those aspects a lot more and I can, I can understand that. And that makes sense to me, but that's, it doesn't strike me as the way that religion looks at God and right. If I'm going to commit myself to a church in any way, you know, I'm going to that's, that's kind of where I'm, I'm struggling to put these pieces together. Have you asked God for a personal relationship? Well, I think I finally came to that earlier this summer. Um, it's like, well, maybe I should ask God, like, if you're there and if you desire to have a personal relationship with me, please reveal yourself in a way that's specific and personal to me. That I could actually understand and that, you know, I wouldn't pass off as something else and I guess the best thing that I've, the closest thing that I've come to since then, um, is that the connections that I make between disparate, you know, I think about lots of different things and, and when these things start clicking together, maybe, maybe that that is, that's the personal relationship with God or the way, you know, the, there's a passage that talks about how there are different spiritual, different gifts, but they're all of one body and to some are given a word of encouragement, some are given teaching and some are given knowledge and so I shouldn't, you know, if I have a very academic relationship with God and if that's the way that I relate to God, I shouldn't feel like I'm somehow lesser of a Christian and I also shouldn't feel like I'm more important because I can understand things technically. Um, I shouldn't feel more important than other Christians, um, who know God in a different way and so it, it's just, it's been, um, I guess maybe that's, you know, it's like, I suppose in struggling to put all these pieces together, I don't suppose I'll ever be able to put them all together all the way, um, in my life. And so maybe it's sufficient to say that I'm just to say, I'm willing to wrestle with God for the rest of my life, even if I never get to certainty, but get baptized so that I can commit myself to a community. Yeah. Um, I, I wouldn't start a relationship with if you're there. I mean, people do it all the time and it's, it's an honest expression, but if, uh, if, if another person kind of engaged you with the same type of bid or introduction, um, what do you, what do you mean if I'm, if I'm here or, um, it's it, I think part of the, part of the asking and inviting is taking, um, you know, tentative steps towards that require risk, you know, for example, also if, um, you know, let's say if, if, you know, thinking back to my single days, if I saw a girl that I was interested in and, you know, felt some attraction to there's, there's risk in terms of approaching her, you know, I, she may, she may shut me down. I may learn that she already has a boyfriend. I may discover that, you know, she's not, I'm not at all what she's looking for. She's not in a, you know, whatever. I mean, there's, there's always this, this chance of being turned away. And there's also in this, you know, a bit of fear that, um, you know, God isn't, God isn't like that, um, job listing where you fill in an application. Um, he got God, God is a free, you know, not unlike the, not unlike the potential lover, God is a free agent and he can decide to come near you or stay away. I also think the, you know, in terms of the tangible aspect, I was listening to, uh, the, the conversation that Jordan peace Peterson just posted with the guy talking about the psychology of narrative. That was a, that was a really deep, fascinating, um, a little bit chaotic conversation, but in it, Peterson says something that he says all the time, which I've continued to try to get my mind around in that, you know, we don't really see objects. We see patterns. And, you know, the more I think about that, the more it's true. And that also helps with seeing the God who is both a gentic and a reenac because people's personal relationship with God. It's easy to get cynical about that because yeah, it's fundamentally different than a personal relationship with my mother or my wife or my child or someone in my church. Yeah. Um, my personal relationship with my wife or my mother or one of my children or a person in my church or someone here on the street, that's also a relationship with a pattern. And it's just that we're, we're very common or we're very adept at having relationships with non-corporeal patterns. We do it all the time. We have relationships. Let's say if you work for a corporation, you have a relationship with your employer. Now there might be a boss and there might be a president or a CEO, but you have a relationship with your employer and your employer is not physical. Like I am your employer is, I don't like the term hyper object, but you know, your employer is this, um, is this very strange pattern, this very strange entity that is very real. And very, um, significant in terms of how your life unfolds and you're, you're very invested in that relationship, but that's not a relationship with a, with someone like a wife or a daughter or something like that. So, um, I, I, I think it's, I think a helpful analogy is yeah. If, if let's say, if you want to relationship with God, um, I think And in fact, Jesus puts that right out in the sermon on the mouth, asking you will find knocking the door will be open. Now it doesn't mean that it's going to be instant. We're sort of conditioned by our context right now to expect instantaneous response that will meet our satisfaction. Well, that's not going to be that way. And if you think about it, it stands to reason why not. Yeah. So the, what you said about the corporation is that makes sense to me, but that seems like, that seems like God, number one. Yes. Um, that's very arenic and it's very, it's rather impersonal. And again, that's like, to me, I don't think that's what most Christians believe in, but that the corporation analogy is very, very, very, very, very, very, very that the corporation analogy seems more like what I, what I could believe in based on what I can understand. It seems more plot, more the case than a, a being per se. But, but again, there's, you know, Christ, the insistence in the gospels or in the New Testament is that Christ became a physical person and that it, so it's, you know, he's not an, he's not an arena. He is a person and he is a being now. He's a spirit being, but you know, Oh, he's still physical and spiritual. That's, that's what the, that's what the resurrection says. Right. So, yeah, it's. Yeah. But he's also a reenac because if you look, you know, at, if you look at the, the, the epistles, we are called to be in Christ. And so Paul talks about Christ in an a reenac way often. That's why I say people are always trying to map God number one and God number two on the Trinity. And I always resist that because each person of the Trinity is both a Gentic and a reenac. And, but you're right. And if you, you know, if you pursue a personal relationship, you want something more with God than you have with a, with a, you know, with something like your employer, you, you want something that's also analogous to a relationship with a spouse. I think about my wife, my wife is very much obviously a Gentic, but there's also an a reenac quality to my wife. When my children come home, you know, there's, she inhabits, my wife inhabits the house that she decorated, that she. There's a spirit of the family there. Exactly. Exactly. Well, and that's, you know, the, the talk or the things I've been listening to in the last couple of months on all these channels about spirit. Um, it's like, I never really looked at it that way in terms of, you know, as a con, as a church congregation, we're together in the same spirit because we're all, it's like having the spirit of the conversation. It's not really necessarily how I ever looked at it before and all these different words, you know, you made a video a while back about the, the spirit that went along with, was it the nine 11, the spirit of, um, sorry, I'm blanking on what that, what the term that you used was, but, um, team spirit and, and school spirit and spirit week and all these things. Um, just it's, it's fascinating to see, to start to see the symbology of all these things. And so, um, anyway, it's, but, but I, I, you know, I know that. I mean, it's not uncommon, obviously you're in a, you, around you as a church and many of those people at different levels as a pastor, you know, it's really hard to sort of judge people by their appearances because you peel back the layers and people have various levels of, of joy, disappointment, doubt. I mean, that's all there, even though when people show up in a room like that, they're conforming and participating and performing. I mean, it's all, that's all pretty normal, but it's, it's not, it's by no means uncommon that, you know, people experience this personal relationship. Now, I would also say that the, the variabilities of human personality are not, um, and temperament are not disconnected to this either. Some people are experiencing personal relationships all the time. And if you're an engineer, part of you is, you know, I, I have a son who's an engineer and I know a bunch of engineers, engineers tend to be a little bit, you know, there's a personality type of an engineer that you see in the discipline. And, and so it's uncommon to find an engineer who is sort of like, you know, someone who's just having a, you know, they're just having personal relationships all over the place with all sorts of things everywhere they turn. And that's where I appreciate, you know, vervekis, you know, error checking, cause it's like, okay, you know, your, your personal relationship with your cell phone, that's probably gone a little far. Um, and so there is, but then people talk about, you know, if you, if you've ever listened to car talk from NPR, um, there's always the discussions about, do cars have a soul in different ways? Um, both from those types of people you were just talking about, but down to the more mechanically minded, um, even the mechanic may have a relationship with this, with this vehicle in it. And it, you know, it seems, it almost seems sometimes as if the car has a certain personality or spirit to it. But, um, you know, and when you mentioned the personality differences, I think that's really interesting. I don't know that a lot of religious people understand that. And, you know, people are in the, in the denomination that I'm a part of. Um, I don't know if you're familiar with the worldwide church of God, um, came out of California, but that was years ago. But anyway, there's, there are lots of splinter groups that deck organization kind of dissolved back in the nineties. And then there's been subsequent multitude of smaller splinter groups. And, and I thought that was just part of that. That was just how that is. But now listening to like Protestantism, like Protestant ministers like yourself and, and even Catholics and an orthod, maybe not so much Orthodox, but like, well, there's, this is more common than I thought that there are differences of beliefs and differences of opinions and different interpretations. And, and so, um, you know, the more, the more, like I remember Jordan Peterson talking about how political affiliation, um, has somewhat to do with personality differences and that more liberal types are more on the openness spectrum and conservatives are more on the conscientious spectrum. And, and I suspect that it's the same way in the church, but in the church, we want to say, well, everybody has to do it this way. And, and then we also say you have a personal relationship with God. And then it's self-evident that nobody sees everything the same way. And it's like, okay. So if, if, if there's supposed to be a capital T truth out there, it's not self-evident to me that, um, if the Catholics think it's this way and the Protestants think it's that way. And I think that you're supposed to keep it Sabbath and the Orthodox think it's supposed to be that way. Then, then it's got, it's either has to be less emphasis on the propositions or it has to be that somebody's wrong and somebody else is right. And, and I, and I'm, I guess more and more I'm inclined to think that it's less emphasis on the propositions, but that doesn't feel like capital T truth. Well, think about, so I've got five kids. And if you were to, let's say you'd take my five kids and you'd put them in a room and you start asking detailed questions about me, on one hand, there's whole ranges of things that they would all be in unison about, but if you go deep enough, they're all seeing me through different eyes. And so to, to say on one hand, you know, to say that there isn't, there aren't truthful things about me. Well, that's true, but their appropriation of these truthful things about me. Are also going to be filtered through their perception, their experience, their temperaments, their personalities, all of those things too. And their personal, uh, their perspectival relationship, their right there, how they experience you. Right. Now what, when we, when we tend to say something like capital T truth, I think we sort of slip into this monarchical vision and imagine, okay, well here's capital T truth. Oh, okay. But that isn't to say there isn't a capital T truth about me. I mean, there very much is I'm, I'm a very real. I'm a very real thing in the world, but their grasp of that, in many ways, I'm far too real for them to fully apprehend. I'm even too real for myself to apprehend fully in terms of the little consciousness, Congress observer of myself that tries to apprehend myself. And, and if, if that's true of a little thing like me, you know, when it comes to God, this is where you have all of this doctrine about, you know, we, we, we can't, we can never fully know God. And all of that, those doctrinal statements are based not in the psychology of it, which came far later, but in many ways, the psychology has affirmed it. I mean, I can't, I can't even fully apprehend me. My children know sides of me that I am quite unaware of and vice versa. So it's, and the propositional, again, you could, you could get wide agreement between my children of many propositional things about me, but you push that conversation far enough and you're going to find propositional disagreements, even between my children about me. They're not going to be, you know, a bunch of these physical characteristics. They'll very much be there, but propositions can be, you know, propositional statements can be drawn out of many different things. And so that's, that's just a function of the world we're living in. And so when it comes to something like knowledge of God, it's, you know, that there's, that's a difficult thing. Right. Well, you know, when you put it that way, it, that makes a lot of sense. And, and so what that, what that tells me is that then it doesn't necessarily matter what denomination or what group that I make myself a part of, but then that doesn't, that also doesn't necessarily strike me as the right way to look at it per se, because, you know, God, the scripture talks about God wants to be worshiped in spirit and truth. And so, you know, it seems like, it seems like they're in theory, at least there's some more correct ways to look at him or something like that. But then, it's like you said, there's, there's different perspectives. There's different personal relationships with God, but then that kind of kind of, you know, it's, it's a, it's a, it's a, it's a, it's a, it's a, it's a I don't know if that's a good thing, but I think that's the, that's the difference between the two, is that it's, it's, it's more, it's more about the, it's more about the relationship with God. But then that kind of seems like it evolves quickly. It can evolve quickly into, well, I have my own church of one, my personal understanding of, of God and, and I don't agree with anybody else. And, and this is my personal secret, sacred self type of understanding. Well, it's again, there's, and if you think about it analogously, let's say to a, a personal relationship with another human being, many of those dynamics are all there. My perception of my wife is different from my children's perception of her. And now that my children are all young adults, it's fascinating having conversations with them because the, the, what we are to them, they are now in their twenties, they are able to articulate and assert things about us back to us that we were, that they couldn't do when they were small children or even teenagers. And, and that in fact is going to continue to grow because even with my parents, I'm not going to be able to do that. I mean, that has continued to grow in me as I have grown. And so there's, you know, knowing and the capacity to know are always coming, are always part of the same package. And it occurs to me when you say that, that you also know your wife differently because of your relation, because of the relationship you have with your wife, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you make of her, or your relationship, because of the relationship you have with her in the position. If you want to call it that, as a, as being married to her, which is different from how your children know her and that strikes me as like it must be different as a pastor, you might have a different relationship with God as a member of the leadership or the clergy than you do as a lay person. Yeah, definitely have a different relationship to the church because I, you know, in the sense I'm on the inside rather than the outside, there is a line that I'm on one side of rather than the other. And, and those perspectives are also consequential often. So, but but all of this is in many ways a mystery that is also partly a gift. And, you know, throughout the the history of the church, the writings of, you know, people who have sought God and written deeply about their spiritual journeys, you find all of these dynamics in there. And God very much sometimes is very close and alive. And then other times very withdrawn. And you read about that in the Psalms, you know, where are you, Lord, and that could be the fact that this person's enemies are, you know, getting the upper hand or maybe the rains aren't coming in or I mean, it's, it's a, that's part of why, you know, in a conversation I had with John Vervecky fairly early on, I don't know, I think this, this mode of relating is deeply fundamental to who we are. And it's also what mode of relating this, this, this questioning, not questioning, but this relational back and forth. And in fact, for Vervecky, because he's got this transjective idea, which is back and forth. That's, I think this is the proper human mode to approach many things, which is why click and clack and the car guys, I mean, they'll, they might have a relation, they know, they understand the spirit of sob, you know, or the spirit of BMW. Boy, it sure is an amazing machine when it works great, but man, if something breaks down, it's going to cost you. And, and yet then, then there's, you know, the spirit of sob, let's say, but then there's the, the, the sob that they own and the sob that they've had a personal relationship. And in some ways, you know, what one has to do, which is why, when you enter into relationship with God and you say, well, if you're really there, you, you wouldn't do that with your car. You would sort of pursue your car and, and, and, and that's, you know, that's very much a dance that you learn and to say, okay, you know, just to be upfront with God and say, I've got doubts. Okay. Just say, I've got doubts. I don't know, but this is what I want. And, that's a little different way of looking at it. Yeah. And, and you can, you know, again, you can do that with people. I mean, I have known stories of, I've seen many stories of, I think some of the first, actually the first impression I made when I first met the woman who's now my wife, that was positive, but then there were some other, you know, like meetings, two and three, but, but I've known men who have been so persistent that, you know, you know, no, I'm not interested. Okay. Well, then they're not going to be stalkers and they're not going to be offensive because again, you're trying to woo a heart here, right? But it's still, hey, this is who I am. This is what I want. And, and I'm, I'm committed. I'm committed to the relationship, even if you're, you know, reticent at this point. And so I think, you know, I think, I think we ought to pursue God with, with that kind of thing, if we want him. Now, some people, it doesn't seem are given a choice. God just, God just, you know, like Moses, God just walks into the relationship and says, yeah, it's you. And most like, I don't think so. I'm not so sure. No, no, no, no, it's, it's, this isn't, this isn't a negotiation here. It's you. And so I guess, you know, to be fair, I shouldn't necessarily exclude the possibility that God can't just come into my life and, you know, say, I'm choosing you to do this. And if you don't do it, your life is going to be way harder. Right. So, and all of the stuff that you hear in Christianity about his timing, I mean, it can sound so trite. It can sound so lazy, but all of that talk is bearing witness to a reality that people are trying to express that. And I see it all the time. That's part of the reason I, you know, I just did that video on deconstruction about Audrey Assad. I try not to get too anxious because if, if, if God is who I believe he is in this God, that I, this character that I find in the Bible, he, you know, look at Moses, you know, the dude's like 80 years old and he's a would be deliverer. And it's like, not, you're, you're not gonna, you're not gonna kill Egyptians, you know, you're not going to save Israel by killing Egyptians. Right. Well, you know, it's part of it, I guess. Yeah, I've, what I've appreciated about this corner of the internet is it's given me language, as you like to say, for things that I couldn't really express before. But at the same time, now it's given me the given me language such that I don't, I can't even talk to, it's hard to talk to people about this anymore. And so you've been talking about scale a little bit. And so that is, I question I was like, how do I scale all of this down to like normal, normal type of people that believe specific scale this down to teaching children about, about God and having a relationship with God. And, you know, I work in construction management right now. And how do I scale all this down to the more blue collar, hands on practical type of guy that, you know, this, all the fancy vervekey words that we talk about and esoteric concepts of, you know, what is real and what is, you know, how does a story work and all these things. And, and to me, it's just absolutely fascinating. And, you know, this is one of the, the, maybe my parts of my reconstruction is that I've tried to, I've tried to forget about religion and God and like, try to walk away from it at some point, but it just never seems to let me go. And like, I just continue to think about these things and question and wonder. And, and I'm thoroughly steeped in a biblical, say worldview, just because that's how I grew up. And so like, I can't even, I can't even necessarily walk away from that. And so, you know, how does that, how does this scale into, into a marriage and like that I am single, but I would like to be married. And so, you know, what, how do I seek out a woman who, what kind of a woman should, given all these things that I understand, what kind of, should I expect her to be on the same page as this? Because this whole, this whole enterprise strikes me as a rather male oriented thing. Like in some ways it's maybe, it's just not surprising that there aren't that many women that are part of this discussion, because it may be not the typical female temperament to, to think about things this way. But, you know, we have to agree on certain things and, you know, it's fine if we're two adults in a relationship, but then you add kids into the mix and you've got to kind of agree on things and agree on how to teach things and agree on what you believe and, you know, and those kinds of things. And so it's, you know, if, if I had to choose what kind of a career should I be in, you know, sometimes I wonder like, am I taking this stuff too far? Like, you know, just how much, how much does this need to change my life or how much should it change my life? So. And those are all good questions. The scale thing has, has everything to do with wisdom, because, you know, you're again, you're probably not going to go to someone and talk about the four Ps of knowing or, you know, archetypes or things like that. But we, we actually scale and compress down in through action. And we can, we can get very esoteric and very verbose about something like love, but love is something that, you know, scales readily. If scale actually has everything to do with context and texture where, okay, love your neighbor. Well, that scales down to. Okay. What does love look like right now? We can talk about it all day long and come up with propositions and analogies and blah, blah, blah. And then when it comes right down to it, there's an actual person that I now have to go out and interact with. And like, I think Louis, I think it's in, is it in the screw tape letters? He talks about like, you know, here's the new churchman, he comes in and then he sees his, his fellow city, his fellow, I don't know, whatever it was, the banker or something come in and he's got his squeaky boots and his, you know, funny personality and whatever. He's like, well, don't let this guy focus on whatever problems he might have, just make him focus on all of those problems with that other guy. And then he'll quickly decide, you know, I don't like being in church anymore. Yeah. Yeah. So, so, so scale scale happens in, again, relationship, it happens in context and, and scale emerges, the capacity for scale emerges with need, you know, the, the, the saying, you know, necessity is the mother of invention. Well, the necessity is the mother of inventing scale where, because all of this stuff at some point, then you're going to have to apply it. You're going to have to embody it. You're going to have to live it on the ground. Right. And, and that's in a sense when the whole stack starts to light up and you say, oh, okay. Now, now everything's going to all this talk about, all this talk about loving my neighbor as myself. Boom. Here's this situation. And here's this person. What does love require? Oh, you know, I'm going to give them money. Okay. Is that what love requires? Maybe money will be a part of it, but maybe it will also be attention and interest and follow through over time. And, and, you know, and then, then again, you're into the relationship and something happens and it takes a different turn. And so you readjust. So that, you know, all the, all the little, all the talking and thinking and, you know, all of this stuff we're doing over here, it, it tends to, it tends to feed a certain personality type. It tends to feed again. There's all kinds of constraints on who this is helpful for. And that's absolutely okay. As long as in my opinion, you know, now we're going to deal with a hierarchy. It helps each of us love our neighbor better and love God better. And those two are obviously connected. Well, that's, that's a great response thing. Cause I was just going to ask, so what do you think the utility of all of this that we are, the enterprise that we're involved in here, what do you think the utility of it is? And so I guess in a simplistic terms and the stale downturns and loving your neighbor and loving God better. That's a good way to put it. Well, we've just, we've, we've, our time is almost up. I don't know if there's anything. Is this, I don't know where, how you felt about whether or not this conversation was something that you want to keep between us or it would be okay for me to share or you want to review it first. It's up to you. I think I'd just like to review it. Okay. Okay. I will, you know, after, after we talk, the video gets rendered and I will, I will send it to you. But I think I thought this was very good conversation. And I think actually this convert, a lot of people would find this conversation useful because I mean, part of the reason I started sharing these conversations was because the, you know, your questions are not uncommon. You're not the only one struggling with these issues. And so it's, that's why, you know, the conversations never get as many views as let's say a commentary video on Jordan Peterson video, but the conversations are really so often where stuff gets applied and where the scale happens. Oh, do I still have you? So I, I recorded what I, what I said, you probably missed it. So you'll hear it on the recording. So I will, I will, I will render this and I will send it to you and you can look at it. And if you're okay with me sharing this, then then I'll do that. So. Okay. Okay. That's great. I appreciate the time. Thanks, Paul. Oh, thank you, Sean. This was a pleasure. Take care. Yeah. Bye.