https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=sl-2JC-5aGs

 Can you hear me? Okay. I hear you just fine. Great. Sorry. Sorry about last week. I get busy with stuff. And then I actually, I actually went, I was over with my wife and I was like, because she's she's at home. So she's like, well, you know, when are we gonna do some special things this summer? And then I'm coming back. She's like, Oh, no, I had a 230. So no problem. I know you're a busy guy. So things happen. No problem. Well, I briefly looked through the conversation that we did. We actually did it in July of 2020. So it was about a year ago. Okay. Yeah. And so I'll put that link below. But I mean, you sent me you sent me some things in the email. Where do you want to begin? Oh, gosh. Yeah. I've got I've got some nice late topics for you, as you can, as you can probably tell from my email. But I think it would be good just to maybe first go over just kind of how the last year has gone. For me, our conversation and maybe just kind of put some things in perspective for you and some of the things I've been thinking and some of the things I've noticed out of my profession. And then maybe we go from there to more specific. That's sound good. Yep. Okay. Um, yeah, so the last year, it's kind of been an interesting year to have a journey like this, given COVID and kind of given all of the isolation and disconnectedness from other people. So I feel like, you know, having kind of a deconstruction or an experience like this is amplified when you're kind of at home or you're working from home. I feel like I just kind of even more so it's just consuming consuming YouTube content all the time. But it was it was a it's been a good it's been kind of a fun exercise, even just thinking about the past year since our last conversation, because I watched it a few days ago as well. And I was just thinking, you know, what things are the same what things have changed in the past year. Um, I think some things that I've noticed are different about myself. Um, I think just more, I'm realizing more and more kind of going on this journey, how much more appreciation I have for kind of complexity and nuance when it comes to just faith conversations and faith dialogues. I've noticed that about myself for a while, but I think even more just this past year of just learning, you know, from the discord community to YouTube to have different books I've been reading, you know, there's just so many good perspectives out there and so many good insights, you know, for many people who in the past, I probably would have shut down, maybe in my upbringing. I know in my upbringing, and this is probably typical for a lot of Protestants, but in my upbringing, we had a very kind of derogatory view towards Catholics, for example. And now even just having some friends who are Catholics, and even this last year, I started following some Catholic thinkers on social media, started reading a couple of Catholic authors, and it just gave me such more of a deep appreciation. So one big change, I think I've seen myself in this last year is just kind of a deepening appreciation for the nuance and complexity for a lot of these issues. So I think in some ways, that's a good thing. We'll kind of get to how that might be. There's kind of a maybe a dark side to that as well. I think something else I've noticed, too, just in myself is the stickiness is a word I would use, but just the stickiness of the Christian faith inside of me. So I kind of asked myself this question, because I've been going on this journey now for I'll even say a couple of years. What's kept me kind of what's kept me around? What's keeping me from letting go of faith completely as you face these doubts, you face these struggles with the church and like so many others who just say, yeah, it's too much. I'm just going to walk away. What's kept me still holding on trying to find faith and belief in it. And I've, I've realized just how I think deep faith is kind of just embedded into me as a person, and how persistent faith has been in me even maybe during periods of time where it's like, if I try, if I try not to believe, you almost can't even help those Jesus, you know, thoughts come back or the Christian thoughts come back and you're like, oh, I thought, you know, you're kind of surprised at how sticky some of those things are even with these new cynical thoughts where you just think those things would get blown out of the water. It's like, oh, no, there's still something to these, to those experiences and to the meanings that were found. And so I think that's been, I guess, an encouragement to me to see that. Um, in some ways, now I'm less afraid to have to face questions and doubts and challenges to my faith and probably ever before, because before going through this journey, I might have mentioned this in the previous talk, I don't know if I did, but I remember going to the library and even just checking out our Richard Dawkins book, I think it was God Delusion. I think that that was a huge step for me because up till that point, I was always pretty afraid of actually listening to what other people thought what I considered smart people thought outside of my faith tradition. And there's kind of some of that evangelical like, you know, kind of, you got to be weary of the world and you got to be weary of the influences of the world. So you need to be careful about what you're letting in. But it was kind of to a point of, I was afraid to read somebody like that, because I was like, well, what will happen if I read them and I lose my faith? So there's kind of there was a fear there. Then it was kind of a liberating moment actually checking out his book as it, it, it kind of gave me permission to ask some of those questions and to kind of really, you know, give myself permission to dig into the things I've been thinking for a while, I'm going to be kind of hiding from. So that, so that kind of all goes to show that all goes to say now, I'm much more open than ever before to entertaining ideas from people who think differently than for me, I'm less afraid to engage with those ideas. I think partially because I recognize kind of, on one hand, the ferocity of maybe people who believe differently than you and some of the challenges, but also some of the robustness of faith, and that faith can actually stand up to some pretty strong critiques sometimes, and you can still make it through. So, so that's been another thing I've noticed, kind of over the last year. So that's a little bit of an update. I've got a couple other thoughts too, just on some of the maybe the dark side for some of the, some of the things I was just mentioning, but I guess, do you have any initial thoughts or are these things that you've experienced who are seen in others? Well, how did COVID impact either participation or non participation in a church community? A lot of things, a lot of things just moved online. So it was like, it was either, you know, for a while, it was virtual services, the church that I've been attending actually did move back in person services pretty quickly, quicker than some other bigger churches in my area did. So, but I would just say, just in general, COVID produced a lot of just an increased level of social isolation. And I think that just leads to more and more opportunities for reflection. If you're, if you're alone all the time, kind of in your apartment or just doing things where you're not out and about being as social as you're used to, you know, it's easier to become more introspective and to think more about these deeper questions. So I think it, on the one hand, it was good because it created maybe some space for me to think about things. On the other hand, it could be problematic because I think it's a lot of social isolation, and I think that's could be problematic because my kind of neurotic personality type can start to spin pretty quickly if you're caught in those kind of thinking cycles and worrying about things. So in some ways, it's kind of nice to actually have the distractions of in person connection again, to just kind of get out of your head a little bit and kind of get into the real world. Okay, okay. Well, that's helpful. Well, keep going. Keep going. You were going, you were doing well. Okay, okay. All right. So this kind of goes to my first point. So on the one hand, you know, if you go through an experience like this, you're more aware, you know, you're more aware than you were before of just the nuance and the complexity and some of the uncertainty involved in faith, where faith isn't quite as black and white or cut and dry as it was when you were raised. And you're kind of more aware of the uncertainty kind of involved in having a faith. And I think part of the struggle with that for me, is kind of figuring out like now, how do you move forward kind of with that kind of new kind of sense of uncertainty inside of you? I always kind of describe it as sort of like, sort of like opening up Pandora's box, almost, it's like you kind of open up Pandora's box and all these things you had kind of buttoned up really nicely before you weren't thinking about and now, you know, you're just so much more aware of, you know, you're all of the doubts you have. So it's, you know, I like the rider and the elephant metaphor. So you know, the rider, I like to say my rider doubts, like the intellectual doubts, the things that are hard to understand, there's the elephant doubts that are like, kind of more emotional of like, like, it's not even in my head, it's more just, you know, I don't know if I feel that enough to really, you know, want to pursue it, you know, and then frustrations with the church, you know, you open up this Pandora's box. And it's like, how do you, how do you move forward with faith again, now with this kind of other element going on all the time? A piece of that being that, you know, to to really live with conviction in the world, you know, it implies kind of a set implies a commitment implies the sacrifice. So to live as a Christian, you know, it asks something from you, it's not just an intellectual ascent to something, it's okay, now you're a Christian, now you'd go do these things. And many of those things require, you know, a deep commitment and a deep, a deep sacrifice on your part. So it's, you know, on the one hand, it was a lot easier for me to do when faith was simpler, because there wasn't really a question in my head of all this could be wrong, or, oh, you know, what if I'm not right about this? I think now there's more of kind of just a keen awareness of all this is, you know, this isn't quite as simple as it was before. You know, how can you live with conviction, despite the awareness of uncertainty. So I think that's kind of where I'm getting stuck a little bit, because I find myself kind of wanting to move forward. I'm like, okay, I, you know, I've been going through this journey. And I don't want to get stuck here. But it's like you kind of you've opened up this kind of new Pandora's box of cynicism and thinking about things in a different way. It's like, how can you? How can you start to make progress again, despite all these other things going on? Does that make sense? Yep, yep. Okay. What does move forward look like to you? I think moving forward would be I think more being more consistently rooted in something. Because I think I'm in kind of this gray space right now, where it's just really easy to kind of flippantly flip back and forth, you're kind of living in intellectual land about faith. And it's like, I want something that is kind of grounded as rooted that is consistent. And that, that kind of that feeling, I don't know if it's a feeling I'm looking for, I've just kind of conviction of like, like, I don't know if it's a certainty or if it's a certainty or like a something inside that's like, okay, you're on the right path and you're doing the right thing. Does that make sense? I don't know if I know. Well, you know, it strikes me that this. So the video I posted today, I don't know if you'd have a chance to see that one yet. No, it's a young guy. He grew up mostly in Canada, has been living in New Zealand for a little while might go back to Canada, was grew up in a very dysfunctional home. Got basically his home was life was dysfunctional, but he, he found my take on him, at least as he found in church, sort of a new, more functional, more stable family, and a very evangelical church in Canada. And so for his, his teenage adolescent years, that was very important for his formation. Now he, you know, over time, he I really liked the story, I was hesitant about posting it because he's so young, he's 22. But he's old enough to decide and he was really, you know, adamant about me sharing it. So I went, went ahead with it. But one of the things that I, I pointed out to him, which some in the comment section didn't appreciate, we, we tend to in our culture, at least certain individuals think theory first, and engaged participatory physical reality second. And I think COVID very much accentuated that because, because of the isolation and the lockdown, we all sort of lived in our heads for a year and a half. And there was fairly little going to church, being with people, smelling them, bumping up against them, talking that to them face to face smelling their breath, all of this physicality. And I, I'm convinced that a lot of grounding happens in that physical space that we are not conscious of. Yet it, it lends it communicates to us in much more subtle, implicit ways. And so for example, I know for, you know, let's say college counselors, it is not at all uncommon for someone to graduate college to go to university for the first time. And now suddenly, not only is there no bedtime, because they probably haven't had a bedtime for five or six years since junior high or something, but the rhythm of mom and dad of going to bed and waking up and going to work and having meals, if you have a, if you have a household like that, that will produce sort of a stability from which people can usually think big thoughts, try new things. It's sort of that basic stability that even if they don't recognize it or not conscious of it, that affords sort of a grounding that allows people to begin to do things like ask challenging questions of their faith, or entertain challenging questions without high levels of anxiety, or, as you mentioned, you know, go to, you know, actually read a, a book by Richard Dawkins, you know, the Faith Delusion and open it up, you know, maybe, maybe stuff it in a Christianity today, so nobody sees it. But and, and, and that foundation of things that we pay no attention to, because they are so much the rhythm of our lives actually produces a freedom, a mental freedom by which we can let some of our ideas die rather than having so much else staked. You know, I think about Tony Campolo's, Tony Campolo and Bart Campolo wrote a book because Bart deconstructed. And there's a video out there of those two talking. And it's a tremendous video. Because at one point, of course, Tony Campolo sort of leans into a son now a father can do this to a son, because again, they've got a deep well of relationship with each other. And so there's a lot of ballast. And if it's been a healthy relationship and a secure family and, you know, good rooting, then suddenly you you have levels of freedom with each other that you don't have when you don't have that basis. For example, a, a marriage in which two people feel secure, and loved. And there's no, you know, there's there's very little anxiety. People can have higher levels of intimacy in such a relationship, because there's so much stability. And so part of what I think has happened with a lot of deconstructions is that well, something has happened in the foundation, and it might not have anything to do with science and religion, you know, all of these. And so in my video that I had with that young man, I called them yard dogs, where they are sort of like these dogs running around. And when you're a, I was going to put pictures of my kids and my Rottweilers on the picture, but I, my kids don't always appreciate if I use them as illustrations for things. So, but but you know, I had these when my kids were little, I had these two Rottweilers. And part of the thinking about kids and dogs is have big dogs when your kids are little at make sure their dogs you trust probably got his puppies and, you know, kind of grew up with the kids. So the kids are part of their packs. So the dogs are very protective of the kids and won't turn on the kids. So I had Rottweilers when my kids were little. And those Rottweilers would knock those kids over all the time, you know, because those Rottweilers were big, heavy dogs. And when the Rottweilers would play, the kids would kind of back up because they knew if they were close, you know, the kids gonna go flying and every now and then I'd have to add my dogs would get out and I'd have to they'd be like, you know, I'm happy day, I'm free. And I remember one instance I had my male Rottweiler I had to actually physically tackle in the street. He was decided he was gonna go out and have a good time. And it was like, my the neighborhoods freak out when there's 115 pound Rottweiler gambling about even though they have no idea he would never hurt them because he's a very friendly dog. And so I basically tackled him in the street. And I'm over 200 pounds. And you know, these dogs were just so solid, I just tackle them and he kind of looks up at me like, you know, what's going on? He had no problem with that. These are but but then later on, when my kids were big, I had a little dog. And that little dog is, you know, that was a rescue dog and all these anyway. So much of I think what people are feeling is, as churches and church culture become increasingly less stable, as information about sort of the low level corruption that is usually implicit in a lot of organizations, as this stuff all sort of comes to the surface, this is causing for a lot of people a deep insecurity. And there's a different kind of exploration you do when everything is very secure, and you're just kind of playing with ideas, or everything is insecure, and you're looking for a new home. Those are two very different realities. But I think in the realm of this deconstruction world, we've sort of got both kinds, and they're mingled together. And so we've got some people who have been their base has been eroded by all sorts of things. And they are, they are unhappy wanderers looking for new homes. And we've got other people for whom there is a deep faith built into them that is probably not going to be shaken very much, they might that rider on the elephant might fully deconstruct. But if you watch that person underneath, you look at them as like, they might not go to church, but dang it, they sure are Christians. They've got all of this stuff has been built into them. And even if they no longer identify as Christians, and there might be one or two new additions in their life that they probably wouldn't have done while they were Christians, for the most part, they are just Christians with a rider making different noises on the top. And I think for a lot of people, if there's that security underneath, they can attain they can entertain a lot of their ideas, and it won't impact them emotionally. Because now, the following generation that doesn't have that, that'll be a totally different story. But and so when I listen to you, I kind of wonder, well, where are you on that spectrum? Because it isn't black and white, it's probably more of a spectrum. And when I listen to you talk, I think, sounds like there's a lot of faith down below. And you've kind of got the freedom now to say, Hey, what about this? Yeah, oh, that's good. Um, yes, that's funny. Because as you were saying that, I'm like, yeah, I could see a lot of myself in that. Because on the one hand, I'm having all these existential questions that I'm saying, and the rider saying, I don't know if I believe any of this anymore. And it's saying things like that. But if people would watch my life, it's like, well, you're, you know, you might act a little differently than you than you did before. But you're still going to church, you're still reading, you know, my, my bookshelf is still covered with Christian, you know, thinkers, and I'm always reading these books and these ideas. And it's like, on the one hand, it's like, I just can't get away from that stuff, you know, there's something about it that even when the rider is kind of doing its own separate thing, the elephant is still kind of hanging on in many ways. Um, which is interesting, but I can also see another, I can also see a different I don't know if this is exactly what you're talking about. But I'll say what I think I mean. So I think one difference between you and me is, so I think you've said with the big five personality test, you're, you're high in openness, but low in your autism. Yeah. So I would consider myself an extra to the test, I wouldn't consider it, this is what I got. I'm high in openness, but also high in your autism. So I have a very curious personality. If, if we read something, if reading something in the Bible, that comes across, and I'm like, and this just happened, actually, in a group the other day, we were reading something, I think we were reading the Ten Commandments. And we were reading the Ten Commandments, we're talking about, you know, thou shall not covet. And I think that was the one I forgot which commandment it was, but there was a little kind of, at the bottom of the commandment, God said, Okay, and if you do this, I will curse you to the third, the third and fourth generation. So immediately, my kind of my mind goes and says, well, what is this cursing for the next generation? And is that fair to do that? And it's like, there's this high in openness, that it's like, if I see something that's off, or that's curious, or that's even doubtful, it's like, I have to chase it, I can't just let it go. It's, I'm always wanting to explore and dig in. But the high in neuroticism thing is I'm very, I would say, I'm very aware of, in general, I feel, I feel things very deeply. So, you know, for some people, if they're maybe playing around with these God ideas, and they're thinking to themselves, you know, oh, you know, we're just kind of playing with these ideas, it's fun, kind of, you know, the back and forth and the tribal games and playing with these ideas, I have a very, I have a very deep awareness, I think of the actual impacts on those ideas in my life, because it's, we're not just playing around with ideas kind of out there, it's like these ideas have very concrete, real impacts on me. So while picking up God Delusion by Richard Dawkins, and one hand was liberating, it's also terrifying, because it's saying, what would happen if I went down that path, if I read this and was convinced that God doesn't exist, you know, and thinking about all of the impacts on my family and my relationships and the structure of my life and the sunk cost and Christianity and all the things I've done and now saying I don't believe it anymore. So on the one hand, I think you're right, where if you watch my life from the outside, you say, yeah, there's still a lot of faith in him, you know, he's not quite as skeptical as he may be saying he is. On the other hand, there, I don't know if that's the elephant, but there is this part of me that when I'm exploring these ideas feels very deeply about the impacts of those ideas. Which is why I'm jealous of people like you who, who it seems like you can entertain those things. And it's just kind of, it's almost kind of like, I don't say it's a game, but I don't think it impacts you maybe as deeply emotionally when you're playing with those ideas, maybe as someone with my personality. I think you have a great point there. I think you're probably right. Because my understanding of high neuroticism is that's high and negative emotion. I'm very low in neuroticism. My wife wishes I were a lot higher because she's like, you never feel guilty. No, not much. And I'm very low and negative emotion. I just am. And I think I think that's a great point. So I, I think you're probably right in that if you're higher negative in emotion, and you're high in openness, that's going to be tricky, because your openness is going to long is going to look for new things. And you're going to experience a lot of those new things, you're going to experience some negativity and negative emotion with a lot of those new things. So that makes that makes real sense to me. That's I think that's really helpful. Yep, exactly. So that's been something I kind of had to navigate, I think a little bit too, which is just, you know, and I think I'm getting better at this. But even just from my own emotional health, and I was I was talking with Cassidy about this, we had a we had a great one on one conversation and kind of realizing at some point, is that on her channel? Did she post it? It is it is Oh, god, I'll have to look it up. Yeah, it's actually a great. It's a great conversation. But um, that for people with kind of my personality type, you know, it's, it's addicting trying to learn more. And you know, you see the you see the YouTube video pop up where you know, Sam Harris has another critique of belief in God, and that you see that thing and you want to click on and you want to listen and you want to evaluate. But at some time, at some point, you have to learn to cut kind of almost cut yourself off because the amount of negative emotion you'll feel or the anxiety and stress of now having to deal with this new kind of challenge. It's like, it's hard for me to find that balance where it's like, it is good to be open and to be receptive to new ideas and challenging critiques. But at the same time, you know, there's a near infinite number of critiques, you know, and criticisms and different viewpoints on your belief and people who would say you're wrong. So it's like, with a neurotic personality like mine, it's figuring out where you kind of draw the line and say, okay, like, I'm done with this for today, you know, I'm going to go for a walk and or I'm going to go cook a meal for myself or do something that kind of gets you out of your head a little bit. Yeah. So that's, that's been a challenge. I've had to navigate to Adam. I don't know if you've heard from others who think that same way too, but it makes perfect sense. And, you know, we are now living. So we're living in this world now where there's just there's just a combinatorial explosion of access to ideas, like there hasn't ever been for individuals in the history of the world. And that is going to impact different people on these personality spectrums in different ways. And so if, if it was 500 years ago, and you are living in some little village someplace, deeply embedded within a Christian worldview, the, you know, you'd still have some of these same dynamics of high and openness and high and neuroticism, but the range of ideas that you would be presented with, you might find that less satisfying being high and openness, but you would not have just a continual possibility of endless things for you to feel negative about constantly bombarding you by these, these corporations that are enormously powerful around us. So in some ways, well, thank you, internet. You've just given me, you know, how many things to trigger my negative emotion. Now I have this to worry about. Right. Yep. Yep, completely. And I think even as I try to relate to, you know, my, my parents, even just in this, in this conversation, so I'm very close with my parents. And even the difference from my generation to their generation, you know, the kinds of questions that I'm asking, or the things that I'm thinking about for them, it's almost kind of like, we've never even had to think about that before. You know, not that they're not smart enough to have to think through it, but just that the amount of information that we're being thrown has been thrown at us as just unparalleled, you know, and there are things that that that generation didn't frankly, just like when they were being raised in faith, didn't really have to think about as much. So yeah, that's I could definitely see even just the gender, even just one generation in the past, how much it's changed. And where you are in life. So I'm in my 50s. And like I tell people sometimes the cake is baked. I mean, brain plasticity, that that left a long time ago, I wish I was a little younger when I learned Spanish, because it probably would have helped. But, you know, I'm not thinking around maybe I'll be Buddhist now, you know, it's just not there. It's not gonna happen. And, you know, it's like people are like, Well, when are you going to become orthodox? It's like, Oh, I don't know, probably never. Just and I've got my own personality aspects involved in changing religious traditions. Oh, gosh, that even thinking about that work, you know, fatigues me, you think I'm actually gonna go out and start church shopping amongst orthodox churches. And, you know, not right now, I'll tell you that much. So yeah, there's lots of layers in this thing. Yeah. The 20. I mean, you hear the phrase, quarter life crisis here, though, you've maybe heard that phrase before. Okay, it's just, it's kind of like a midlife crisis. But somebody who's in their mid 20s quarter life, who's kind of being hit with all these big questions of life. So it's, you know, your 20s, you know, what am I going to do for a career? Where am I going to live? Who am I going to marry? You know, what is my where am I, my, my values, my morals, you know, where are those going to come from religious questions, you know, it's, it's a, it's really a hard time of life in that sense, because you're you're out of college now, you're kind of in the real world for a few years. And now you're trying to figure all of these things out. And it is different, because it's, in a sense, it's like you're young enough that you can still make a big change in some ways, and actually kind of meaningfully live in that separate story. So it's like, for me, one thing I'm always thinking about is career and thinking about, you know, what I do now, and what I consider doing something else. And it's like, when you're in your 20s, you have a lot of flexibility to still change, I could go to grad school, if I wanted, I could switch careers pretty easily, if I wanted to. Um, versus what you said, if you're in your 50s, you know, a lot less people are probably thinking about career change, because like you're saying, well, we're on our way out, you know, right. And same thing with religion and marriage. And it's even the religion and the marriage thing is very tied together, because it's, you know, your beliefs, at least the way I was raised is that, you know, your religious beliefs will greatly impact the kinds of people that you consider dating or maybe eventually marrying. So there's kind of, there's kind of this weight to, well, I've got to, I got to arrive at the right religious belief. Because what if I come arrive at the wrong belief, and then I marry somebody, and then I change later. And so there's kind of almost this pressure to have, I've got to get all of these questions answered, so that I can get everything lined up, because of the stage of life that I'm in, where maybe somebody like you, kind of later in life, you know, you're just you're looking at it from such a different vantage point in many ways. My wife always thinks, you know, if something were to happen to her, I'd, you know, be out there on the market looking for a new wife. And I'm like, I, I wouldn't even you know, again, I'm part of me is I'm a rough person. Once I start doing something, and I like it, I stick with it. And it's like, when I go shopping for a new wife, oh, gosh, that's just sounds horrible. I had an uncle who when his wife died, you know, people are like, you know, well, you're gonna get married again, he said, I'd rather be lonely than miserable. And he didn't have a bad marriage at all. He was just like, he'd been around and he knows that a marriage is a big complex thing. And I've seen wonderful second, I've seen one people with wonderful second marriages and wonderful later in life marriages, my mother in law had one, but they're enormously complex things. And so yeah, now you're exactly right. You get to a later point in life. And it's like, move, remarry, change careers, change religions. Boy, I don't know about that. I mean, I just don't have that much potential left in me. Right. Yeah, funny comment, actually, just a little funny story about the marriage thing. So I was in a work meeting the other day, and we were playing like a would you rather I don't know if you've heard that game, but it's just you get two options. And then everybody kind of has to pick, okay, like, would you rather do a thing or B thing if you're faced with this option. And one of the questions that I asked was, everyone was married except for me. And the question was, you know, would you rather if you could go back and redo it everything? Would you rather live your life single or, you know, or being an arranged marriage? Every single person said live life single, not even a question. It was really interesting. And it was like, it was everyone kind of laughs, you know, and they were saying, well, we're married. So you know, we're gonna start they're kind of saying, you know, marriage is hard and all this stuff. So it was it was definitely it was kind of a funny moment. But, but it was just it was funny. I was like, maybe somebody will debate it. And I was like, Nope, we're doing the single thing. Kind of kind of funny. But, but if you don't mind, so going back to what we were saying before, so here's, here's an interesting, I think, analogy that might help us. So you're familiar with you've read CS Lewis, like a lot of his essays and things like that, correct? Yeah. Outside of his apologetic works and things. Okay. So have you read the one about it's called on riding a bicycle or on bicycles or something like that? I probably did. But it was probably a few years ago. So refresh my memory. Okay, so he, he, he kind of he kind of creates this picture of people. And people kind of go through these four life stages. So and he and he uses, you know, his relationship to riding a bicycle and like to explain these four stages. So there's unenchanted, enchanted, disenchanted, and then reenchanted. That's those four things. I don't know if this is maybe ringing a bell to you. But the unenchanted stage is kind of like that stage of life before he wrote before he ever really knew what a bicycle was. Before he kind of like understood like its value and purpose of bicycles didn't really mean it mean anything to him. Then there was kind of this enchanted stage, which is where he first learned to ride a bicycle. And he describes it like his life, his life opened up to him. Now he felt like he had found the secret to life is the wording that he uses and that bicycle kind of infatuated. Yeah, with that childhood infatuation of riding your bike fast and going to a friend's house and having mobility and independence for the first time. And there's this kind of this infatuation enchantment phase. But then he describes the disenchanted phase, which is kind of that stage of life or the stage of in terms of the bicycle analogy is, you know, riding a bicycle just kind of became work at some point, if you use the bicycle to ride to he talked about ride to school and back. So it was for him, you know, it kind of lost its charm and its infatuation. And it would kind of just became kind of this kind of dull kind of mundane thing. And then he describes now kind of later in life, he describes now he's re enchanted with bicycles and, and in the sense of, you know, now he there's this kind of new found deeper kind of connection and magic he feels about riding a bike that even though it does, it's different than that initial kind of infatuation. It's, you know, it's this kind of new deeper connection. And he draws the connection in the essay to to marriage. So and kind of his relationship to it to women. So at a young age, he's enchanted women are just kind of other people, there's not that kind of sense of attraction yet. And there's that enchantment where you're in the honeymoon, you fall in love, there's the disenchantment, which is kind of that, kind of the honeymoon wears off, and you start to see them a little bit differently now that you've been together, and some of the novelty wears off, and then the re enchantment, which is like, which not all marriages get to, I guess, but it's that kind of deeper love or that deeper connection that you have now, having gone through the cynicism and whatever it is that kind of dark period, and now you kind of come up the other side. So I think it's a really I think it's a really good essay. And he said, and he says that applies to almost anything in life. And he kind of gives all these other examples to that of how we see these stages kind of working out in people's lives. And I can't help but I kind of see myself in that kind of framework as pertains to my faith, because I think there's that there's kind of that infatuation period where it's like, faith is simple. And you know, you know, you haven't really experienced a lot of doubts or like a lot of kind of hardships in relates in relation to your faith, and you're just kind of enchanted with the idea of faith. And maybe you have these ideas that, you know, everything will go great if you're a Christian, and you know, nothing really bad can happen to you. And maybe just these kind of in these these kind of simplistic ideas, maybe have at the beginning of a faith journey. And then there's the disenchantment, which is, you know, you start to experience things that kind of initial mirage kind of starts to fade away, because you're like, Oh, this faith thing is actually quite a bit harder than, you know, I initially thought, and maybe it's more complicated. Maybe there's, you know, some things happen in your life that were really hard, and you would have never have expected that have happened, based on kind of your initial expectation of what it would be like. But then there's kind of getting to that next, there's kind of getting to that re-enchantment phase is like, you see, you see with a sober mind, the complexities of faith, the nuances, the hardness of it, and all of the re of all of the things that make it hard and challenging, but there's still something in it that makes it worthwhile, there's still something that, despite the hardness, there's almost kind of a deeper affection and a deeper connection you now have with it. I would almost kind of say I'm in that, I'm in that disenchantment phase, I think, trying to get to that re-enchantment phase, because I'm, I think I'm, you know, I'm realizing, well, you know, I'm probably not going to view faith the same way that I did five years ago, 10 years ago, because I've been through different experiences, things have changed. And I'm, I can find, I'm finding myself, okay, how can I get into that, how can I get into that re-enchantment? And maybe it's not something that you will willingly will yourself into, maybe it's just something that kind of has to happen to you. But I very much see myself in that progression and relates to my, my faith life. So I don't know if that helps you maybe see kind of where I'm at. And, you know, how can I get past the disenchantment cynicism and, and kind of that stage into a stage that sees it for, you know, that sees it with a sober mind and so with a sober vision, but can get past the cynicism into a point of a deeper kind of appreciation and connection. I think that sounds good and right. And I think part of modernity is this, is this sort of low level colonization in us that we imagine. Faith is a project that we undertake, and we are solely responsible for it. Now, speaking as a Calvinist, I would suggest that part of that perspective is in fact, sort of, an Arminian bias that says, faith is something I do. And I'm not going to, you know, I find few Calvinists that actually undermine personal responsibility, we are responsible for whole ranges of things. But again, and again, and again, if you read in the Bible, faith is a gift. And I think you're right in that re-enchantment. It's not wholly up to you. Now you can ask God for it. But gifts are given or not given and that, that powerlessness as modern people, we really don't like. But there's something to that something going on in that. And so, you know, and again, I often will say things like, you know, becoming a Christian is not like buying a sensible car. It's much more like falling in love. And when it comes to falling in love, there's you fall, you are, there's 50% of the equation, and probably probably actually responsible for far less than 50% of the equation, because the stuff baked into you has been baked into you completely without your volition as well. But a whole lot of this is on the side of, of the other. And so I, I am, I know that there is in some ways, especially in evangelical churches, but also in mainline, that there is a there is an existential panic around deconstruction. And I'm not I'm not saying that to take it less seriously, or to say that this isn't having a profound effect on the health of the Church of North America. But I also see these processes of distance of deconstruction as not disconnected from the maturation of people's faiths, especially given the broad sea change we're experiencing at far deeper levels of how we believe and participate, and how we see the world. Because, you know, we are individuals going through these things at the same time as a whole society. You know, there are huge spirits. Again, back to the themes of my recent videos, principalities and powers are at work. And we are navigating our own little boats in the midst of a very stormy sea. And so to imagine that, well, it's all just up to me and my little craft is like, that's silly. Because, you know, you might have a wonderful little craft and you go out in a sea and you can cross the Pacific, no problem, just because all of the weather patterns were favorable for you. But if you're going to encounter a hurricane or a tsunami, or a cyclone, well, you know, maybe the little craft that did just fine in fair weather is not up to the task. And then suddenly we're at we're dealing with far larger, far larger dynamics than my ability to construct this little craft. And in such a scenario, you know, people, that's the kinds of things that produce heroes and weathered sailors and people of consequence and substance because they set out on their three hour tour. And, you know, now they're going to survive on an island with six other strangers for who knows how long. So maybe just miss that Gilligan's Island reference for you, but an older generation would have caught it. Yeah, probably too young for that. Yeah. But okay, yeah, that makes that makes a lot of sense. And that's, you know, one of the things I've been hanging on to through this whole process is that, you know, because many, many days, it can be easy to think, you know, why, you know, why couldn't faith just be easier for me? Because, you know, sometimes it's like, I'm wrestling with these things that, you know, other Christians I see around me aren't always wrestling with. And sometimes it can be easy to be become cynical about that and just think, you know, why couldn't I just have a faith like that? You know, why have I been taken on this journey when others haven't been taken on this journey? But to your point right there, I mean, something I've been holding on to is that it's a tumultuous journey to go on, but I'm having faith. I'm having faith that on the other side of this is going to be is going to come this kind of deeper, more mature, maybe more robust faith than I've ever even had before. Right. Which is an encouraging thought, because it gives a sense of meaning and purpose to the journey. It's not just that you're kind of floating endlessly, like aimlessly, but that eventually you're going to arrive in a place that is going to make you stronger and more able to withstand storms and the waves of life than maybe ever before. Which I think is kind of the point of that, of the different stages of when you when you reach that kind of re-enchantment stage, or you reach that stage of maturity in your relationship or something, you're much more stable and much more able to kind of weather the storms as they come, you know, so yes, I'm holding on to hope that that that will be produced in me, even if I can't quite see it at this point. Well, and your worldview affords that. Whereas if you fully deconstruct, and you you basically say, well, you know, all of these experiences that I have in the universe are totally random, and I'm simply a product of I mean, the problem is, if you actually go there and actually start inhabiting that place, really down deep in your core, well, you're gonna have one heck of a meaning crisis. And there are some, there are some big consequences there. And so for me, I'm, you know, even if I'm wrong about God and faith and purpose and all of these things, I will have lived a much more satisfactory life than someone who's totally aware of the truth and that there is no purpose, and this is meaningless and all of that. It's like, well, good luck to you, bucko. You know, you live like that. I don't think so. It's just not how we're how we're set to live. And if that is the truth, and I am wrong, well, I'm still better off than that guy over there. Yeah, that's an interesting. I've never quite thought about it that way. That's Yeah, that's interesting. Um, and I think that's that ties into, you know, okay, so kind of my initial question. So, you know, you go through this journey, and you're aware of the complexity of life and faith and all and everything I was talking about before, you know, how, you know, how do you live into the story again, you know, now that you've kind of stepped back and kind of analyzed that you kind of have these new cynical glasses, you've looked at it, you want to live into the story again, obviously, I know you'll say probably church and participation in the community. But even just kind of in my daily life as I'm making decisions, and you kind of reach these little cross mode crossroad moments of like, okay, this is a moment where you could really live as a Christian. And you kind of have that choice before you. How do you live into the story again, and commit to those decisions when there's this now this voice in you that's that that's kind of more cynical, and kind of more aware of kind of this other this whole other world that you weren't aware of before, how can you still, I guess, live into the story, you know, the reason I'm asking that question is that many times I'll, you know, I'll try I feel like I'll try to do faithful things, I'll say, you know, I want to do x thing, because I know it's the right thing. And I'll be kind of struck with this feeling of either the doubts or the cynical thoughts, or you'll do this thing. And there's kind of almost this imposter syndrome kind of feeling going on of like, you know, you're almost that whole act as if you know, you're acting as if you're a Christian. But you know, the insides maybe haven't caught up to the actions on the outside. So there's kind of this imposter syndrome going on. And this, you know, am I being inauthentic by doing this? Because because the inside doesn't match what the actions and Oh, I guess what tips would you have for somebody who's trying to live into the story again? Um, now with this new kind of lens that you're also managing, but still be able to live in the story with conviction? Well, I think that I think you've nicely laid out the challenge for a lot of people now. I mean, myself included. I mean, part of the reason I was reading CS Lewis's book miracles, you know, two, three times a year was, okay, how, what does what does re-enchantment look like? And unlike initial naive enchantment, which sort of came naturally and easily. Now, I've just got a whole lot more to do to maintain living into this story. And I've got baggage. Now, maybe it's analogous to the difference between the young energetic person setting out to sea and their small craft, and the grizzled veteran who has survived survived cyclones and tsunamis. That person probably has elbows that don't quite work right. And they've got scars. And you know, they got this this arm got mangled in that storm. And it ever since that storm, it just never really worked right. And, you know, you get that scene and you got that scene in Jaws when they're comparing scars, you know, and, and I think that's, that's what it starts to look like where and again, back to, let's say the marriage illustration where you've got a couple who, you know, it's not the honeymoon period where they both kind of looked into each other's eyes and I'll never do you wrong, and you'll never do me wrong. Now it's boy, you did me wrong. And crap, I did you wrong, too. And we've sort of worked that stuff through. But that initial naivete is gone. And so now suddenly, when he or she says something and does something and you feel the mistrust well up and you feel the defensiveness wear up and you, you want to attack or protect or flee. Now suddenly, it's like, Okay, okay, okay, I've done this before. I am going to resist the design, I'm going to resist the impulse to lash out or flee. I'm going to learn to calm myself down, as I've done in many circumstances. Usually, there are some cherished routines and books and places you can go to say, this is how I practice my faith. I you know, and it's it's I've seen this with people who have been through 12 step programs where, you know, they they basically beat the bottle and they're doing okay, and everything's fine. But then there's a spouse that dies or there's a crisis in that life. Suddenly, that bottle looks good again. And so they might be haven't been to a meeting in 15 years, but it's back to the meeting. And it's back to and that's in a lot of ways what I was doing with CS Lewis's book miracles because I could feel could feel stuff moving. I could feel doubt growing. I could feel foundations getting undercut. And it's like, all right, I need to go back. And then it's okay, now I'm going to redouble my prayer life. And it's it's back to the old thing. And you have a sense in life that, you know, you have a sense in life that you can only go back to this so often. But at the same time, there is an end in life when at some point, my race will be one, you know, the Apostle Paul talks like that, you run the race to win. But if you've ever, you know, I ran cross country in my freshman year of high school, you long for you know, you're running that race hard and you see that finish line. It's just, I just want to get on the other end of that finish line. And then I could stop running. Absolutely. Yes. Yes. Yeah, that's a great picture of it. And I think I think part of you has to decide internally that whatever the thing is that you're committing to is worth committing to. That's that's kind of foundational because when those doubts well up or in the marriage example, those challenges start to come up because I mean, there's always that option of, you know, for the faith thing, I could leave the faith, you know, with the marriage option, it's well, you know, this could we could potentially end this marriage. So it's kind of, I think underneath what you were just saying is there has to be this sense of commitment inside of you that says this is what I'm this is what I'm gonna fight for, because you're realizing in that new mature stage, you're gonna have to start fighting a lot more than you did maybe in the honeymoon stage to try to keep this thing going. And the fighting is gonna imply commitment, it's gonna imply sacrifice, it's gonna imply fighting for it at times when it maybe would be easier to just run away and to not have to engage. So I think that's where I need to get where I can kind of feel inside where there's still that kind of a fear of commitment going on. I'm like, Oh, well, I don't I'm not sure if I want to go all in. Yeah, I don't know if I want to commit to that point. Yeah. And it's, you know, as Peterson is always talking about the importance of commitment and where the most, you know, meaning meaning comes from commitment and setting a course towards towards a goal or a name. And if you can't set a course or a goal or a course toward an toward a goal, if every time the opportunity comes to turn back, you're always changing. So I think there has to be that kind of commitment alignment inside of yourself that says, you know, this is what, whether the doubts come, whether the challenges come, you know, this is what I'm going to fight for. Yep. Yep. And that that's part of what that's part of what maturity looks like in a mature marriage. You know, in a in a new marriage, it's like, you know, you fell in love, you excited with everything. And then there's the first fight is like, ah, maturity is like, oh, we've had this fight so many times. Yeah, we got to have it again. And we have to get through the resolution again. And, you know, you just you just learn these things. And, and faith is and someone might say, Wow, who needs faith? And it's like, okay, yeah, divorce is out there. But I've seen, you know, and I've seen that side. I've never been divorced. But I've seen I know plenty of people have gone that route to and that option B. You know, and I talked to people 1520 years after option B. And I hear, you know, they're going back and forth over that choice of the choices they made then. And I mean, it's it's that that is life in this world. Yeah. And, and as much as we'd like to say, No, I want peaches and cream forever and ever and ongoing youth. That's not what this world affords. Yeah. Here we are. So what are you gonna do with what you got? Do you think? Do you think people in my generation, from your perspective, do you think people in my generation struggle more with commitment than in your generation? Yes. Because there's been two generations of divorced parents. And so we're looking at grandchildren of divorce sometimes in both parents. So that's one issue. Another issue is, when I was going through in my Christian community, there was a lot of still in society, there was generally a fair amount of you can call it pressure, you can call it support, whatever you want to kind of holding people together. And that doesn't mean that there aren't some marriages that should end, or some people that will stay married, but shouldn't live together, and all the different permutations that happen with people. But there was something leaning in on couples, to give them the motivation that if I walk out of here, I'm going to be able to walk out of here, there's going to be stigma, there's going to be shame, there's going to be repercussions. And I'll tell you sometimes when when when tight when life is hard, walking out, walking away from the faith. Two generations ago, was a costly business, you would, you would suffer at the hands of your community. Now it's just freedom. Okay. But, you know, anybody who, you know, we're at the Olympics, or, you know, we're in the season of the Olympics. Most of those people are not there because they don't understand commitment. Right? If all of those people, almost all of those people understand commitment at one, yeah, there might be a freak or two that just is so outstandingly endowed, but they're all very athletic people. And the one who wins the race is the one who sticks to their diet and sticks to their schedule and listens to their coach and doesn't get injured. So there's the whole, you know, random factors there because you got to have two great athletes and one just gets injured and or the timing of the four years for I mean, it's just, yeah, that's how life is. Yep. Yep. And I'm, I'm actually a guitar player. So I'm always looking at these great guitar players that I love to watch and love to listen to. And I've always got that desire to like, you know, if I, if I just practice more, if I just really doubled down, you know, I could sound like that maybe something like them too. But there's kind of that commitment piece of like, you know, they didn't just get there overnight. They didn't just get there. They didn't just pick up a guitar and start playing like that. You know, these these legendary players that I love to watch and listen to, they sat down for hours on and day after day and practice and practice and rehearsals and rehearsals and listening to their favorites and kind of finding their own voice. And so I think, you know, I, yeah, the meaning the most meaningful things in life require commitment. So and that's hard, I think, for our my generation, for the reasons you were just describing, I think just what we were describing to before in terms of internet and everything that's available to us. So the paradox of choice, I don't know if you've read that book. But it's I think it's, it's, I actually haven't read it either. But I've watched some of the YouTube videos, the guy who is the author of it. Um, and just kind of says how, you know, how having too much choice in life can actually negatively impact people and their decision making ability, because now more than ever before, we have so many more options available all the time with our with the internet and smartphones. And we're just talking about all the information available to you and the flexibility that we have where maybe two or three generations ago, you know, you were born into a family and the religion of that family was religion you did. And, you know, you learned your father's trade, and there wasn't all of these options of university and pick all these different careers and live in all these different states doing it, you know, so it's, I think that's part of it is just we have, we're so blessed in the sense that we have so much opportunity and so much freedom and ability to pursue anything that we want to pursue, which is a great freedom to have a kind of the dark underside of that is then it becomes much harder to commit to something when you're aware that there's so many of these other great options out there. Part of the reason why, you know, online dating gets critiqued for that too, in terms of people when people are kind of in an online dating mode, everyone's so afraid to commit to each other because they have 10 other people lined up right behind you on the app that they're talking to. So, and then you get sort of Yeah, right. So it's, I think that's part of the two is that when you're so aware of all the options that are there out free out there for you, it can make it trickier to commit because when you commit to one thing, you're saying no to, you know, 99 other things. So, you know, finding that thing that you're that you're going to stick to and say, this is the thing I'm going to do, you know, easier said than done, I think. And but I also see that struggle amongst my generation too. Yeah. Yeah. So, yeah. All right. Well, I do have a couple other questions for you, if you don't mind. Okay. Um, so they're kind of honestly, it's kind of all tied together. So we might get on one topic, and then it might very easily into the other ones. But so this is something I'm interested in. And this is, I guess, what I this is what I emailed you about. So kind of this idea of, you know, Christian Christianity, understanding who, you know, who ultimately gets to participate in the age to come. Obviously, a very debated, a very debated topic amongst many Christians, and a lot of very strong opinions on that. And I've always kind of, in my more so conservative Baptists, kind of with the reformed event, much more traditional and kind of much more conservative in terms of, you know, who, who gets to participate in the age to come, you know, and I'm kind of getting out there now and kind of realizing there's more perspectives out there and trying to wrestle through it and say, you know, what, you know, what's right here? And how should I think through this topic? I think I laid this out in the email, but you can correct me if I'm wrong. But I think there's kind of like, there's these three buckets, there's kind of like the exclusivist bucket, inclusivist bucket, and then there's universalist bucket. So exclusivist being, you know, the only people that get to go to heaven or to participate in age to come are the ones who explicitly trust in Christ in this life and pray the prayer and, you know, accept him into their life. There's no exceptions to that. Inclusivism, which is something I've been more interested in, is more so like, you know, there's a there's potential for a provision out there that maybe there is some way that God could work through situations where there's the kind of the classic, the classic examples of what about people who never get to hear the gospel? Or what about babies that die when they're really young? And kind of examples like that, and then universalism. So I guess I would love to get your insight on it. I mean, I've always, I always grew up with a strong kind of exclusivist kind of background of like, it's, it's cut and dry. This is what the text says, you know, very much kind of, you know, we don't want to deviate too much from what the text says. But I always kind of had those questions about, well, you know, what about, what about this example? Or what about, you know, a person may be born with disabilities or a person who dies in, you know, before, you know, age two or something, you know, and like, what, how does that all work out? And I was floored the first time I read mere Christianity, because in mere Christianity, Lewis kind of portrays that question and says, you know, well, I used to think before I was a Christian, isn't that unfair that people who don't get to hear about Christ, don't get to participate in the age to come? And then he kind of gives, he kind of gives essentially kind of like he pleads to almost a sort of mystery of, you know, we don't really know for sure, how he will deal with people who don't who don't hear the gospel or who don't hear, you know, about him in this life. And I remember reading that thinking, Wow, I never in the circles that I grew up, and that would have been a big no, no, that would have been a nope, you're crossing a very, very dangerous line there. So it was interesting to me, hearing Lewis kind of portray that example. Um, I think in the end of one of the Narnia books with emeth, there's kind of that classic example, too, of where he says, you know, you worship a different God from our God, but I'm going to, I'm going to grant your worship of this other God as worship to me, and then now you can come into my kingdom with me. And I know Lewis has got a lot of flack for that, too. So anyway, so this has been a, it's been an important topic for me, because I've always kind of had a lot of questions about it. And it does it kind of it factors into my, I think, perspective of God and, you know, fairness, you know, what is fair, what's not fair, there's just a lot baked into it. Um, and I'm trying to kind of explore what's out there and see, and I'm more than ever before, I think I'm open to other perspectives on it. But there's a lot of that kind of, I hate to, I hate to use the term fundamentalism, because it's just, I think, probably overused. But there's a lot of that kind of bit baked into me, where if you go to a Piper church, and you even suggest that that would be an option, you know, you would absolutely get shut down and say, No, that's, that's a big no, no. Even in the Gospel Coalition articles, you know, where they talk about CS Lewis, they always want periodically, they'll, they'll post these articles and say, here are seven things you need to be wary of with CS Lewis. So that's, that's usually one or two on the list of, you know, here's a dangerous idea that he has that we want to stay away from. So I'm curious, you know, just give me if you feel comfortable sharing just your honest thoughts on Lewis and that topic. And, you know, how does that fit into Christianity? How much space do you think is out there, you know, to be able to realistically flex between one of those views? That's a loaded question, I know. I am very reluctant to share my opinions on the internet. I don't know where you get the idea that I talked about something like this. I figured that'd be a struggle for you. Well, I think it's helpful to take a step back and ask a question about what we're asking about. Because in such to some to one degree or another, we're asking about policy, say, Okay, well, what's, what's the policy of heaven? What's the minimum entrance requirement by which I can somehow qualify for participation in the life to come in a way that I want? Okay. And there's there's lots of other, other interesting assumptions beneath it, such as, okay, heaven is sort of like Santa Barbara, and hell is sort of like the bad areas of Stockton. We have all these. And so when I talk to people, there's all these things kind of floating around in them. And they usually rush to this question, and ask this question. And I what I usually do is I usually back them off. And I say, Now, wait a minute. So what you're asking me, a Calvinist, is about the quali qualifications by which you can somehow qualify for entrance into and, you know, right away, you can you've already anticipating some of what I'm going to say, to the degree that, you know, this should be a this should be a question that Calvinists don't worry too much about, because the answer is easy. Everyone God wants. Now, that answer pulls in some other things that people begin to wonder about. But you can I can similarly sort of deconstruct some of those questions to Dallas Willard had another approach to this, which was who gets to go to heaven, anyone who can stand it, which sort of flips it on its head. Because well, if you have any understanding of the banquet of the lamb, the celebration of the banquet of the lamb is all about Jesus. And from everything that Richard Dawkins has says, he doesn't want to have anything to do with Jesus. So it would seem torture to force him into that party, wouldn't it? So there's another strange twist on it. So in other words, part of part of usually the first task and addressing this setup is, let's take a look at the setup that you've addressed and trying to force me into an answer into this setup, because there are issues with this setup as it is, that are being concealed, and trying to force people. So what is the what is the policy of the pearly gates, St. Peter has a stick, and everyone who's or a scale and everybody who's, you know, soul outweighs or doesn't weigh this. I mean, people have been playing this game since the Book of the Dead and the Egyptian. So let's let's right away recognize that whole business and say, let's have a little bit of skepticism about that game. Because whereas you can certainly read particular New Testament texts, and the light of that, there are many other texts that suggest all sorts of other things going on as well. So let's let's back off the three buckets as it were, right from the start. Now universalism is sort of a way of not worrying about the other two buckets, because you say, everybody gets there. Okay. There's some on there's some undesirable aspects to that, which sort of means that let's say Mother Teresa and Adolf Hitler, the life that they lived in this world really didn't matter because they're both finally going into the big you bucket. And then of course, at that point, then universalists begin to say, wait, wait a minute, that's not exactly what we're saying. Okay, well, then exactly what are we talking about in all of this here? Because on one hand, we very much want our lives and decisions in this world to be consequential for the next. And there's absolutely nothing in the Bible that would deter us from that thought, that what we say and what we do and the choices we make in this dispensation are in fact, consequential for the next. So let's take that and say, okay, let's include that picture, because that picture actually seems healthy for human beings and human society, that it is generally speaking, a healthy thing to concern ourselves with the next world in terms of the choices we make in this world. Now you can be overly concerned or neurotic, or there can be all kinds of bad ways of doing that. But to eliminate the concern completely also seems like a bad idea. And so the Bible does not say, don't worry about how you live now, God just is like, wow, you killed all those people and you tortured and maimed and murdered, but that doesn't really matter, does it? God seems very invested in how we live in this world. And the Egyptians had an idea about that. And the Hebrews had some really strong ideas about that. So let's just take that. And now let's also, which is not uncontested in our realm, say, well, is there another dispensation? And say, well, okay, there's A or B, there is or there isn't. Okay, so let's suppose there isn't another dispensation. And Dawkins is right, where, okay, dead is dead, boom. Well, suddenly, we're sort of back in Hitler Mother Teresa land. And so you've just now undercut the conceptualization that what we do in this life is significant for a next dispensation. So if we can agree to hold on to that, we've actually already accomplished something. Let's take the exclusivist bucket and do a little policy chart for that. So if you believe in your heart and confess with your lips, then you make it into the exclusivistic bucket. But very quickly, the exclusivist begin to add new qualifiers to that. Because they've also read the portions that note that Jesus says things like, well, you know, some people are pretty sure they made the e bucket, and they didn't. So then suddenly, it's like, oh, okay, so believe with your heart and confess with your lips and really, really mean it. But now suddenly, all the neurotics are like, am I really, really meaning it? That's right. Am I really am I doing it? And then Jesus, then you've got Matthew 25. And you got the sheep and the goats. And so then you've got all kinds of other people that are like, well, that whole belief in your heart. That's not really matters. What really matters is what you do for the least of these because we've got Matthew 25. So now suddenly, we've got we've got lots of different subsections of the e bucket. And so what I'm with all of this, what I'm saying is, there, this is a this is a an important conversation. It's a fascinating conversation. There's a reason there we've had debates, vigorous debates about this conversation. It's quite likely that Paul VanderKlay in a video will not give such an answer that the conversation will be exercised from human humanity from this day forward, that will likely not happen. And so probably what we're we should do is sort of like Lewis, take a step back and say, let's just talk about some of these things, shall we? And the Calvinist can kind of say, who gets who who is included in the banquet of the lamb, everyone God wants at the table. Now, suddenly, if I put it in that realm, all sorts of parables sort of light up parables that we weren't paying any attention to. And we looked at our three buckets, because, well, he sends out the invitations and all kinds of people like, I don't know if I want to go, I'm a little busy today. And the food at those banquets, I don't know if it's, you know, and so, well, what about your Calvinism, that and divine election and decrees and all those things. And so it's a big conversation. And as a pastor, what I what I usually do is sort of cut to a chase with people and say, Well, what do you want? And we'll say, Well, I don't want to go to hell. Well, that's reasonable. All the eternal conscious torment. I mean, this is a phrase I've just heard in the last few years. And it's like, Oh, well, everyone arguing for universalism just turned the heat up on all the neurotics, because it used to be that hell was bad enough. Now you've just turned the resolution up. And they're thinking eternal conscious torment. Oh, my goodness. It's like, yeah, big favor universalist, you try to say, Oh, don't worry about eternal conscious torment. That's a bad idea. But all everyone who's high in neuroticism is now worrying about it. Great move, people. Yeah. So Yeah. So Yes. So and so then I'll say, Okay, well, do you want to be with Jesus? And I'm not so sure. Well, tell me about that not sureness. Well, you know, I'm worried about dead Canaanites. And I'm worried about goats. And I'm worried about Okay, well, let's begin with the premise that you're little and God's big, that you're dim, and God's bright, that you're sort of generous towards other people, but God is way more generous towards other people. For example, he sends the rain and the sunshine to fall on the just and the unjust and Jesus calls that perfection. And Jesus says, you know, although you are evil, you know, to give your child an egg and not a scorpion. Um, God who is a lot better than you, but God is also more demanding than you. So in other words, what I usually do is say, let's not worry about the policy of heaven, because number one, God hasn't asked you to set it. Because number two, you know, wouldn't do a good job. So let's just imagine that the master of the universe will get this right. And if you say, I don't trust him to get it right. I think you've just brought on to yourself way more problems. Because if he didn't get that right, what else didn't he get right? In other words, sort of built into Christian theism of God's generosity, God's justice, God's goodness is the answer that whatever he does with us in terms of participates participation in a coming dispensation will be more just than we can imagine, and more merciful than we can imagine. So because what really when people come with this question is, do you just want the policy? Or do you want to judge the policy? And by judging the policy, will you judge the maker of the policy? So I'm going to jump to the chase and say, if you decide you want to judge God, go right ahead, but be careful with that posture. Because implicitly, what you're saying is you could do a better job. And I don't know about everyone who knows you really well. But chances are everyone around you thinks, maybe not. And because we all know that we've got self serving bias here, you know, because I think I could do a better job than God. And it's actually really remarkable in a show like The Good Place, where at the end of it, when finally these four randos get to decide, get to step in fresh talk about, you know, what is it a Mary Sue story, you know, these four randos get to decide the policy about after life in this universe, oh, good, we're giving this to four random people, when we have a fair amount of trembling about 12, a jury by 12 members of our peers, we're going to give the whole thing to 12, four randos. And they're just on the top of it going to do a better job than the Almighty, who actually designed all of this. So in as a pastor, what I usually do is say, what you really have to do is trust God. And, and, and then someone would say, but how do I know, and then I'll say, well, what kind of God would put his son, not only in harm's way, but to be tortured and died and something's well, that's obviously not a very good father. Well, but the sun was in on it. And in other words, the trust thing is finally answered by Jesus. And, and so I'll just usually back people off from saying, it's, it's legitimate to have a conversation about the, you know, about the afterlife, the church has been discussing this for a couple 1000 years, but have that conversation over here. But when it comes to your heart, learn to trust him. Because not trusting him, not only won't help your heart, it isn't terribly rational. And if God can't be trusted with this kind of thing, I don't know what chance you think you might have in beating such a system. Because for the most for what we know, you know, after we shuffle off this mortal coil, we don't know. Yeah. So the answer, as with many Christian answers is learn to trust. Because that will actually resolve a whole bunch of things. Oh, yeah. That's hard. That's hard to do. Clearly, the whole story of the Bible is our trust issues. The serpent comes along and says, that tree over there. Are you sure God's not holding out on you? That's, that's the first question. Yep. So, okay, so I think kind of where it sounds like, there's almost kind of like this, please, you're somewhat of a Okay, so there's, so there's kind of, you know, whatever conclusion you come to on this topic, where you think, you know, this is what I think scripture teaches or whatever, and then saying, Okay, you know, how do I want to say this? Is it a is it a trusting God with the mystery of it and saying, well, we don't really know for sure what's going to happen. So we'll kind of leave it to mystery and trust, trust in God's nature that he's going to do what's right. Or is it is it like, you know, we just we just need to, you know, we just need to swallow the bitter pill of how hard this teaching is. And then and then say, you know, we just need to trust God that what he's doing is right. He's told us what he's going to do. Does that make sense? Because I think maybe from some people who are from the more rigid camp will say, opening it up even to mystery and saying, we don't know what he will do, they could claim that's back and almost be in a sense, a sort of unbelief, because you're, you're going against the clear teaching of scripture. And this is what scripture says will happen. And this is who's in and who's not. And if you're even even leave that door open, you're in a sense, not trusting God because you're saying, you know, what what's in the text, there's got to be maybe there's more to the story, I guess. Does that make sense? Yeah. Okay, so it's like, do we is it a trust in the mystery of it? Or is it a trust in the this is the conclusion that we think this is what how it's going to work. I don't know if I'm articulating with the character of God, because when putting it in the text, it doesn't have much else to say. It's like, it's like, we're trying to be a good listener, because when push comes to shove, you don't have much else. Think about this, let's imagine that, you know, suddenly, we all opened our Bibles tomorrow, and there's a new verse in it says and says, you know, God damns all the English speakers and English thinkers. Oh, oh, well, crap. Now I'm not going to say that English is a language. Well, that arbitrary God just damned all the English speakers and all the English thinkers even so not only do I not have to let English leave my lips, I have to not let English inhabit my brain. And I was born speaking this language and I'm in my 50s and the cake is baked and how are we going to stop thinking English for Pete's sake in order to save my immortal soul? Well, let's Just, because so many but so many American speakers and English thinkers still says to constantly everybody Cut the etch barrier or that you're a hope for God, he's such a God who does this kind of thing. What's your plan? Because tomorrow he might say, Yeah, we're going to take out the Germans to, I mean, in that case, you're gonna, you're going to you're gonna do And so it's either trust or don't trust. And for all of us humans, it's like, I'll try. And then here's an even nastier little bit. As we started, I'm low in neuroticism. You know what that makes? And I had my parents stay together, my grandparents stayed together. My parents were not corrupt in the church at all. They really believed this stuff. They were wonderful to me. They were supportive. I mean, I have had a wonderful life in many respects, about one of the best this planet has to give. And so I'm low in neuroticism. And so trusting is easy for me. You're higher in neuroticism. Sorry about that. Now, there are circumstances in which you're better off being higher in neuroticism. Maybe all of us low in neuroticism, some wave comes through humanity and history. And all of us trusting, happy folks get wiped out. And all you worriers, you all survived the pandemic or what have you. And now you're out there multiplying. And now you're multiplying lots of worrying children, but 10 or 15 generations, more and more of us non-worry folks begin to, you can run this stuff forever in your brain. And so again, as a pastor, someone comes in and wants to talk to me and I got to take this whole thing and I got to get it right down to a nub. And so what I'm going to tell them is learn to trust God. Well, what about God's damn nation of English speakers? Well, if God is arbitrarily damning English speakers, sorry, we're both cooked. And there's not a darn thing we can do. And if God wants to wisp me out of this world and put me in eternal conscious torment, there's probably not a lot I can do. But if that's the administration of the universe, and I don't like it, I can shake my fist at the heavens, but in the Dominican Republic, I, rats would get into the house and I had a live trap and I would catch them and I would put them in the water and they'd look up me with their little eyes like, are you really going to drown me? Yep, I am. I'm going to drown you because if I just think, oh, I would have saved a little rat. I'm going to go a hundred feet from the house and let the little fella go. I know exactly where he's going to be, back in my kitchen, eating the food for my children. Now, how does God administer the universe? Well, I'm looking for clues. And I'm a Christian, so I'm looking at the Bible. There's some Muslims out there saying, well, yeah, you Christians, you're better than these other people. And Paul VanderKley, you don't drink alcohol. You don't do Ramadan and you don't do the Hajj and you're reading, you think Christians rose from the dead or maybe Allah will be good to you. And so, all right, well, I'm not in control of you. I got me to steward and that's plenty for me. And so, this is the basket I'm putting my eggs in. And the only way those eggs settled is I learned to trust. And could I be wrong? I'm probably wrong about more than I'm right. But at some point, you make your decision, you pick your road, you go down it. And doesn't mean other things don't happen, but what are you gonna do? What else are you gonna do? Sit there at the crossroads and say, I'm not gonna go down any road. Great, you're gonna live in a fork. That doesn't make any sense. Right. Yeah, and built into this too is kind of, I think the fear of the cost of being wrong, especially on a topic like this. So, and this kind of comes, this is why it ties into hell and other things like that. But it's, there's so much weight in my mind, at least when I think about it, I'm like, okay, if there's anything we gotta get right, it's that. I'm thinking to myself because this then impacts, this will greatly impact the way you live your life. And I'm not even in terms of myself, but in terms of evangelism, like sharing your faith with people. So people from kind of more of that exclusivist perspective will critique inclusivist or universalist types and say, well, probably because it kills the evangelical, the spirit for evangelism. Because if you think people are gonna eventually all end up there, then why would you go out of your way to try to share your faith with people? So you can probably see this in me. Baked in is this very strong kind of evangelical, participated in campus crusade and college and there's very much this mindset of the Christian life is to go out and share your faith with people and try to get as many people saved as possible. So when you approach this question, the way you answer that question is gonna greatly impact the actions that you'll take. If I go down universalism path, my approaches toward evangelism and how I share my faith are probably gonna be different than if I held to kind of that exclusivist path. So I think I'm trying to figure this out because it's like, it's gonna impact the way that I interact with my faith with other people and the level of urgency with which I feel like I need to share my faith with people. And then just kind of the weight of being wrong about it. So even just the topic of hell. So it's, and this is one of the reasons why hell is kind of a hard topic because it kind of escalates the stakes really highly for a lot of these conversations. So, if you end up being universalist and think everybody ends up there, so you spend your life, you're not really that, it's not as important to you to share your faith with people because you're thinking, oh, everyone will end up there. I'm sure Luke Thompson and others probably have a lot of critiques of that. But I'm just kind of saying hypothetically, and then you get to the end one day and you realize, well, you were wrong on that because, there hell's a real place and people really do go there forever and you made all these decisions on the assumption that it wasn't that, that it didn't exist or that it was a temporary place or whatever. So I think there's just kind of this, and I think that sort of fuels the fundamentalism, I think somewhat fuels that impulse because there's this, there's this fear of being wrong that tells you, I need to accept the lowest common denominator. I need to accept the harshest possible thing because I would rather accept something too harsh and then realize that, oh, it was actually was better than it was maybe not as harsh as I thought versus maybe be something not quite so harsh. And then you realize, oh, I was actually wrong. I don't know if that makes sense, but I've kind of seen that fundamentalist kind of impulse where it's, we need to stick as close to the text as possible. We need to be as conservative as possible. If there's a harsh interpretation and there's kind of a softer interpretation, we've got to take the harsh one. That's the Torah. Yep, exactly. So I think there's some of that baked into me too of, it's such a high pressure thing. Cause it's like, well, I've got to get this right because the way you answer this question is going to impact your actions and the attitudes you have about faith. So I hope that makes sense why for me, it's something that I've been thinking a lot about and trying to wrestle through. There's a lot of that kind of evangelical mindset inside of me, which is, the Christian faith is about sharing your faith with other people and trying to get as many people saved as you possibly can, which that's very evangelical language as you know. Let me say a few things. Number one, there's a, in Sacramento, there are a fair number of street preachers or there's a few of them that come by. Here on Florin Road, so I'm going to meet, my church is on a main street, but every now and then the street preacher will come. They'll have a big sign, they'll have a blow hoard. I look at him, I say, God bless him. Just go out there and I don't have any problem with what he's doing. Sometimes I'll stop and chat with him because I want to, and I find out they're actually from other cities and they come here. And so I find that interesting. And I've known people that are just really good with street evangelism and God bless them. I've got no argument with them in terms of, I believe they're doing the work of the Lord. And I myself, I mean, people in my church understand what I'm doing as, I see my channel as an evangelistic project. So let me say that. Now, let me make a couple other observations. Number one, when I first went away to college, so Christian Reformed Church was sort of a version of that. Now, of course my father was my father and he was a big Lewis fan. But I went to, when I first started reading the Bible for myself, and what I mean by that is I was actually, I'm far enough away from home. I've got a certain sense of my own autonomy, my own independence, and I wanna, everybody had been reading the Bible for me. I wanna, sort of this way that sparks all sorts of heresies. I gotta read the Bible for myself. I wanna see what it says. And I came with it with this filter, this very four spiritual law, street evangelism, wind souls for Christ filter. And I thought, I wanna read the New Testament. I don't wanna see, I'll even say it, lay aside the Old Testament, okay? Because, okay, Jesus hasn't died yet or come yet and all that stuff. So I'm just gonna read the New Testament. In fact, I'm just gonna read Jesus. And I wanna circle every time in the Bible when Jesus says, unless you have a personal relationship with me or you have the four spirits, and it's like, I don't find any of these things in here. And I find Jesus talking about dietary laws and tithing, fasting, I find Jesus, all this stuff. And you'd think if this was the one thing of supreme importance, I could read the Gospels and not only find it, but not be able to miss it. And so, and that then sets up a much deeper question, which I still continue to struggle with, which is, well, it's very clear that in the Gospel, Jesus is trying to secure everything. And now what language can I have to actually get this in? And so then I look to the Bible itself and it seems to me other types of language, a lot of which you'll hear me use now, like the reconciliation of heaven and earth, that is sort of a better frame to kind of understand everything Jesus has to say. Otherwise it's all blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, believe in me, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah. And then all the other stuff that makes up most of the New Testament is sort of chaff and you can get rid of that and you can put it on a little sign and on a card and give it to people. And if you do this, but then we're back to the three buckets and then we're back to all of those games. So I had to say, okay, now I, okay, I'm a Christian. So I believe Jesus is the son of God. And I believe Jesus came to reveal not only through his words, but through his life and through his death and his resurrection and ascension, promise of the second coming. I am a small old Orthodox Christian. I'm a crunchy Christian who believes in miracles and all of these things. But I hear Jesus spending all of this time talking about, you know, tell my brother to divide the inheritance, be on the guard for all kinds of greed. Well, wait a minute, as long as I get this, believe with Jesus, right? Then I don't have to worry about greed, right? And that's what they say at the front end of the crusade. But after you actually go forward and, you know, bend your knee and pray the sinner's prayer, now suddenly I have to worry about greed. And you say, now, and I've, so I've worked both ends of this whole thing. And so then people are like, hey, wait a minute. There's a bait and switch happened here because you said all I had to do was believe in Jesus and I get to go to heaven when I die. You didn't say I had to stop doing drugs or cheating on my wife or somehow devote most of my income to the welfare of my children. And now you say I do. And the church Christians are kind of like, well, yeah, well, that's what it means to be a Christian. It's like, no, no, no, no, no, no, no. I listened very carefully to the speech that Billy Graham gave. And I didn't hear any of this stuff. And so in other words, now suddenly you have to connect, taking care of your children and not cheating on your wife and not going to sleep every night soused with alcohol, suddenly connected with this believing in Jesus. How do these things hold together? And so very quickly we're back into what on earth is this whole thing about? Because you just reduced it all the way down to this feeling of intention at one particular point and saying these words. And I'm a little skeptical and I'm not skeptical because I've had some grand revelation. I'm skeptical because I'm watching all of you and you're good to your children and you're not cheating on your wife. And well, how does that fit into a whole picture? So I am not a universalist. I do not want to. And if you listen to Lewis, Lewis can be downright terrifying in some points when he talks about the threat of hell. I mean, even though he's sort of in this inclusivist basket, there are a few people that are actually scarier than Lewis when he says, every decision you make is that little turn. And it's like, whoa, I thought I could just go down at the crusade and get the ticket stamped and continue as normal because now I got, evangelicals regularly deconstruct that view. And so at some point I look at them and say, now, y'all got to do some work on this because you're sort of cheating people and they're figuring it out and it's not a good look. So let's work on our language and try and look for language that helps. And then suddenly you begin to look at the history of the church and realize, yeah, we've all been working on this for quite a while. And in many ways, faith is a gift and the Christian life is mysterious. And Judas ends badly and Peter gets redeemed and, so yeah, there's plenty of mysteries in there, but there's lots of stuff that isn't terribly mysterious, which is fishing after the resurrection and fish on a fire and Peter feed my sheep. Well, what about John? Don't worry about him, you follow me. Let John worry about John, you worry about you. And so that's part of the reason why on one hand, should you, is hell, should you worry about eternally being divorced from the goodness and glory and pleasure of God? Absolutely. And I am not going to deconstruct people who go out there on the street because I have talked to plenty of wonderful Christians who them or their parents came to faith because someone brought a message on a trite little card with four spiritual laws and they changed their life and their entire family was better off for it. So I am not going to complain or deconstruct those folks in the least. And so I do believe in evangelism and I believe my channel is a work of evangelism. And also, well, what exactly is your evangelism? I don't know, why don't you watch a few hundred hours of me? And I don't know if I can distill it all into one little thing, but I think you're seeing it. Well, I don't think you're doing it right. Okay, you do it better. Be my guest. I'd love you to do it better. I would, at the end of this life, I do believe I will stand before my Lord and be called to give an account and there will be some things that I don't want him to see and I don't want him to show me and I don't want to answer for how exactly we all deal with that. I'm going to have to leave to him. And I think about that, but a lot of these people offer these little easy trite answers. And I just think, well, I've seen a lot of your answer and I'm not impressed. And so I'm going to keep trusting and praying and studying and thinking and trying to do the best I can in my own little way. And if it's a big mess, well, I mean, very early on, I remember did a conversation with someone who wasn't a Christian and I was getting emails from this woman and she's like, you talked to this person and you didn't present the gospel to them. And I was thinking, okay. You go round him up and do your deal. And if he says, I'm going to church next week and he starts a Christian life that goes from here to eternity, I will praise you and your way of doing it night and day, but I'm working with what I've seen and what I've got. And so I don't know what else I can do. That's really interesting. Yeah, so, oh, I don't know where to begin with that. So, okay, so for you, when you see the street preacher, he's on the street corner, he's preaching at people. You know, when you see that person doing that, where are you getting the mindset to yourself to think, you know, that that's not, are you seeing that person and thinking to yourself, that's not the most effective way to go about this? Like I admire what you're doing, but I don't think you're doing it in an effective way. Or when you see, or are you kind of saying, what you're just saying, you know, they're not giving a holistic enough picture or what I'm trying to figure out your kind of perspective and evangelism, because I see what you're doing. I do see it as evangelism that I've been watching your channel for a long time. But clearly what you're doing is very different than the street preacher or very different than the campus crusade, you know, college students going around with the KGP booklet, with the four spiritual laws, you know, sharing with people just on a whim, you know. So I'm kind of just, I'm trying to, I'm trying to figure out your mindset and kind of, and how you've gotten to the place that you're at. I mean, I think you partially just answered that, but what, when you see people kind of engaging in, let's say the street evangelism, you know, what's going through your head about their process and what they're doing? And does that make sense, that question? Oh, sure, lots of things, actually. One thing is, gosh, they've got a certain amount of zeal that I wish I had too. I know a lot of people, people who have deconstructed, people who have never given Christianity a thought, people who are of other religions, and they're driving by this guy thinking, he's a nut. Well, why do I think they think that? Because they told me, and they have like zero respect for him. I also know that somebody's gonna drive down that street, see that sign, and God's gonna use it, and they're gonna be okay. If you look at some of the old Freddie and Paul shows, one of the guys on the show is the Jesus man, and that's my friend Phil. And my friend Phil, after he died, not after he died, after his wife died, he just, the other day he told me his story in a nutshell. He said, you know, when I was a young man, I lived for me. And when I married my wife and had kids, I lived for my family. And when my kids grew up and my wife died, I decided I'm gonna live for Jesus. And so what Phil does is he has this, gosh, I've got a few of them around here. It's just, I don't wanna get up and grab one. But he has this little sort of inverted letter sign that says Jesus. That's all it says. And it's the reverse letters. So a lot of times people have never seen the sign, and you know, it's kind of like optical illusion. They let, he says, what does this say? And they look at it and they can't figure it out because it's all these strange lines. And then suddenly bang, the brain flips, it reverses, but it's Jesus. And all he does is he paints this inverted letter sign. He'll cut it into grass, he'll make signs, he'll put it on his motor home. He's got all these little cards and stickers and magnets. They're all over my church. They're all, he puts them in hospitals. And I got my book up there as he gives them around. I gotta show you the book because this is just too much. Okay, let's see it. Let's see it. So I actually have two books from him. And this is 2008 to 2020, and this is 2008 to 2016. And he's got, you know, there he is with the signs and here he gives them to people. And you know, and every time he makes a new book, he'll say, oh, Phil, I want another copy of your book. I'll pay for it. I don't care. I don't care what it costs. I just, you know, 30, 40 bucks or something for this book. And, and you know, and then he's got stories of, you know, he gave someone the Jesus sign and, you know, they became a Christian and then they died. And you know, that there's no pure story for that kind of Christianity. And so I, this is Phil's mission. And gosh, you know, when his wife died, I went to, say I first got to know Phil because I got to know his son, because his son grew up in this church and was kind of an Anabaptist church. And so he calls me, his son years ago calls me, phoned off the blue. Hi, are you a reformed pastor? Yeah. Can you mentor me? Okay. And at that point I had no YouTube following. So gosh, someone wants to listen to me. How unusual. And I said, well, how'd you become, why do you want to reform to pastor? Well, I became reformed on the internet. Okay. And so then, and then I got to know him and then I got to know his father. And then, you know, Phil's wife died and I went to her funeral over at the church there. And you know, Inge was, from listening to the funeral, just a beloved saint who, she cleaned houses for a living. And she, when everybody, anybody had a baby or there's a death in the family, she'd be there with a casserole. And she'd, do you need me to clean your house? And she'd clean their house for them. And there's a young mother struggling. She'd come and clean her house. I mean, this is, this is what she did. And then when she died, you know, you could just tell the stories at the funeral about the community where, you know, Inge was a saint. And, and, and Philip, when his wife died was, you know, it was grief stricken. What am I going to do without my wife? You know what he's going to do? You're going to make Jesus signs. He's going to litter the world with them. And you know, I know people's lives are complex, but you know what? Dog on it. If he doesn't have stories that I believe are a hundred percent true that he showed up someone and gave someone this silly Jesus sign, it's not silly at all. And they were blessed by it. I just say, Phil, the Jesus man kind of looks like Santa Claus, you go to town. And so, you know, he's on the Freddie and Paul show sometimes and, and, and I think someday he's going to stand before his Lord and his Lord's going to say, Phil, well done, good and faithful servant. You know, you, you, you took what you had and you did for me and you know, what, what, what, what are we going to, you know, who am I to tell this man to stop? I think it's wonderful. And the same with the sign guy. And I know full well, part of people are like, he shouldn't do that. He's giving Christianity a bad name. And it's like, if someone is so bothered that this dude will come from Vacaville and hold up a sign on a corner, when there's all sorts of signs on the corners for dispensaries and, and you know, ambulance chasing lawyers. And you know, this dude with a Jesus sign is somehow harming the universe. Give me a break. So that's, that's how I feel. That's what goes through my head. So on one hand, you know, I, I really respect Phil and his sincerity and his commitment. And so I'm not going to say a word against him. Do I know that for a lot of people, just getting a little inverted lettered sign, isn't going to deal with all of the things that they have in their head and in their heart? Oh yeah. Well, that's kind of where I come in. So I deal with them and some of that stuff. And you know, the, some of the most gratifying emails I get from people are ones that say, you know, you know, Paul, I was ready to chuck the whole thing. And I listened to your insane meanderings hours on end. And I don't know why, but somehow it helps. And I think, there you go. I've done my thing. And you know, Phil's just a lot more efficient. He just has to stand off the sign. I spend hours yakking to people. So, but God and his economy, I say, I say there's room for us both. So, okay. That's, that was a great, great story. So there's kind of this, it sounds like for you, it's, there's not like a right way to do it. You're, it's what you're saying. You're saying that- I think I'm doing it the right way, but I didn't. I'm saying, I'm saying, you know, so cause some people will say, well, what your friend who's on the street quarter, that's the right way. Or, you know, that what you're doing is the right way. And it's, so you have kind of, it seems like more of a, I'd say open perspective on it. I'm just like, there's different ways, there's kind of different ways of going about it. Some people need that just kind of quick little four spiritual laws. That's all they need. Some people you have to sit with them for years. I mean, I think about Lewis's conversion. I mean, it took him years, even just to move from atheism to theism and then her theism to believe in Christianity. You know, that's not, that wasn't a quick, you know, somebody just shared the four spiritual laws with him. And then he just kind of was from zero to zero to 60 or did a whole 180. It's, you know, it took years of working through his doubts and things that he was struggling with and the friendships there. And so I agree with you. I think that's maybe part of my, that was part of my frustration with many ways that I've seen evangelism work out in the church. Sometimes, you know, there is so much emphasis on just, well, we got to give them to pray the prayer and we just need to get them the spiritual laws. And you know, the other stuff doesn't really matter as much. And I think when you, you know, I saw it at least in campus ministry, you know, doing that sort of thing, when somebody would, you know, you'd get them to pray the prayer, but then there's kind of that question in the back of your mind. I mean, two weeks from now or a month from now or two months from now, are they even going to remember that conversation? You know, but you kind of walk away and think, well, this person's a Christian now. And you know, I kind of did my job and it's like, and that's where I agree with you when you look at Jesus and the life that he lived and the things that he talked about. He talked a lot more about the things, all the things that you were saying than about, okay, now you just need to go out and you need to get people to pray this prayer and, you know, trust in these four points so that, you know, this is that they can be entered into the kingdom, you know? So yeah, what I'm getting from you is it's kind of more, it's more so this holistic approach. I think it's a good thing. But I know plenty of people who are just, and you listen to their story and say, they told me this story and I thought, they're right. I'll be a Christian. And they were a good Christian for the rest of their life. You meet them too. So I, you know, I leave God in charge of the world and I say, I got my own messes in me. Why am I gonna, why am I gonna, you know, why am I gonna wade into your life and think I can clean you up when I can't clean me up? And well, doesn't Jesus say that with the speck and the log, you know? So again, I, so what do I tell people? Oh, why don't you start with Jesus and read the kind of things he has to say and go there. It doesn't seem like a bad place to start. To be a Christian, well, I'll start with Jesus. Good, that's good. Start there. Yep, yeah. So that's good. So I don't know how much time we have left. I know we're kind of coming up on- We should land the plane. We've done this for two hours. Okay, okay. All right, well, it's great talking with you, Paul. Thanks for entertaining some of my ideas and some of my questions. Okay, Michael, it's good to talk to you. Yeah, all right, take it easy. Have a good one. Send me the link to, just make it easier on me, to your conversation with Cassidy so I can put that in the notes too. Okay, okay, I will. All right, Michael, take care. Have a good one. Yep, bye-bye.