https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=RUXlsTEHUKc

 So let's let's set that up. So we, you know, as it always starts, Kail and I are chatting and then we start getting on topic and it's like, dang it, we better start recording cause we're chatting about personal stuff and personal stuff sort of leads to, uh, the good stuff, the good stuff, the good stuff, the good stuff. So, um, well, so we were talking, we were just talking about, you know, okay, I'll ask about my church. And I was talking about the fact that I remember seeing a study a number of years ago where two religious communities were highlighted by the fact of broad sacrificial giving. And it was, uh, it was a Jewish, it was a particular Jewish community. And it was the Christian reform church where you had a tradition of serious Christian formation at a young age. And we're talking about how that is going away. And then Kail just mentioned Catholic, Italian Catholics and Irish Catholic immigrants to the United States, who probably had a very similar pattern. And which sort of brings us around to the, I guess, the ostensible topic of this, even though of course, in Harry Potter, I only know the movies, but yeah, it was pretty obvious to see that the visiting professor of defense against the dark arts, that wasn't exactly the character in the movie you wanted to be. Yeah. It meant that you had a one film contract. Really? I mean, let's, let's be honest. Um, you know, because the, uh, well, at all the focus, of course, uh, it makes a certain amount of sense, you know, defense against the dark arts, especially, um, uh, which I do, you know, uh, you know, Grimm, uh, of course, it sort of invoked this from the beginning. Um, but I think that there's a real insight to that because, um, if you look at the role that the dark arts play, not only just in the Hogwarts world of, but in the, in the larger sphere in Harry Potter, you know, and again, just nerd out here just for a second, just so we can fit it in a situation and maybe then abstract out into, you know, our world, um, that, that the, the defense of against the dark arts is sort of in this sleepwalking phase because, you know, Voldemort has been gone for 10 years. And so in that 10 years, there's been a kind of letting down of the guard, a kind of letting it all, do we even really need to teach those kinds of things? I mean, you know, and so you get into all those kinds of arguments as to why, why would you even need a defense against the dark arts thing? Because Voldemort is gone, right. Or so you think, right. And, and so that, that much of the drama of, of, of the, of the series, uh, is it sort of focused on this course that they offer. Um, and not only are all the professors, you know, they're one and done, right. But, but there seems to be a sort of a real question as to why would you even have such a thing in the first place? And, and the way that the stories unfold is that Dumbledore, uh, insists that this, this remain part of the curriculum. And, and so when, so when he's kind of forced out in the middle of the series, the people who come in and take over Hogwarts, um, who are training the next generation of, you know, wizards and witches, right. Um, uh, the, the, the question is always, you know, how do you teach this thing? And so there's this sort of this, this desire to suppress it because it's something seen as either, you know, retrograde, um, or, or, or even, uh, kind of almost a kind of, um, you're fixating on the wrong negative thing. Right. And so, so maybe, you know, um, so for me, um, as a school teacher, um, you know, I, I think a lot about these issues anyway, um, and, and I have, you know, been teaching for the better part of three decades now. Um, and, you know, I see what you can do with a student in high school, but I know that they're being kind of frog marched into a kind of world that, you know, in, in certain respects, I feel that I have ill prepared them for, because they're going to go to college. And at least the way that I see things, they go to college and either they, they sort of do one of two things, Paul. They either become, um, pragmatist, nihilists, or they become, um, true believers in the new gospel, you know, the new gospel is well here. So the new gospel can either be a kind of sort of very sort of politically tinged, um, uh, gospel of liberation, we might call it, um, or, um, a sort of, um, a kind of a nihilism. It's, it's, it's difficult. I mean, I can, we can sort of play with all those various strains, right? But what they, what they, what they all seem to rest upon, right. Is, is what Taylor talks about as the imminent frame, right. That it presupposes that metaphysics are, um, uh, a waste of time at the very least, probably a Psyop against you, you know, by, by the powers that be, uh, in the world, whereas, you know, the stuff, you know, where we come from, you know, you and I, and I've been our various ways, this little corner business, right. It's sort of a reopening up of that frame or reconnecting maybe that frame to that, which has been forsaken. Now we started now when grim grizz, of course, when grim grizz here, we're doing a commentary and grim grizz. Yeah, I know. Here we are. Yeah. I love it. I love it. It's so, so, so, so, so, so, so, so, so, so, so, so, so, so, so, so, so, so, so, so, it's a channel of, it's a channel of a little over a thousand subs. And, uh, here we're, here we're, here we're commenting on it. Like, you know, like, like we're having a conversation about Jordan Peterson. It was the latest Jordan Peterson drop. That's right. It's the latest grim grizz drop that we're having a conversation on it. If people don't understand just how central grim grizz is to this entire effort, um, that's he's, uh, he's colonized well in a very interesting way, but we started, you know, we started, I think, okay, let me back up a little bit. Yeah. Irish Catholics, Italian Catholics, and I grew up among a fair amount of Italian Catholics in Northern New Jersey, who are a significant population. Um, and as a young man, the Italian girls were pretty good looking. So they had attention. Um, but the Irish Catholics, Italian Catholics, Dutch Calvinists, probably Norwegian Lutherans, all of these, all of these groups came in to the United States late 19th, early 20th century, of course, the, the two world wars and between the wars disrupted some of that that impacted the African-American population, which of course is a big part of my story. Great migration up to the North. And then after the second world war, you have this, the second world war is this interesting moment in the world where there's the United States is sort of galvanized for war, and it certainly takes place a significant part in the European theater, but in many ways, the Pacific theater is, is really where the United States becomes the, you know, the great hegemonic superpower, the great empire of the 20th century. That's right. And it, and it does so basically by mass production. I mean, the, the U S begins the war and the Japanese are just kicking America's butt, but of course the great, um, the great Japanese Admiral knows when they bring the United States into the war, the way that they did was sort of a gamble that hopefully, you know, the shock of Pearl, that the, the idea was that Americans are weak, they're, they're soft, they're comfortable that the shock of Pearl Harbor will make America sort of flinch back and say, no, and they don't understand this deep pride. Uh, and so America basically says, we're going to jet, we're going to destroy the Japanese by just burying them industrially. And of course that's exactly what happens in the war in the Pacific in Europe, of course, the, the Russians bury Germany, that not industrially, but by birth rate, we're just going to send waves of soldiers, human fodder, and they're, they might kill all these poor Russian soldiers, but Stalin doesn't care one way or another, we're going to grind them down. And then the two, the pressures of both sides, Germany collapses, et cetera, et cetera. Well, all of these religious groups in America that came into the middle of the 20th century with all of this spiritual formation, but many of these groups are set against each other. So, uh, a denomination like the Christian informed churches, you know, deeply all of that anti-Catholicism is very much in there. And I would imagine from the other side, the, I, you know, all of the Protestants and Catholics after a number of centuries are sort of still pitted against each other. What happens in this great movement in the United States is that they all become, you know, brothers and sisters in arms to, to fight the Japanese and the Germans, et cetera, et cetera, et cetera. And all of the formation that I think, I think when we're talking, I mean, because what we're really talking about is formation yesterday on the Freddie and Paul show. So I, I used the first, the first question and answer of the Heideberg catechism as my conclusion to the sermon this week. And of course, Nancy, Nancy will watch Nancy watches my videos. Uh, Nancy, uh, riffs on that and her little tail kit, tell comments are really important if you understand her story, because she says, and she's right when she was a little girl. She's a, she's a, she's basically a boomer when she was a little girl every week, in addition to the Christian school that you had, you also had catechism class taught by the minister or an elder and grades were assigned for catechism class. I mean, and so this process of formation was deep within the Christian reformed church and all sorts of things followed from that denominational identity, denominational confidence, uh, did not sacrificial giving on the part of people for the denomination, um, devotional practices at the home. Now, again, this was, this was fairly sectarian. I mean, people would comment in Western Michigan, evangelicals that, oh, the Christian reformed church, they're the only, they think they're the only ones that are, you know, if you're Christian reformed and you get, you know, Jesus welcomes you in, if you're reformed church of America, might have to do some proving, but of course, all bets are off on everyone else. Now, Paul, so we have these themes of confidence and formation. Right. Anyway, go ahead. Okay. Yeah. So this is great, right? So, so when in the Christian reform, uh, communities, when did, did, let's say, when did it, when was it not the case that a kid went to catechism class with a pastor or an elder and received grades? So sort of using that as the kind of the, the, the funny model, when did that stop? Or all depended on where those churches were within the urban monoculture. Ah, okay. Good. Okay. Keep going. When I was a seminarian in the 1980s, I, as part of my seminary field education, I had a job driving to Hudsonville, which is, which is now a bedroom community was an agricultural community outside of Grand Rapids. I drove to Hudsonville and I taught on Sunday morning. See, that was all, it was sort of a tradition. First, you had it midweek. Right. And then it went to Sunday morning instead of Sunday school. Ah, okay. And in fact, just recently, um, CW has been pestering me to do more dog fooding. And so this was, this was a book. Um, it was basically a commentary on the hyper catechism. So the Christian firm church used to just teach the catechism as such. Yep. And then it started creating materials to sort of help, you know, because they, they thought the catechism was just going to be, again, in the culture of the sixties and seventies, the catechism was thought to be, first of all, pedagogically, it was archaic because it was rote memorization. Teacher asked the questions, students memorize and gives the answer. And you're graded on how you can memorize the answer. I, my bet is what I'm saying now, there are perfect analogs in Catholicism. Well, I was just going to say, I'm looking for my copy of the Baltimore catechism, which is, you know, uh, in many respects, the, the, the fellow traveler here, you know, you and I like to talk about this notion of, of, uh, opponent processing and, and just the idea of a catechism itself, it to me is fascinating. And I, and I'm kicking myself, not, not doing a quick Google search before we jumped on here, but my guess is that there was a, a rush somewhere around, you know, 15 twenties or so to push out a lot of catechisms, right? Because all of a sudden propositional, uh, concerns, I took the forefront, uh, in, in the wake of, um, Luther is sort of sparking it. I mean, you and I could go for days and days and days on, on all this in a different time, but, but, you know, my guess is that, that catechisms proliferated, uh, and have continued to proliferate. Now, um, so, so, uh, do you have a rough date on the Heidelberg Catechism? Yeah, 1560s. 1560s. Okay. Right. So, um, which would then, you know, the, the, the, the corollary in the Catholic world would be the, the, the, the Trent, the Tridentine Catechism. Um, and, you know, I don't know the, I don't know all the permutations of it, but the one, uh, that would have been, um, preeminent here in the United States of America, which is based upon Trent, is the Baltimore Catechism. Baltimore, because Baltimore is the, um, oldest diocese in, in America and still has a sort of a position of prominence in that regard, even though it's not as big as some of the other ones now, of course. Because Baltimore was, I mean, Catholics didn't really come to America very early. And so Baltimore was sort of this strange. Yeah. Maryland. Yes. Maryland. So, so, um, so then, um, so like, for instance, so my mother was born in 1944. And so she would have been steeped in the Baltimore Catechism. And it's a series of questions and answers very similar to what you're, what you're, what you're saying here about the Heidelberg Catechism. And it was wrote, right? You memorized it. And so like, to this day, I can probably poke an 80 year old Catholic and I could probably, I could probably get those verbatim answers from them. Yep. Even though it is essentially abandoned wholesale, essentially overnight, uh, you know, 65, 66 ish. Yep. In the wake of the council. Yep. Right. And so, um, but it's, it's the same kind of thing. And that's why, you know, again, I don't want to sidetrack us here with discussions about the council. We've, we've done that before, but that's not the point of this conversation, but it sounds to me like in our varying, our various traditions, right? There was something that occurred sometime in the sixties, right? 60s, seventies, let's call it, in which this kind of, uh, focus on a catechism, a kind of axiomatic, um, starting from, uh, you know, arguing from, from axioms, um, you know, like a catechism or like Euclid or, you know, any of those kinds of things, um, that that got abandoned. And so then what are you then? Like, what do you do? So I can sort of get, you know, what in, in the CRC tradition, as far as formation is concerned, once it, it moved away from the explicit instruction in the Heidelberg catechism, what took its place? I think we have to talk about pedagogy, which is interesting, of course, because you are a teacher and of course pastors, it's one of the things pastors do. I think a big part of you're exactly right. Last time I taught the Heidelberg catechism to my Sunday school class, that was pre-YouTube days. I was always, before my father died too, I, I, I wondered how this was going, gonna go in my, in my Bible, in my Sunday school class, because I had a lot of people with no CRC backgrounds and they loved the Heidelberg catechism. I was really sorry. I talked to my father, was still alive then. He said, every time I taught the Heidelberg catechism at Northside, people loved it. I thought, that's interesting. But now when, when the whole, the whole reason for the, the emergence of these kinds of books, now it, it was so funny because I, I remember seeing this book around when I was a little kid, it was a little ahead of me, but reading it now, it just drips of, you know, you have kind of 60s, 70s art. Oh yeah. I could give you, I mean, again, I could, I could give you, you know, multiple iterations of this in the Catholic register as well, right? In it's, and you know, it's graduated. So there's like the Baltimore catechism one, which sort of upgrades to two to three to four and four was, I believe of memory serves, four was like the adult one. Like it's, so you kind of work your way up to it. And like, there's the sort of the funny art from the sixties and then the funny art from the seventies. And then the sort of the, you know, then the, the, the iterations in the eighties, you know, it's just, you know, cringe, you know, and all of that. But, you know, it was, it was essentially, it sounds to me, it was a sales document. Sorry. It was a, yeah, it was a sales document. Wait, maybe it's a catechism masquerading as a sales document, or maybe it's a sales document masquerading as catechism. I'm not sure which one, but it's a sales doc. Well, pedagogy was critical in this. Yeah. Okay. Because one of the things of course that had happened was a big critique of, you know, what my, one of my favorite professors in seminary was actually, you know, the, the, the, the, the, the, he had been a school teacher and then he had been, he had gotten a doctorate in something, in religious education. He'd been a school teacher in Christian school. And he, he talked about mug to jug education, which was from my, from my mug to your jug. And so the point of the, the point of education was for the student to regurgitate in this case with a catechism. But you use the word. So I just, so it just, I just want to note that it's so hard to even talk about this without adopting the language of the people who employed it to attack it. Yes, exactly. Exactly. Cause this was now the irony of that is of course, the fact that in critiquing this form of education, they actually used it because I just used the word of that catechism. And the, in the supposed dismemberment of that particular form of, of, of pedagogy. And in that particular form of pedagogy, because that particular form of pedagogy was dismissed as not being sufficient for Christian formation. Because of course, what we wanted from the students is to engage critically with the material. And in that day, rephrase the material in your own words. Okay. Why was that? Cause we, I get it. I heard it too. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Am I away? Um, why, what's the boogeyman there? You know what I mean by that? I know exactly what the boogeyman was there because of everything that was. So this, these silos of religious formation and, and, and inter-Christian religious warfare that, you know, had been that, that basically for hundreds of years had been maintained. Yes. Was well, I mean, one of the things that we had in our documents was all about the detestable, you know, the, the Roman, the, the Roman mass was idolatrous. Sure. Sure. Because of course you add images and you add, and so, and so all of this stuff was maintained and you formed children with this language so that they would get the heebie-jeebies when they buy it went by a Roman Catholic church. I still have that built into me today. That kind of formation works well, but I think part of what happens in the second world war is where you have Christian reformed youth, Irish Catholic youth, Italian Catholic, you begin to have inter-marriage, you're looking across the bunk in your transport across the Pacific and yeah, he's got his rosary and you're looking at him saying, well, that's idolatrous, that rosary. You're looking at all of this stuff, but in the end you're in the foxhole with this guy and you eventually say, I'm not so sure he's not going to heaven with me. Yeah, that's right. And so we, we do. And again, this is, this is behind the council, of course, too. You have these experiences that begin to say, maybe we need to look at the old ways and reconsider them. And I think you and I, by virtue of the fact that we have a friendship and we're talking about this video, we're making it together, we're comparing notes. We would say, yes, that's true, but we're doing a reassessment of all of this and saying, okay, in the process, what, what, what it appears, first of all, we had a confidence in our churches that we no longer have. And part of what was lost in the transport ships going across the Pacific was that confidence because a lot of that confidence was built on I'm right and you Catholics are wrong. And that's a, that, that sort of psychologically is a very strong thing for us. Yeah. And so we did lose confidence, but along the way, and I think again, then with the counterculture, there was an American, I think the, the civil rights movement had a big piece of this because the, the civil rights movement pointed out the, the, the, it was, it was impossible for mainliners, eventually evangelicals, Roman Catholics to not look at the systemic multi-generational treatment of African Americans and say, wow, did, did, did we ever miss that? And if we missed that, what else did we miss? I think there's a big part of the rise of the urban monoculture where we now have a catechism involving racism, quite rightly, you know, this was, this was what I was raised in, but at the same time, all of these other questions. So then suddenly when the civil rights movement sort of becomes the, the, the, the point of the spear for a whole bunch of other liberation movements, well, you've treated African American poorly. What about women? Yeah. What about gays? Right. What about, you know, and then everything comes in and at some point you begin to say, well, well, where really is the center of this gospel? And, you know, along the way for the last number of decades, the Christian Forum Church has been looking at the Roman Catholic Church and thought, well, have we, have we sort of, you know, have we sort of misrepresented the Roman Catholics? And I would say, yes, we did. And, but, okay, but what then does that mean? Where then is the gospel and how do we form children in it? And I think, whereas sort of the confidence built in generations before has been lost. And we're at a place where now suddenly we're looking around for confidence and identity and new centers. And, and then, you know, even pedagogically to say, well, you know what, memorization, it's a pretty profound pedagogical tool for children because guess what? You know, I can recite how many ditties from television. Now we're back to Grim Grizzland from the, from the, from the world of set, cuckoo for Cocoa Puffs, Frosted Flakes. They're great. I mean, and he likes it exactly. So we, so we threw out kind of the, the programmatic repetition and formation by memorization of our youth and gave it all to set. Yeah, that's right. So the liturgies, yeah. And so, and so they're, they're, there became all of these sort of subtle and crypto liturgies and dramas that we oriented our lives around. So even something as silly as Saturday morning cartoons, right. And whatever, you know, fill in the blank, but no, I think that's exactly right. You know, so for me, you know, it was Dukes of Hazzard on Friday evenings, you know, we would rush home from the pizza place so that we could, you know, get up in front of the TV to watch Bo and Luke Duke, right, or what have you. So, right. So, so there was an abandonment of the notion of, of repetitions as, as, as, as a formative reality. And therefore there was this sort of opening up to the extempore or, or, you know, you know, the, the spontaneous or, or, or, or what have you. It's almost like we wanted to have the feeling without the content. You know, we wanted to, you know, there's this, you know, in, in a rush toward, you know, I'm sure you heard this buzzword as magic word all the time, which was relevance, right. You know, the church needs to be relevant, relevant, relevant. So I, I've always been struck, right. I mean, exactly. Right. And again, I'm sorry, I don't have a, my, my Catholic versions of these things, but they're exactly the same. It's exactly the same thing. So now Paul, I'm interested that, that, you know, we, we heard this word relevant growing up all the time as a fear word, right. That we're not relevant. And, and yet here in this corner, we talk about relevance realization all the time. So I wonder what kind of connections you make between that and what was, what has Verbeke even able to get us to re-see about the word relevant? Yeah. Well, first of all, it's sort of re it's relocated into a different area. Okay. But I, I want to, I want to, before we go too far into that, I want to get into the, there was a reason behind the dismissal of rote memorization as a formative tool. And it was, there was a hermeneutic of suspicion operating there in that basically the argument was these prior generations have been, and another word relevance of course, was the word you wanted indoctrination. Yeah. Yeah. Indoctrination. Yeah. That's right. These people were indoctrinated into the Heideberg Catechism. And now what they are, are resistant to, and in some cases they were, they are resistant to critiques about racism. And again, in the Christian foreign church, there was a battle that was fought over Timothy Christian schools and, and the way it sort of, but just in terms of temperamentally conservatives of course would say, no, we're going to just, we're going to keep using rote memorization. And it was the, the progressives who tended to be urban who would say, oh, you know, they're, you know, you know, who else, you know, who else likes rote memorization, they're racists like rote memorization. Exactly. Yeah. Right. So it's a suite, right? So we think of these things as sort of a, a lot of these things are sort of put together like a, like a, like a combo package, right? And so, you know, you're going to take all of these things, sorry, not sorry. Right. And so, oh, well, if you don't like this thing, then you need to take everything else away too. This sort of this, this collection that needs to be disambiguated. Right. The urban rural divide continues to, to sort of, this continues to sort of happen as the urban churches. We're the churches that are, we are anti-racist. We're the churches that we are not legalistic because again, part of that package, part of that suite was sabbatarianism. So we're not bound by those. And so you could easily sort of poke the sabbatarians and say, well, they're legalists. You had Pharisees. And then, you know, then in terms of the biblical narrative, you can play off those Heideberg catechism memorizing Sabbath eating at home people as Pharisees. And we are the new liberated Jesus followers who, you know, are not living under the law. And we're the ones of course, who are loving the, the, the, we're loving the racial minorities and we're loving the sexual minorities. And where, I mean, you just, you just set up this whole, you set up this whole system of assimilations and groupings whereby the urban monoculture is clearly the, the coming of the age to come. Yeah. And all these recalcitrant conservatives back there still doing Heideberg catechism on Wednesday after school. Right. Holding onto their wooden clogs. Right. Holding onto, that's exactly right. Right. And I can, I can just imagine exactly the same thing happening in Roman Catholic spaces. Oh yeah. No, it's, it's nuns and their habits. It's, it's the rosary, you know, it's the, it's, it's all of those distinctives. It's the meat on Fridays, you know, the, sorry, the no meat on Fridays. I mean, it's all of those distinctives get, get just decluttered, just whoosh, you know, just, just taken away because we're not going to do that stuff anymore. Right. You know, that, that's, that's old stuff, right. You know, but again, like in, in, in my world, the world, or rather the world that I showed up in, which had just recently been decluttered, you know, that was done from the top. Yes. Oh yes. Again, you know, we can get into all the nitty gritty, but essentially the way that the rank and file parishioner at St. Joe's down the street experienced it was this came from on high and it was all whooshed away. And now we're going to start fresh and we have guitars at mass now. Yep. And, and so, and what happens then, and so this is being played out. Of course, the Christian church is a far tinier scale than the Roman Catholic church. And, and so now suddenly, of course the women in church office fight and the Christian from church was sort of peak baby boomer, urban monoculture hegemony in terms of the wave that goes through the Christian informed church. Right. And so they, so, so then, you know, women in church, women in ministry then becomes just the next, the next thing on that list. And then of course, this 25 year fight in the Christian informed church over this finally, finally gets settled because the Christian from church is that exhaustion is tired of this fight. We have to get it off of our, our synodical dockets because it's the only thing that's occupying the attention, the relevance realization of the Christian informed church. So then we have this, we have this pragmatic compromise, basically the local option and about, you know, 30 to 50,000 members of the Christian from church leave from the most conservative area. Got it. But then we also begin to see conservatism starting to come up. And this is what really surprises. Yeah. The, the started coming up in urban areas. Yeah. We're like conservatism isn't supposed to be in urban areas. So then of course you get all the way to now in the Christian from church and the fight over same sex marriage and all of the leadership had been formed by this wave. And now suddenly they're, they're just in shock because, but, and, and they don't realize that number one, many in the urban monoculture just kept moving. It just kept moving into assimilation in the urban monoculture. And so- Because you can really, you know, not to be too cute about it, but you really can only serve one master. Right. And again, I'm not, I'm not trying to score cheap points here, but I just being just, just being very clear about it, right? You know, you know, what spirit are you following? And it would appear that the spirit of, if the summa bonum is liberation, then this, the summa bonum doesn't in that iteration does not seem to have carved out a place for it. Piety. Right. And, and Piety is met with suspicion. Right. Of course. Yeah. I mean, that's just it. And so even, even though there's all of these, and this, of course, James K. Smith writes about this a decade ago in the Christian firm, there's all of these implicit liturgies. Yes. That have in fact been forming the urban monoculture. And so now suddenly, because of the way the Christian forum church works in terms of synods and classes and delegates and all of that, suddenly you get to Senate 2022 and 2023. And the progressives who have just by virtue of their filters, imagine they are the vanguard of history and everyone will sweep along. And it's only a matter of time. Just go back and listen to those sentence. They're all on YouTube speech after speech after speech. So the progressives are basically reciting their liturgies. And then the votes are taken. And it's like, we're 30% of the church. Yeah. 30% of the votes. Right. It's like, we want a two thirds majority. Yeah. Yeah. You're past that buddy. Yeah. And I'd look around and say, your votes are no longer there because your churches are no longer there. You have no fruit, right? This is, this is my, this is my constant refrain, you know, with those would be liberationists in my own church, you know, they don't have children. And I mean that literally, sorry, physically, I mean that physically they don't have children. But I also mean it metaphorically, right, that they do not bear, they don't have a legacy in the various ways in which we understand that word. And of course, similarly interesting because my church has a celibate clergy. So the only way that the church recreates itself is to have, you know, a particularly fecund laity. And, and, but what they are, they have found out that even if the primary preachers of the gospel are celibate men, in theory, what the gospel is still matters. Right. And I remember this distinctly, right, that, you know, when I was 17 years old, I made the very quick deduction, sorry, I'm just gonna shut this off. I made the very quick deduction. Sorry. No, no, you're good. You're good. You're good. I made a very quick deduction that if what you're, if this is the gospel, you know, that, that you're, you're telling me, I don't need the church. I don't need you. I can march when I need to march. I can go to a soup kitchen if I need to go to a soup kitchen, but I'm just gonna skip all the other bits. Like, why do I care about confession? Why do I care about the Eucharist? I go to a therapist if I find that there are things that need to be worked through. Amen. Amen. Right. And so, so, so that, that, that the gospel that they taught was, you know, again, I know I'm being somewhat me about this. It's, it's, it's a dead letter. It's a dead gospel. And, and so when I hear you, when I, when I was listening to you talk about the, when, when the progressives woke up after one of the synods and were like, oh my gosh, we don't have the votes. It's because you forgot the most basic fundamental reality, which is the next generation. You're so busy trying to be ahead of the curve of, you know, history as if history has a shape. I mean, right. I mean, that's, that's the implicit things that you buy in with the progressivist myth, the mythos. You know, you, you, you were all worried about being in front of the arc of history, but you forgot the future. The future of your institution, that in fact, the church mattered. Now, there are deep conversations to be had here with respect to church and culture. And a lot of the other conversations that we're having now, like Dread Christian Nationalism and Christian imperialism and, and what happens in terms of, you know, one speed versus two speed with John Calvin looking to make all of Geneva, a Christian city and the Puritans, when they come to new haven Connecticut and they set it out and you know, these, these, these Puritans are coming into the new world and they're, they're establishing the new Jerusalem. That's what they're doing. Yeah. Which is interesting, of course, because Constantinople, you're establishing the new Jerusalem, which is Constantinople. And so all of these themes just running through history, but that that's, and so then you set up the battle. And of course, the main line, the main line Protestants, this, so I think when we get all the way down to it, I mean, because of course the Protestant and the Protestant reformation and Luther and Calvin and England and all of this stuff, they're trying to rescue the gospel from something. And now here we are today, Protestant and Catholic looking at what has happened. And so we want to rescue the gospel from something because it seems to have gone astray. And I think part of, we're talking about the fact that in a catechism like the Heidelberg, that we're, we're, we're attempting to, we're attempting to fix the gospel. I don't mean fix in terms of repair. I mean, fix in terms of concretize set. We're tending to set the gospel into this document. And therefore, if we can reliably transpose this document from this page into the memory of people, we can deliver something into this world and all of its four, Verbeckian four piece of knowing sort of way. And, and, and part of what we look back now on and say, wow, there was, there was some success in that. And yet we also look back on it and say, and there were some other things in there too, that we're, that we're thinking about. And I think part of what we get to is the fact that the gospel, the gospel is a kind of thing. And of course, the apostle Paul says that the, the angels epithumia looking into this thing, because they, they, they're always, even the angels are always trying to get their minds around this thing, that the, the only, the, the, the, and of course, this is deeply Christian, the gospel is best instantiated in a human being. Of course, as Christians, we say the archetypal gospel instantiation is of course Christ, but then into human beings and then into communities. I think that was part of the, what's going on in terms of the Protestant, the Calvin, we want to instantiate this into a city. But we, but, but okay, we're going to try and instantiate it into text on a page in a particular form and, and, and to not, and to not, you know, speak ill of, let's say, so this is, this was a product of Gord Spikes, Spikeman, who was a, who was, I didn't have met Calvin, but he taught at Calvin and he wrote this and he wrote a systematic theology that I picked up, you know, not saying it again, but, but they felt something, they, they felt something in the counterculture movement where they said, there needs to be a further transposition. We no longer have confidence in the catechism. And so we're going to try to transpose the catechism into something like this, but of course the, the, the gospel needs to be transposed into our culture in a way so that we no longer abuse African-Americans or Jews or Catholics. You know, people seldom remember that the Klan was not just, you know, maybe their fiercest, their fiercest hatred was against African-Americans, but they really hated the Catholics and the Jews too. Right next to it is the Catholic and the Jews. Yeah, I know that that's true. How are you using this word transpose? Help me out just a little bit. Well, I am thinking about Lewis's, did a really good essay on transpositions. Okay. That it's, it's again, one of his essays. It's a short work. It's easily found. Yeah. But when we think about, so there's the gospel and let's, let's assume that in many ways, the gospel, what's the relationship between the gospel and the Holy Spirit? Pretty close. What's the relationship between gospel and Jesus? What's the gospel and the father? Okay. So, but, but how does the gospel become flesh and how is the gospel, how does the gospel take on instantiation? And so we have these gospels in a book. And so we already have this relationship between logos and gospel. So, I want to jump in here real quick though. This is, this is one of those weird things where, you know, if you scratch like a, like a hardcore Catholic guy, right? Who's like loves apologetics and does all this kind of stuff and might have a particular, you know, love of going after Protestants, you know, if a classic sort of Catholic talking point is, well, you know, how did all those people get saved before the books? Yeah. And, and again, I, just for the record, if, if, if there are any Catholics watching here, like I basically agree with that. I'm not, I'm not arguing with the Catholic talking point here. I'm just pointing it out there because that to me was a real watershed moment in my own figuring out where I fit in with my own denomination and am I, should I be a Protestant? You know, all those kinds of things. And I'm talking early on and, and I, and I remember coming across, well, that's weird to me, right? That there, there was a time, a pretty big chunk of time in which there was nothing written down, not, certainly nothing collected. So, well, that's interesting. So then, well, how did it happen? And I remember late much later on reading a novel called Quo Vadis. And, you know, as you know, I'm a, I'm a, I'm a story guy, I'm a lit guy. And it was the first time that I encountered the character, the character of St. Peter. And there's a great scene in the novel in which the, the, the, the, the protagonist and, What's the name of the novel? It's called Quo Vadis. It's written by Sienkiewicz. It's a Polish novel. Is it in English? I don't read Latin. It's in English. Oh yeah, it's all translated. Yeah. This is like one of the most famous novels of all time. Like it's like one of the most widely published novels of all time. It's really quite good. When was it written? Oh gosh. I've been meaning to talk to you about this forever. I don't know. Look it up. Do a Google search. Google me while I, while I talk about it. So, Jamie, you're my Jamie today. Well, I would really like to be Jamie. I think it'd be a fun job. Anyway, 1951 film. Okay. So it's a film. So I guess it's the thirties. Sienkiewicz is the last name. Sienkiewicz. Sienkiewicz maybe. Yeah. In Poland, it's an ancient Rome during the rule of Emperor Nero in 64. The novel tells the story of the romance between Marcus Venetius, a young pagan Roman officer, and Ligia, a Christian barbarian princess raised in a Roman household. Sounds interesting. No, no, it's a, it's a, it's a great novel. Okay. Number one, it's a great novel. If you guys, if you're in the novels, read it. Trust me. So, but, so this is okay. I've been meaning to talk to you about this forever. So when I read Holland's Dominion, okay, I'm reading this thing and I'm, and I'm thinking like, yeah, yeah, of course, of course, of course, of course. And I realized that this novel tells the story that Holland captures in Dominion. And I mean it this way. The Roman officer falls in love with Ligia and he doesn't understand why she won't sleep with him. So you have this encounter of the pagan sexual ethic and this Christian sexual ethic. And, and you really see, you know, that was my first sort of incarnate encounter with, with, with, with a, with a Roman who was being Roman, right? The way that Holland talks about, you know, the, the, this in, in his Dominion. So at any rate, when, so you see it all unfolding and as he falls in love with her and he is sort of being catechized in a way by her example, she takes him to the catacombs and they, and he meets Peter. Oh, yeah. Like Peter, like he's there like doing his thing, right? Yeah. And so, and so, so then, of course, my mind is popping at this point being like, oh my gosh, that's right. Like on some radically one-to-one level, everybody who now calls themselves Christian owes that gift, that fact to somebody somewhere 2000 years ago shook hands with, with, with, with, with Peter, with Paul, like the person, you know, and then your mind just explodes. Like, well, what did he do? Did he like give him a website? Did he give him a catechism? No, of course not. The whole point was that we gathered together, right? And you see, then you start to, you start to make sense out of all those hymns you sang in Vacation Bible School, you know, and, you know, they'll know we're Christians by our love, by our love, you know, and then you're like, oh, but like actually, like, you know, it's no abstraction. It's a real incarnate thing, you know, so, so, so the formation then is transjective, I think is what, what Vervecky would say here. Like it's formed person to person, yes, or person to person, right? There's no, there's no pamphlet, there's no bullet points. Now that comes in much later, that that's a real thing. And I don't mean to lie over that, but, but at its, at its core, it was, you know, I mean, can you imagine that, Paul? I mean, can you imagine just like being a guy like living in Ephesus, let's say, right? And you're going about your business, selling fruit or whatever it is you're selling in the market, and you, you meet this guy. And your first inclination, of course, is like, this is a crazy Jew, like, what does he have to do with me? And then I'll, you know, listen, I mean, what must that have been like? I mean, talk about charisma, charismatic. I mean, that must have been, well, it miraculous, miraculous. Well, I think your initial question, I think is exactly right. And in terms of how I understand my tradition is Christians are made by the Holy Spirit. Now that's punting in a way. Yeah, no, no, no. But, you know, but at the same time, when I think about, of course, the Protestants had this critique of apostolic succession, I can understand if all you've seen are a bunch of fairly corrupt, corrupt. Yeah, totally. You'd have a little skepticism of apostolic succession, but that's very much what we're talking about. It's something that's transmitted person to person. And, but, but sometimes it's transmitted by a book, you know, you have these. So Dante, the books are clearly a technology to aid and assist and to flatten the curve, maybe, you know, so that I don't, you look, I'm a book guy. I mean, I love books. I see in them a great value, but it's still like, there's a kind of a witness that the book kind of almost represents a one-to-one this. Right. And, and the, you know, I've always had this, again, when I talk about the end of the protest, now, again, when I say end, I don't mean like, Oh, it ends tomorrow. No, it's the Protestant protest. Oh, yeah. Okay. Yeah. Sorry. Sorry. Yeah. The Protestant protest. And it's not like the Protestant protest is going to end tomorrow. And it's, you know, the end of the Protestant protest will probably in some ways, like the end of the Roman empire. I love the rest of this history had a, you know, a couple of episodes on when I, I never thought I went to the Roman empire. And it's actually an extremely difficult question to answer because in some ways the Roman empire is still with us. I mean, when I go down to the Capitol here in Sacramento and I look at that building, it's like, why does that building look like it does Roman empire is still with us right here in the middle of Sacramento. So no, I think that's, I think that's a great question. And I think it's a, it's a timely question. And it's important. When I was thinking about this conversation this morning before I got on, I was thinking, yeah, what are we going to talk about? Because in many ways, by the way, it's hilarious that both of us have that thought. And like, honestly, if we had world and time enough, we probably just wouldn't stop talking for like, you know, 19 hours. But anyway, go ahead. That's that's, that's, we've been there 10,000 years. That's what we'll wind up doing. Among other things. So, you know, when I, when I was thinking about, okay, defense against the dark arts, and I was thinking about, yeah, all of these, you know, so often the defense against the dark arts professor at Hogwarts is right there in the middle of this embrittlement. But the way you set it up initially is important because a lot of what happened in the counterculture and the assimilation of our churches in that culture was exactly what you just said, where we no longer need to worry about talking about Protestant Catholic differences anymore. And again, part of what's key in this little corner is we like talking about differences between denominations We like talking about differences between denominations, but we like talking about it in a different way. Yeah. Yeah. And I loved visiting you. First of all, this is another one of the little videos that I thought of making this morning. I'm doing these on my membership channel now, just these little cell phone videos, because, you know, visiting, we're doing it through a personal network now. We're not, I haven't gotten a book to read about all about Catholicism. If I go and visit Kale on this campus, which is monastic in origin, and I walk with you into the chapel, which is a beautiful building, and I noticed that, and of course, this is new for me, I noticed that when we walk into the chapel, you have your rituals and your movements that, and I watched that it's like, that's interesting. You genuflect to the tabernacle and you bow to the altar. Okay. So the altar is the place where the sacrifice occurs, think of Aslan, right? So that's the altar of sacrifice. And then the tabernacle is the holding of the Eucharist, of the consecrated post. Right. So that's the sort of the two movements you make when you walk in. So now I am a child of generations of the protest, whereas of course, I'm also reading, I'm also always reading too many books at once. I'm also reading Bruce Gordon's biography of John Calvin, which is, okay, almost everyone would agree it's the best biography out there of Calvin. Okay. And you have to understand that these, these Luther, another interesting thing about the reformers that Erie nails right at the beginning of his book, they're all people of a selective generation. It's amazing, right? It's like in the corollary, the corollary for us, right, is that if we're thinking about it in boomer, gen X, gen Z, millennial terms, they're millennials, right? Or maybe they're gen Z's. So if Erie, if I'm remembering my Erie correctly, this is his book, Reformations, by the way, folks, they are all born after the printing press has been, they've never known a world in which the printing press hasn't been a reality. Right. Right. And so, and the new world is discovered. Right. Exactly. And that the new world has been, but actually, I believe the new world, no, you're, you're exactly right. Wait, it's right on the cusp there. Right. Well, so new world 1492. So, you know, and then the Gutenberg is 1537. No, sorry, printing presses 1450s, I believe. Yes. Yes. And then, and then, and then Columbus is 14. Okay. So it's going to take a little time for that printing press to really get going too. But they, but they, but they, but it's part of their social imaginary. Yes. Right. And I think that's where Taylor is so important for me here. Right. So that this is a very specific generation in which they, they know about the new world and the Gutenberg press has always been a reality. So books, and of course, books were very quickly, it was, they proliferated very quickly. Cause when people realize that, oh my gosh, I don't, you know, I can get a book, it became like a thing. And we can see this exact same thing happen with our own technologies here. Yeah. Yeah. You know, it's like, it's like high speed internet. It's like once it was a thing, everybody got it like within five years. Yeah. Right. So this age of breakthroughs. Yeah. You know, Luther born 1482 or 1483. Yeah. And then you look at 14, 1480, 1482, 1483, 1484, 1485, so Luther was 11 when, when Columbus, it's your 10 or 11 when Columbus discovered the new world. Yeah. And that's just crazy. Yes. And, and it was, what was amazing when I read Erie's book, cause I read the chapter. It's like, yeah, all of these years of education, no one ever pointed that out. Yeah. As if it was incidental. Yeah. Like, oh yeah, by the way, you know, Columbus, Gutenberg, whatever, let's get back to Luther. Like, no, like they are formed by their social imaginary. Just like we are. Like, and that's, that's why it's exactly how my mind was popping when I, when I, when I was, when I was looking at that, right. It's, it's, it's like, oh, of course, because, so if you, if you had been 20 years older than Luther, let's say, you would have had a memory of a world without books and without Columbus. So therefore without, you know, doubling the size of what you thought the world was, let's just say, what you think of as possible and real is radically different. Yes. Pivotal, you know, and I called it on Twitter the other day. I sort of called it, it's a sort of a, it's, it's akin to the, it's an axial revolution. Yes. And I think, I, so even just looking at this little corner, Peterson, he's a year older. He was born in 62. Yep. I was born in 63. Vervecky, very much the same age. I think John's maybe two years older than I am. Yeah. But Joe's on the young end. Yeah. You look at, you look at the Weinsteins, you look at all, you look at Sam Harris, you look at all. Baron. Yes. Bishop, Bishop Baron. Baron, he's a little old. When was Baron born? I'm pretty sure he was, I'm pretty sure he was born maybe, maybe late fifties. He's not an old guy. No, but he's more boomer than I am. That's true. 59. Yeah. Okay. So you're, you're, you're, you cheat toward the Gen X range of the boom. Yeah, that's right. Okay. Yep. All right. Go ahead. He's more boomer than I am when he taught, because, because Dylan was already passe when you came around. Yeah. Yeah. When I come around. Yeah. I mean, culture is moving that fast. Yeah. I know what you mean. I know what you mean. But, but okay, think about the moon landings. Imagine. Right. If we went to the moon and there was a world of people on the moon. That's right. That's right. That's right. That could be enslaved and they had minerals that we wanted and they had crops that we wanted and they have souls that need to be saved. Right. I mean, it's like, it's, it's, that's, I know people don't cynical people don't like to, to see that as a salient part of their imaginary, but it absolutely was. In fact, that's the, the miracle of, of, of colonialization, oddly enough, is that the Pope said, sorry, they're people deal with it. Yeah. And, and, and it was, but that was a, that was a raging. And then you look at all of the racism and especially once evolution comes on, it's so amazing how people forget what all the debates were at the end of the 19th century with respect to a race and evolution. I mean, it wasn't until the second world war that that sort of gets rung out of the culture because after seeing what Hitler did and what the Japanese were thinking, it's like, we don't really want to do this. Well, well, remember, you know, the, the, the, the book to read here is the war against the weak. You know, it was not the fact that Hitler's racism, the fact that eugenics and racism get hung on Hitler's neck is pretty historically convenient because it was a much bigger deal in America than it was in, in Germany. It has to be pointed out. Yep. Yep. Yep. But okay. So back to the reformation period, you have, you have this massive transformation in the imaginary of Europe. And of course you have Spain, which had just recently sort of been rested. I mean, before then everybody's thinking Catholic Islam. And of course the Jews are, you know, sprinkled in this mix, but that's the big, the big enemy is Islam, right? That's who they're right. That's who they're perpetually at war with for centuries. And now suddenly Spain gets de Islamified. Right. And of course the Jews have to leave and those are probably my ancestors. Yeah. And then, and then suddenly Spain, which is sort of this new country. It's a new thing, right? It's right. It's, it's, it's Isabella and Ferdinand, right? They, they joined forces in their marriage to create Spain as we know it. Right. And Portugal, when, when Columbus, of course, an Italian goes to Portugal and wants money to go that way, the Portuguese are like, you're out of your mind. Everybody knows there's something over there. Yeah. Everybody else knows it's too far. Yeah. We're not going to do this. And, and the Spanish are like, what do we got? You know, well, they took a flyer. They took a flyer, like whatever here, take three votes. Yeah. And then suddenly it catapults Spain into this Catholic superpower. Yeah. Which that of course is going to set the set the Protestants as tremendously terrified of Roman Catholics for now generations to come into the Americas. And people wonder why so much anti-Catholicism in America? They're scared to death of the French and the Spanish. Right. And especially, you know, again, people forget this because we're used to looking at map, the current maps, but you know, your, your, your folk up in the Netherlands, they were run by the Spaniards. Yeah. They revolted. Right. You know, so it's, it's like these weird empires were strange and morphed and yeah, very strange. And if you, and even back to the hypercatechism, if you, if you're in Northern Germany, if you're in Germany and you want to resist on the economics, the politics, all of these things, you of course, adopt a different religion. So we need to write this catechism. So our children grow up just like in a May and, and you know, what's happening in schools right now is that they are writing catechisms so that their children grow up and you know, a boy and a girl, that's no big deal. And what you do sexually, it's no big deal. As long as you feel fulfilled and happy about it. And that's the thing about curriculums, right? The curriculums are, are catechisms and, and you really need to understand that. And that doesn't mean it's bad. I, I, you know, cause I want to be very clear. I don't think either of us are saying catechisms are a bad thing. I'm there inevitable in some real way. They just simply have to be balanced by a, what I would call it, a kind of an embodied, embodied communities. Right. But you know, because what, what happened in, in, in my church is that after, after the councils, there was all kinds of confusion. Right. And so finally, John Paul, the second commissions, the writing of a new catechism. And so when I was in college, the catechism of the Catholic church was, was printed and promulgated and all of a sudden overnight, all of this kind of stuff that had been passed on to students and families as well, Catholics can now believe X, Y, and Z all of a sudden that gets like, wait, what? Because that's not what the catechism say. So that like ticked off all of the, I would say the progressive element in the church because they love not having an explicit catechism because they could just be the catechism. Right. And so, so that fight, you know, John Paul, the second sort of put a stopper in some way, shape or form on that. Of course, there's a whole story afterwards, but, but, but there's something unsatisfying about a catechism. That's just a catechism, right? If the catechism doesn't come out of the lived experience of a community, whatever you want to call this, right? If a catechism is, isn't a sort of a natural outgrowth of worship and culture, then it, you know, you, then it, then it's like, it's, you know, it's alien. And therefore, it's going to be perceived by a certain segment of your population as colonial. Yep. Yep. And, you know, we asked before, okay, how does, how does the gospel get transmitted if you don't have a catechism? Well, and the same with the urban monoculture. How does the urban monoculture get, get, get transmitted if you keep your catechism implicit? In a sense, it's a little easier because, especially depending on what exactly your, your gospel is, you can keep tinkering with it as you go. And because of basically the perpetual amnesia of successive generations and human beings, you can very quickly forget that, oh yeah. And so then suddenly you read an old book. So one of the things that's happening, of course, in public education now is where do you teach, how do you teach students in California, California history in the fourth grade, all California students are required to take California history. California history is enormously fraught because you've got the missions. Yeah. And so they go from being these beacons of, of, of civilization and light to these sources of, of incarceration and oppression and white supremacy. Right. And, and now like overnight, right. And now you have to get rid of all of the books that of course, are they have the catechisms of the previous generations. You gotta get rid of those, but now they've got sort of a weird dual system where on white, on one hand, there's this implicit catechism in the culture that says, don't expect the heirs of oppression to educate the heirs of the colonial lists. That's right. Because don't put that burden on them. Okay. Don't make me do the work. Yeah. I don't like to do the work. Okay. So, and don't let anybody who's not from that group write a book to educate the heirs of the oppressors in that. Okay. So you know what's happening now? There are no books, nothing, nothing. There are no books, which means that, you know, fourth grade every year, another class goes through fourth grade. That's means you're going to have generations of people that are going to be like, what's the history of California? Well, right. So it's, it's elective amnesia and, and what, you know, that's really perilous territory, you know, because all concerned, right, right. Exactly. Exactly. And, you know, you know, a lot of what animates my attraction to the corner has, has been well, well, I mean, look, what first got your attention, what, what, the way I first got your attention was that I wrote a piece, basically bemoaning the fact that the cultural transmission of my particular church was not passed on to me. Right now I'm, you can, that becomes a pattern then for the way that I see the world. And I, and I hold on, I hold to that. Keep talking, I gotta fill my drink. Keep talking. Yeah. And I, and I hold to that, right. But the, the, but what I found out as a young adult who started to do a deep read into my own tradition is that why didn't anybody ever tell me about any of this stuff? Like, this is great stuff. Like what, what has gone wrong? You know, why, why wasn't I given my inheritance? Right. And so, so, so therefore if it's true in this way, it was also true in just in terms of, you know, like an English class or, you know, a film class or, or a culture class that all this stuff had been withheld from me. Now, I, at the time, I didn't know if that was like, did somebody just forget, you know, did or was there some kind of purpose behind this? And, you know, I guess at this point, I think it was probably on purpose in a very real way. Like in other words, there were those who had been tasked to mine, mind the vineyard. Right. Had pillaged it. Right. And, and when the sun came back, you know, to see what was up, they killed him. Right. That's the pattern. That's right. That's right. And what's so interesting is because I'm a bit older than you. And I think it's again, these, these people born late Bromers, early Xers. Yeah. That saw enough of the old world. Yeah. And of course the, the old world and the new world sort of had this, this urban rural dynamic too. So if you wanted to go visit the old world, you could still find it when I was young, even when I was in college, you could still find the old world. Yeah. I mean, look, look at our friend Rod. I mean, Rod's a perfect, he was just writing about this, I think today or yesterday, he was just talking about the fact that he grew up in the sort of this weird rural world, but then would have had had urban experience and then would go back to the real world, the earth or the rural world, and then go back to the urban. You know, he, so he was, he's a classic liminal figure. And I think that's really what you're talking about here, Paul, is that, you know, that you, you all are occupying this kind of this liminal space, enough of the old and right there in the midst of the new that you can, you can kind of do this flip back and forth. And so, and I would put myself at the tail end of that too, because I grew up in the South and I think there was still some vestiges of, certainly there was a residual Catholic piety that still existed in the world I grew up in, but also there was a sort of a residual culture that was still in being maintained. It did not get run through, but, but, but, but, you know, I would run to the mailbox once a month to receive the Oracle from Rolling Stone magazine that would take me out of my, you know, my, my sorry, sad little backwards Southern town. And I could dream about New York or LA or Paris or London. And I did. Right. And so, so, you know, that allure got me for sure. Yeah. Yeah. I can see it. I can see it. And, and there are, you know, as with Erie and reformations, I mean, there's all these aspects to this layer, because of course, getting television, I mean, now, I mean, you can get some of it in print, but boy, I mean, the civil rights movement would the Vietnam war, the civil rights movement, the evolution of television and how those things played out culturally, politically, religiously was absolutely key. Same thing with the lunar. I mean, can you imagine if there had been a television crew with Columbus coming into the new world? But now we imagine this, but again, one of the things that we've been, of course, mining in this little corner and seeing now in our conversations with respect to psychology and cognitive science, if you read enough, if you read enough from ancient material, you begin to appreciate the fact that in deep ways, they just saw the world differently. Yeah. And we have an appreciation for that. Of course, Tom Holland has been the, you know, proponent of that because his, I mean, his story is about, he begins to appreciate how radically different his heroes saw the world from himself, which meant that he could never be that kind of hero, which would mean that you go on a quest for looking what kind of hero can I be, especially if you're a man. Yeah, no, I think that's right. And I think that, you know, I wonder if, you know, I was reading up on some McIntyre this morning, you know, in his book after virtue, and, you know, he, he sort of doing a similar kind of project, it's not really retrieval project, but it's a sort of a recognition, you know, that, that the way we talk about these things is in some ways really context dependent. So therefore, what is the underneath that could possibly connect these things, because we no longer talk the same way. Right. So what, what does remain, you know, and so, so I know, you know, for me, the urban monoculture oracle, say of the Rolling Stone magazine and that, and that cluster of that worldview, both through the music and the music videos of MTV, and that whole thing, ethos, that disconnected me radically from everything that had come before. But what reconnected me was, you know, a good teacher, reading a really old book, and letting the really old book speak to me on its own terms. But I had a true professor. And, and, and it's not unlike a good witness to the gospel, right? That's what's so interesting to me. I remember, you know, when he said, you know, and, and so therefore, I know that the, this, this, this vast body of wisdom that set has disconnected us from, and that the urban monoculture has disconnected us from, I know that that holds. It's all it's exactly what we need. It has in it somehow. And it's what we need, but it's not just like, jug, mug, right? There's something about actually wrestling with the material, right? Yeah. As a practice, right? That, so it's not just like the, okay, I now know A, B, and C, right? As if I just sort of downloaded it off a website, it's okay, ABC, done. No, there's something about doing it, right? There's something about, you know, fighting with, I don't know, you know, Macbeth, or, or, or fighting with the confessions, like really trying to understand it. You know, I can, I could, you know, we could go and chat GPT right now and we could say, you know, what are the top 10 lessons from St. Augustine's confessions? And it would spit us out a, probably a pretty good list. Yeah. Right. And okay, but that's not the thing. You know, that's, so it goes back to this catechism question, right? Right. That, that, you know, here, if you just like, if I just die, if I just eat the catechism, right, like I'll be fine. Right. It's not right. It's, it's reconnecting to a process and a pool or something. I don't know. I think it has to do with idolatry in, in that there was an idolatry around in the Christian Reformed Church. I mean, the Christian Reformed Church that was dying when I was coming up was deeply built around the Heideberg catechism. Okay. As a youth, you memorized it in midweek class. And as Nancy Schuller said, you were graded on it. To become a member of the church, you went to a council meeting and you would have to be able to recite on command elements of the catechism. That doesn't mean if you did poorly, you necessarily would not be allowed in, but that was the system. Yeah. I thought, I thought every Sunday night, the catechism is broken down into 52 Lord's days. It doesn't matter Christmas, Easter, Lenten. I mean, all of this Lenten, the liturgical calendar. These are all papish accretions. I mean, exactly, exactly. So I always chuckle about, I always chuckle about, you know, with my Protestant friends. You know, they're talking about Lent and they're talking about Christmas. I'm like, man, if you, if you really want to do a dive there, you would not be sitting too well with, with, with Sir Calvin. I won't tell you. You know, Luca might have a couple of choice things to say to you right now. So. But part of the, I think, I think part of the, part of the deconstruction of all of that entire system in the Christian Reformed Church was again, by virtue of, let's say, the civil rights movement, because when, when it was so, when the, when the racism and the treatment of African-Americans, which is so blatantly obvious, you had, you provoked questions about if our catechism, if, if our discipline and practice of the catechism is so right, how could we have missed that? And so then there's the, then you sort of have the, have the, how an idol gets exposed. And now suddenly, and then of course, in that iconoclastic moment, let's destroy that idol and get rid of it when no, actually, maybe, maybe the problem wasn't necessarily the catechism, at least in our, in our system, confessions are not scripture. I mean, they're a step below the canon. They can be, you know, they're, they're within reach of us. But, and I think along the lines in many of these siloed traditions, part of what pluralism exposed in a good way were some of the idols that we held. But now we have the difficulty of again, going back to formation. And so the, the comments that I made on Twitter this morning, and then I made a little, little membership video on my, on my cell phone was watching these, watching these new trad movements. Now in the Roman Catholic Church, just because it's so massive, you can have a significant movement like the trads. And there's just one tiny piece of the massive thing. But in terms of the Orthodox in America, this trad movement, it's probably going to take over the whole thing. I mean, just by virtue of scale, or it could, or if in fact, the immigrant churches are dying, and the trads are coming up, they're going to inherit, you know, the, they're going to inherit the structures in the buildings. Yeah, but these are the, yeah, right, exactly. I mean, these are the ebbs and flows of awakenings and fallings away. And this is Old Testament 101, right? I mean, this is what we do. And it's, and I'm sympathetic to it. But my concern is that, you know, and again, this is, this is why I'm here and not, you know, preaching on word on fire, let's say, you know, is that I do not believe it. I don't think it's what's going to work. Right. I think that's what's unique about the corner. Right. In that, right. You know, we're not, we're not, you know, I'm very much, I, God bless the traditional Catholic, God bless the Orthodox God. And, and also that I'm going to sit with, we're going to sit in an estuary meeting with a bunch of people like John Van Donk, who, you know, is very much with us in many ways, but he's got doubts. He's got skepticism. He has his own little, he's got his own little idols that he loves. I mean, even at our church, estuary yesterday, he keeps, I was going to say, John, you don't have to sell estuary here. We're all here. Yeah. Yeah. Well, I think the, to me, it's a, it's a, it's a, it's a, it's a very understandable response to what you always talk about with combinatorial explosiveness, right? That, that in, in, in eras in which things are, are in flux and in doubt, and there's more information that you can possibly wrap your head around it. We're looking for certain technologies that will simplify the, the, the, the game, right? I, you know, I call these sort of cultural jigs, right? Because, um, you need, you need a workaround, you need, a work around is the wrong way. You need a, you need a something to manage your workflow. Right. You need a compression engine. You need something to take too much and to say, okay, I can't manage the whole thing. So I'll do this, right? Cause I've got confidence in this. Yeah. And, and, and so therefore I, I am sympathetic to the tread, the very, all the varieties of tread, right? Because it is at least a recognition that something's wrong, right? It's at least a recognition that the, you know, the, the thin gruel that we were served is, is not up to the task. And so therefore it's time to get serious about it. And so, you know, you're seeing this with, you know, um, you know, the, you know, the orthodox, of course, or the envy of the trad world, because they do lent for real, you know, those kinds of things. Um, and I, and I, and I, I get it. I do. I, I, um, I understand that, but it will, and of course the, the tell will be taught, right? You know, you know, will, will you be able to replicate, um, and pass on to a successive generation or two? And really what every, what every sort of trad bro who's on Twitter flaming all the liberals and all the lefties, et cetera, what they should be worried about is their grandchildren. Don't worry about me. I'm old, you know, like I'm whatever, like I'm doing whatever I'm doing. You need to worry, be worried about your grandchildren. Cause that's, you know, that's the only way it, it, it, it means anything. Cause everybody can, you know, that's why you know, right, right. No, no, no, no, exactly right. I mean, everybody can, you know, everybody can, you know, start up a commune. Well, and, and, and what, not even start up a commune. That's what they did in the sixties and seventies. All you need is to, all you need is to order an icon on orthodox Amazon. That's right. That's right. You just gotta, you just gotta, you know, get your Peugeot fairy tale and do some profelicity, you know, on Twitter with it. Yeah. Yeah. No. And, and boy, you know, and that's my worry, right. As, as an older guy, you know, I remember how, you know, fired up I was when I was 23 and thought that everybody was an idiot and, you know, et cetera, et cetera. Now it was a little bit different because when I was 23, you had somebody's inspiring as John Paul II, you know, on, on the throne of Peter. And so I could just sort of point right there. Yeah. Like scoreboard. Look what we got. This is a rock star here. And, you know, for those of us who did not predecease the rock star, we understand that when the rock star leaves town, there's something really sad about the cleanup. And again, no, no shade on, I'm a, I'm a big fan. I remain a big fan, even with certain asterisks about John Paul II. I love him. And he was, he is a hero of mine, but, you know, the church, well, I mean, look, look, look at, look at the church now, right. I mean, it's, it's, it's, it's a, it's a bed of confusion, you know, so, so therefore being able to fast better than your neighbor more severely, you know, ain't gonna do it. You know, it's cause it's cause you're just a different flavor of productivity, bro. Right. And when we, and, and, you know, and then you look at, you look at analogs, all things And when we, and, and, you know, and then you look at, you look at analogs all through the Protestant world as well. I mean, okay, I'm gonna, I'm gonna homeschool my kids all the way through their bachelor's degree and they are only gonna watch what I allow them to watch on any screen. And they are going to, they are going to memorize, they are going to memorize the lie in the witch in the wardrobe so they can, well, Lewis and Tolkien at the drop of, I mean, well, whatever, whatever system you want, you know, part of what I, when I, of course, my vocation requires that I spend time reading the gospels and thinking about the gospels and thinking about how I can, again, this transposition that Lewis writes about how I can sort of preaching is between two worlds. So, okay, how can I within 25 or 30 minutes give a divert, especially now on the YouTube thing, give a diversity of people a glimpse, a little bit of that something that is the gospel through the gospels. And, and, and one of the things that I, I regularly come to in the gospels is that this dispensation, this age of decay that we live on, only so much can be achieved here. And that, yeah, and now I might be on, I might be underestimating, I might be a pessimist, overly pessimistic, who knows, please prove me, please prove my pessimism wrong. Nothing would make me happier. That's right. That's right. That's right. But, you know, over time, we see, you know, the Protestants, okay, we're gonna, now that we're, now that we've, you know, we, now that we're away from the, the French king, you know, now that we're out of his, now we're just on the border in Geneva, a whole bunch of French exiles clustered into this town. Now, finally, we're gonna do it right. Yeah. And, well, no one ever does. No, and look, this is, this is the, going back to the Columbus bit, you know, we talked about Gutenberg and the Columbus thing. Imagine what it would be like to be Calvin. Let's just, and again, I don't, full disclosure, you know a heck of a lot more about Calvin than I do, but just, I'm just, just as I should. Yeah, right. As a Calvinist, right. No, but I mean, like, you know, if, if, if memory serves, he would, he was born a French Catholic, right? Yes. Yes. And then, okay, good. That's, that's, okay. So God is education because of all these, you know, ways of getting money and the Catholic structure and hierarchy. Yeah, yeah, right, right, right, right. Right. So, you know, so imagine looking at this sea of embedded corruption, you know, you, of which you cannot even see the bottom of, like, you could, you could, you could, you know, move, move things to the side, to the side, to the side all day long and never get to the bottom of that. Imagine Joe Biden naming archbishops and bishops and clergy in America. Think about that, folks. Right, right. So good, right. Okay. You know, so, and then you hear this crazy story. So, so the world that you live in is nearly totally corrupt. There's not a, there's not a parcel of land that isn't touched by someone with dirty hands. And you hear this story because it can only be a story. It's not a picture. It's not a film. It's not even a book yet. But you get a story about a whole half of, a whole, half of a globe that you didn't know existed. Now, as far as I know, Calvin didn't have any pretensions about going to the New World. Is that fair? Okay, good. All right. But it doesn't matter. Imagine the idea that there's a place where you could start over. Good Lord. Good Lord. Yeah, well, Mars. Right. So, so, so we, right. No, I mean, that's where I'm going with this, right? So, you know, Eric Weinstein and always his talk, like, we got to leave the planet. And clearly Elon Musk seems invested in trying to get us to leave the planet. I get all that. Not my thing, but I get all that. The idea that all it needs is the idea that there's a place that you can go that you can start fresh. All of a sudden, you've just opened up worlds of possibilities that a generation before you would have no access to by the frame itself. They would have no access to. Yep. That's, that's, that's, that's world changing right there. Well, and also consider why is it that all of these reformers and a good many who stayed in the church itself adopt Latin names? Yeah, I love that. I love that. Yeah. And because a whole nother world had just opened up to them. The classics by way of Latin and really Greek. Right. No, it's exactly right. And now it's affordable to them. They have, they don't have screens. Now they can actually, they can actually read it. I've got an app for that. It's called a book. And now suddenly they're living in this world of corruption. And now that they're imagining, you know, they're setting up Tom Holland here, they're imagining this world of Cicero and Seneca and, and, and then Virgil and, and this entire world that is this, this world of heroes and purity. And, and then they're uncovering these, you know, Rome was, you know, I'm reading these biographies of Jerusalem too. And I don't know, there's gotta be some good biographies of Rome out there because it's just the story of the history of Rome. I mean, yeah, the thing was basically abandoned and forgotten. And, you know, and one of the things that caught my attention to, and I listened to Tom Holland was, you know, Hadrian's wall. What did, why is Hadrian's wall the way it is? Cause everybody needed material and why, why, why, you know, dress your own stone, where you just take it right off all the old buildings. Right. Right. I mean, yeah, no, he's exactly right. That's exactly right. You know, God, that's so good. That's so good. So, so therefore here we are. Right. Okay. So, so we stand on, you know, clearly we're, we're living through an evocative liminal period. And it's funny because the trads on one hand are especially the ortho trads and I'm sorry, imagine the Roman Catholic trads and now our recession of modernity. They would say, gosh, darn Protestant reformation. But in many ways, if you're wearing medieval clothing and taking on a church name, this is exactly what the reformers did because they also wanted to get beyond the world of corruption back to that pure world of the new Testament. Yeah. So Paul, this is why I know I say it all the time. We're all Protestants, right? I mean, this is, this is, this is exactly what I mean by that. Now you can say, you know, or I also say we're all heretics, right? That's what I'm getting at. Right. Is that, you know, you're not really being trad, you're really being in a weird sort of way, a kind of retro progressive, right? It's, and it, and I just, I just don't know how, I don't know if they're capable of developing that kind of detached standpoint with which they, with which they can look at that. So again, so what I'm worried about with my own students is how can I get them to affect a, both a detached and deeply engaged standpoint to see the world? Yeah. Like that, like that, that's the thing. That's what I get. I think we go all the way back to where we start about the catechism, which is kale. You can only give them what you have and what you have is you. And I think that's really what's at the heart of this corner in terms of this, this personalism that, and you won't hit every student, but you, there will be, you will be communicating something to your students just by who you are and how you love that will, that will get into them. And part of, I mean, the strangeness of this little corner is that this is what's happening. I mean, obviously something of me is in the corner along with her vacay and Peterson or Peugeot and you and Gris and you know, something of each of us is getting it and Chad, the alcoholic, something of each of us is getting inside of us. Right. And, and so, you know, your defense, you are the prof, you are the defense against the dark arts professor. And I've lasted more than one year. So that's, that's good. I guess. Well, well, you know, you know, I, I, I look, I'm not trying to toot my own horn. I, I think that's right. I think I'm realizing that I, I have kind of functioned that way, you know, as, as a kind of defense against the dark art teacher, but, but I, I, I'm, I'm, maybe this is my own ego. I don't think it is, but I want to find a way to give more of that. Right. You know, you know, it's, it's, and, and, and I'm, and I'm coming to the realization that there's really little difference between what we're trying to do and what in my own tradition, we would have just called, you know, you have to be a saint. Yeah. Right. You know, and I tweeted this out the other day. I was, again, I was listening to reformations and come across this guy, John Matteo Giberti, which was one of these pre-reformation Catholic reformers, you know, so he's a man working the system. He's in the mainstream system and it's deeply corrupt and he inherits a bishopric in Verona. And after getting burned in Rome, he retreats back to Verona and takes it upon himself as like, well, Rome's dead to me, essentially, right. As far as a career trajectory is concerned. So I'm going to go back to my home diocese and I'm going to be a saint, you know, and he says this, he says, he's talking about being a priest, but I think you can understand what I'm going to have. He says this, he says, mindful of our name and profession, we have the need to live well and have not gained a license to do wrong. We must do this, lest we give laymen any pretext to sin or cause them rightly to have a low opinion of the clergy and derive there from an excuse to persevere in their faults. Therefore, we must make special effort to do the works of the saints and to make our deeds shine in the presence of men and to be watchful and solicitous of that evangelical salt in our ministry, planting, weeding and scattering, and with the greatest zeal, building up what makes for holiness. And, you know, you could do a very quick, you know, just change out a couple of nouns, you know, I, like, like I feel that, right, you know, how many times have I jumped on a live stream with you or with Chad or with Neil or and, and others, and, and, you know, everybody sort of talks about the character of the conversation, you know, Pajero might call it the spirit of the conversation. The angel of the conversation. Right, right, right. And so the angel of this corner, the angel of this corner, the angel of this conversation, you know, seems to inform the way in which we talk and interact with one another. Right, so that, you know, on paper, you know, you and I might have all kinds of reasons to draw the sword, let's say, or other people, right, you know, but like in this, in this, it doesn't matter, because what we have stumbled upon, I believe, is the greater value, right, you know, since we, since, you know, we don't have to fight over, you know, land in Sacramento, you know, I don't have to fight you about who's going to go to your church or my classroom on Wednesday, or whatever, right, we're not having these sort of turf battles because we don't live in turf, we live in, we're in this sort of, this liminal space right here. You know, it allows and affords something characteristically different. Yeah, yeah. Yeah, I think that's right. And, you know, one of the things that came out, I played it on the Friday live stream, that, that conversation that Chad and Grizz and Lance did with Clara, you know, when Chad and Lance and Grizz had to sort of, okay, I mean, when someone new comes in from the outside who is academic asking questions, what's going on here? How would you describe this? You have to sort of, again, distill and compress and, and some of what they noted how many of us here are exiles in some ways from our seats of power. I, I do not, I am not the pastor of a important congregation in Grand Rapids, Michigan. Yeah, and I'll, and I'll never be a headmaster. No. And, but we are all in some ways exiles. And so the, the paths to the ascending heights of our own particular hierarchies are closed to us for one reason or another. And, and I think probably some of what that forced on us is a, we've got little to lose. I mean, I, that's right. I can talk unfiltered on the internet as a Christian foreign minister. And if someone decides to go after me, it'd be like, is it really worth it? You know, what's the point? What's the point? Yeah. Yeah. No, it's like weird. Same. Yeah. Same. Same. Same. But in these spaces, I mean, what you just read is, I think, I think true in that there's always this duality where again, it's, it's right there in the gospels where in many ways, the heights of many of the structures, that's of course where the corruption is because there'd be no reason, no reason corrupting anything down here. There's just not a lot to take. Because that's where the resources are. Right. I mean, it just, you know, it's like, there's a reason why the Fox goes to the hen, hen house, because there's protein there. That's a little sacks of walking protein. Of course, the Foxes are going to go there. You idiot. You know, it's like, you know, you don't worry about it. You know, yeah, yeah, sorry. But yet, but yet in some ways, you know, the gospel is here because we, the gospel is here and we, we can enjoy, you know, we can enjoy it in some ways because, you know, we don't have a concentration of hens here. And that's part of why. These are not, these are not the hens you're looking for. But that, but that's, but that's part of why, again, I have this, I have this, and I'm, I'm critiqued and sometimes rightly criticized for it, this belief in the small and the slow, because you and I can do this because we can do this. And if, you know, I had a channel the size of Jordan Peterson or even Jonathan Peugeot, I mean, it's harder and harder to, to get time with John and Jonathan. And, and you know, rightly so they've, they're, they're significant men who are doing significant things and they're in demand and I'm glad they're in demand because they're doing important work and God bless them. But I, you know, I, I love, I love living in a world where, you know, if you, if you make your way here Sunday morning at nine o'clock, you can sit in a room with me and six other people and we can have a conversation. And there's, because there's something really beautiful about that. And, you know, I think about, you know, Luke, I think it's Luke 12, you know, basically Jesus says, you know, be of good cheer, little flock, because, you know, basically I'm giving it to you. The kingdom, the kingdom of heaven is, is, is accessible all around you. I mean, the kingdom of heaven isn't, the kingdom of heaven isn't behind a paywall. The kingdom of heaven isn't at the front of an enormous line that you don't have time or life or money or leisure to wait in. The kingdom of heaven is at hand and is at hand for, for any of us. I mean, that's, that's the, that's the amazing, amazing thing about the kingdom of heaven that it is, you know, again, it's, I have someone made a great meme of it. They have the two lines, the line, the line of people waiting to be loved, and then the line where you can go to love. And there's no, there's no line on that, on that door. There's no line at that desk. You, you have people around you right now who need to be loved and you can love them. And that's where it starts. So, you know, and I hope that, you know, I do think that that is part of the animating spirit behind, you know, Peterson's very pedestrian seeming advice, slash admonishment to young men, you know, that, that, that, you know, the best way to get meaning is, you know, let's say, is to orient your life around giving it, you know, like, yeah, you know, that's why young men respond to being a father. You know, it's, it's like, it takes all of the guesswork out of it. It's like, well, mama and child are right there. Get, you know, get to it, you know, but, but, but again, so, so maybe, maybe my concern here is that, you know, the rich man needs the gospel too. And I'm not trying to make some sort of like Joel Osteen type, you know, argument here. In other words, you know, perhaps actually, and metaphorically, you know, the, the students that, that God has seen fit to put in front of me are rich men, as the parable goes, right? And they're in need of, they're in need of the gospel too. And, and it just, the, the, the thought of them, you know, sort of going out into that world and just before they even have a chance to notice they've been, like a spell has been cast upon them. And I might even mean that actually of, of again, functionalist, nihilistic, materialistic, you know, that, that, that gets me, you know, that, that, that, that, not only for the world, you know, but like for them, like, like for them, you know, that, that, that they will, like, I'm not sure if they understand what they're sacrificing. Yeah. You know, and so that. Well, we both, I mean, when I look at, I mean, and I think in many ways, those who are exiles from that, you know, hopefully by the grace of God, learn and find another path. It's, it's. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. You know, it's not written, you know, you know, to, to, to, to, to, to, to, to, to, to, to, to, to, to, to, to, to, to, to, to, to, to, to, to, to, to, to, to, to, to, you know, you know, to, to riff on, um, what's the name of that movie? The desert movie, uh, Lawrence of Arabia. Lawrence of Arabia. It's not written, you know, I believe that I wouldn't get up. I wouldn't get up every day. No. You know, if I, if I believe that it was written, um, but, um, but it would be, you know, but you could, you don't have to wait either, right? You know, I know, I know, I know. Well, I, what, what are the things that I note is that, and this goes far beyond the particular, um, the particular structures and spells and principalities of our age and our place and our moment, that it is almost always, it is almost always the case that, um, saints are made, saints are, saints are made in suffering. Saints are, saints are something, the, the idols have to be exposed and broken before you, and those dreams have to be broken before you're actually ready to receive. And it's, you know, it's so interesting if you, if you look at Peter, I'm so interested in this book that you told me about, I'm going to look at another book in the pile. Um, but it's, it's only 99 cents on Kindle. Um, but the, you know, you look at Peter, I think it was you last time we talked about Peter and Judas, there's also Peter and the rich young ruler at this last time that I preached through it again, part of the beauty about returning to these texts again and again is, and in different gospels is that, of course, Jesus is talking to the rich young ruler and, and Peter, I think sees in Jesus' face that, that Jesus loves this young man. I mean, you can just see this young man, you know, all of the, he's a good guy, all of, all of Moses, I've done that. I got there, I'm there. I'm there. I've done Moses. I'm a tragic man. You know, I really believe in Moses. I believe in the historical Moses and I've, I believe in the covenant and I'm fulfilling the covenant because I want to see God's kingdom come. And so I've, I've fulfilled the covenant. What's left Jesus. And Jesus says, you know, get rid of everything and just join my troop. Of course, the, the Gatorine demoniac doesn't get to join Jesus' troop again and again, Jesus liberates people and they don't get to join his troop. Here, Jesus comes and says, you, I want you and Peter then maybe gets, you know, I'm old, I'm not wealthy. You know, I, maybe, maybe this guy's more attractive to Jesus than me. And maybe my post of preeminence is now threatened by this rich young ruler. And of course the rich young ruler doesn't take the invite. And then Peter launches and it says, but Jesus, we've left everything to follow you. What are you afraid of here, Pete? What are you afraid of? And then Jesus, of course says what he says. It's like, Devastation, devastation. You'll not only receive in this life, but in the age to come. And it's like, okay, then, then, okay, then back to Peter. What did Peter receive an exchange for his desire to leave his, you know, his, his fishing business and become a disciple of Jesus? What did, what did that cost Peter and what did he receive in return? Yeah. I mean, he just, let's see. Jesus says, you receive all of these things and persecutions. It's like, right. Persecutions? No, no, no, no, no. I like my, I like my discipleship without persecutions. Thank you. That's right. I can just stay here. I'm good here. Yeah. So, you know, I, I don't, you don't, you know, we never excel beyond our master. We don't. Even though greater things he will do, he will do something, he will do greater things through us than perhaps what others had seen in terms of those things, but we don't excel beyond our master. Yeah, that's right. Anyway, well, maybe it's, maybe it's time to land the plane, Cal. This is awesome. As always, this has been great. This has been great. I will, I'll put this in no wait, no ads. And then if you want to, I don't know if you want to post it to your channel or if you want to wait or what your desires, I don't know what. Yeah. I'd love to post it. Yeah. If you don't mind, you go first. I mean, I'm not, I'm not trying to get subs just yet. So I'm just putting, well, I'm going to put it in no wait, no ads. Cause I want to do a little bit of work on Peterson's Bishop Baron conversation this afternoon. And I'll probably post that tomorrow. So then, so then, uh, I'm sure the corner people that are in the membership section will chew on this for a little bit. Love it. That's great. That's great. So I will send you a copy of it too. All right. Thanks Paul. All right, Cal. Well, let me, let me pray for you. I want to pray for you. Lord, as you, as you, as you said to Elijah, as you said to Paul, you have people that we don't see all around us because we can only see through the hierarchies that afford, um, the distance vision that mountains afford. And Lord, it is, it is just a delight this morning to spend some time with Cal and to compare notes about our own stories and our own churches and, and how you've worked in the Catholic church and how you've worked in the Christian Reformed church and, um, the upsides and the downsides and the idolatries and the, and the failures and the insights and, and all the ups and downs and Lord, this is, this is your kingdom and these are your churches and Lord, you're, you're working through, um, all of this and, uh, so Lord, I thank you for Cal and I thank you for his students and Lord, his students are richly blessed to have him and I pray Lord that you continue to bless him and that you continue to work through him and may he continue to be the, um, the professor of the defense against the dark arts, uh, wherever you place him in teaching Dante and Virgil and classics and I thank you Lord that there still are schools that, um, that, that, that want their students to know this work and I thank you Lord that you, you continue to work in surprising ways through, through people that perhaps two, three generations from now here on earth, their names will not be remembered, but Lord, you remember, you don't forget. So I pray Lord that you bless him, that you keep him and you, you cause all that he puts his hand to, to flourish. So hear my prayer in the name of Jesus. Amen. Amen. Amen. Thank you, Paul. All right, Cal. Take care. Cheers. Bye bye.