https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=AikZmeKm4XA

 Okay, we are streaming. Let me put up a chat room so I can see and get confirmation that people will be hearing us. So, here we are. So these are sort of like thief in the night live streams when I've got a few extra minutes and I want to check out what's up with the Discord peeps and I don't want to lose it. So we're going to maybe continue on some of the stuff that we talked about last time because Nick wanted to get in on it and I just popped right into a room on the Discord and they all announced that besides the question of whether Nick sounds like Brett Weinstein. They solved the secrets of the world. So quick introductions from each of you. Tell us a little bit who you are. Mark's been on before, but just go ahead round and then we'll jump in and see where it goes. Do we start in top left? Oh, we're all in different squares. So you go ahead, start Nick. Oh, okay. Well, I've been on your channel quite a number of times. Granted, they are fairly old interviews at this point. I've hung out in the community for a number of years now and yeah, I don't quite know. I'm a craftsman, so I'm a little awkward in these spaces, I suppose. I don't think you're awkward. I thought you handled the Verveky interview. That was amazing. You did an amazing job with that. Wonderful. Yes, that's right. I did that. Okay. How about you, Mark? Very quick because I think you've been on a number of times. People know who you are. Yes, I'm Mark LeFever. I have the YouTube channel Navigating Patterns where I'm fixing the cultural cognitive grammar to save us from the meaning crisis. Okay. Joey. I'm Joey. I'm a member of Paul's Sacramento Jordan Peterson meetup or was originally a Jordan Peterson meetup and I run the Discord server. All right. Ian, you and I have never had a talk, I don't recall. Not much, but I'm a resident chiller on this server. I take full advantage of all the amazing people that come in here. I don't know a ton of things, but I try my best to connect what I can. Okay. Ewan, is that how to say your name? Hello, yeah. Well, that's how it's read, yeah. Okay. For all intents and purposes, I'm just some dumb guy that happened to be present while some of our people were talking. So that's what I represent here. All right. And you wanted to be a part of this and we're not even sure quite sure what this is yet. So what were you guys... Go ahead. We only promise the answers to everything, so at least we're not over-promising. Okay. Can you be a little bit more specific about everything? Let's have Nick pick up on what he wanted to pick up on from last time and then we can roll with whatever we have left with. Okay. So last time we were talking about... Mark had this really... I thought it was a terrific point that if you're going... Part of the reason we're talking about Rick Rapetti's interview with John Vervecki and how Rick Rapetti's little church sort of breaks up and one of the weaknesses there is that they don't have the big container like you have in Christianity with Jesus that actually allows a little container to break up and then to have it hopefully not only productively but also something with a possibility of advancement, reinstantiate in another place and actually be able to not only continue a personal narrative but to be able to continue a collective global... I just finished recording a video on proximal versus ultimate betterment and some of those things. I don't know if I'm going to put that out tomorrow or Monday. I haven't decided yet. So that's what we were talking about before and I'm not sure if Nick, that was what you wanted to jump in on. Now you're also known here probably... You never asked for me to name you. I guess I'm sort of like Donald Trump in that way. I called you Four Cult Nick because of course you said you were a member of Four Cults and then when I told my wife that she said, and now he's listening to you. It's number five right there. So go for it Nick. Yes. Yeah. Okay. So I guess where my mind was going with that discussion initially and I think it does tie in to Mark's point, granted in a way that's not immediately obvious, but where my mind went when I was listening to the Rick and for Bervecki discussion was how distinctly Gnostic both of them came off. And this I think was most exemplified in Rick's describing his position after having his social system collapse. He was describing it as he was up high on this ladder and the ladder was falling apart. He could in some sense see the top of the mountain, but he did not have the skill, which I think this is how he described it and I think it's important that he described it this way to navigate the rest of the climb up that ladder to actually arrive at the top of the mountain. That gets contrasted with Bervecki's telling of his kind of initial mystical experience through the platonic forms, which I thought was actually really important for contextualizing Bervecki because he doesn't use emptiness or nothingness, Buddhist terms to describe it. And it got me thinking about my own plethora of various mystical experiences and how what was so bizarre, I suppose, about the specific set of experiences that turned me towards Christianity was that the manner in which I experienced form and right, you could use something that is structured was largely the feeling and the way I interpreted it in that moment was very distinctly as united within a person and I don't know a better word for it than person. It's not quite right. It's not as limited as we normally imagine a person to be. It's not quite right. It's not quite right. It's not as limited as we normally imagine a person to be. It had an aspect of feeling like it was the place from which all personhood comes forth, right? All structure that's structured in such a... Oh. Yeah, lots of words, lots of words. How do I put it more simply? I'll jump back. So what kind of arrived in my mind listening to that conversation was basically that I started getting this understanding that when a person has a mystical experience lacking the sense of personhood on the other side, right? The other is a person. You kind of end up defaulting towards one of two directions and we generally describe it as gnostic or we describe it as solipsistic. So if you're coming from an emergent place, much like I think Rick was in that conversation, you end up describing the mystical experience in solipsistic terms. And I think that when you come from that emergent pathway, you do describe your failings at being able to deal with that in terms of skill, which is you're the person and the thing that you're dealing with is not a person. And the only way to deal with something that is not a person is through skillful means, right? Technique. On the flip side, you have Verbecky's experience where he's describing these platonic forms and you get something that's much more gnostic in its orientation or emanationist as opposed to emergent, where he is able to partake in some sense of this perfection to which he does not belong. It's perfect spheres, perfect shapes, perfection, right? And he's trying to adapt himself into that mystical space that is too clean for him to exist there. And you start getting this gnostic feeling from the mode. And what this, the train of thought that this all got me going on is how absolutely necessary for a transjective, I'll use the Verbeckian term because I think it's important to his project. Also, I think it's useful contextually. To have a transjective relationship, I'm more convinced than ever that a requirement for it is for there to be two or more persons, right? You need to be relating as a person. You don't get to view yourself from the emergent perspective as a bundle of something that isn't person. And likewise, on the other side, the thing that you are communicating or interacting with must necessarily also be viewed in terms of person. And I don't want to overly limit that word, right? Because I think it really does expand far beyond what we normally how we normally experience personhood. But that's where my mind went with that conversation. Sorry, that was a lot. No, that was really good, though, because I mean, part of in Christianity, I mean, you're how you just laid it out now is really helpful because in Christianity, God draws us towards him. And when you look at, for example, C.S. Lewis's description about pantheism, that's exactly where Lewis says pantheism fails, because what if you decide what if you discover that the thing on the other side is not just a realm of potentiality waiting for your personhood to assert will and intention and rationality towards it in order to exploit it sort of like a virgin land, right? But rather, in fact, something is hunting you. And that and then the difference of the difference of posture with respect to a lot of these psychedelic psychedelic experiences, Christians tend to be on the side of don't play with this because there are living things on the other side of the door. Whereas if your assumption is that human beings are the only agents around, well, that's just a door. Let's go through the door. And, you know, it's a it's a new world that we can now exploit and explore or whatever. And that's right. And I think I think so, that's sort of the difference. I think I was pointing out with the Jesus container metaphor, right? Where the so there's a difference between Verbeckis transjective. So we'll grant him the word and transformation, but not not the way Verbeckis talks about it. But there is a difference. And the difference, I think Nick has nailed it perfectly. He always does. That's one of the reasons I don't like him that much. He always makes me look bad. Yeah, it's that person to person. Right. Because because person to thing relationship can never result in the proper transformation. Right. Right. And we know that in terms of our transformations, the and Verbeckis talks about that with Agape because the mother exactly pulls the Agape, the mother pulls person, brings the potential of personhood from that baby into the world. That's all of our development. And Peterson, when he's talking about developmental psychology, that mothers and parents tend to, you know, they're in that realm of proximal development that, you know, and we do it, we don't even know we're doing it. We're talking at just another level to not lose the toddler, but let the toddler continue to leverage our personhood and to draw us into it. And that's I think whereas I think you really nailed it, Nick. The other idea is that, oh, I need more skills. You really nailed that. That's really that's super helpful. Or drugs. Skills are drugs. Whatever. Yeah. You're stuck in the propositional and the procedural and you can't get out of those two. So when Verbeckis talks about, oh, we're stuck in the propositional. No, we're stuck in the propositional procedural. Right. But then you're switching to which you're switching to our model to the four piece model. I talked about with you, Paul and with Karen Wong and the meaning code. That's a that's a slightly different model for that reason, because it recognizes where we're stuck as propositional procedural. Right. Stuck in skillful means. Right. Humanity is the basis of of all personhood. And thus anything that we do must be through skillful means. We've lost that relationality. That's fundamental that it could write it. I don't think it's an accident that you have lines in the Bible like where where two or more are collected there, you will find the Holy Spirit. I'm paraphrasing. That's not how it goes, but it's something like that. I think that's important. And right. The kind of reverence that I see with Verveckis when referencing the the transjective very much brings to mind that feeling that seems to be captured in the Holy Spirit. Why is there something special about two persons being collected? Right. It seems like it opens up something else, right. It opens up something else, right. A different way of relating to to the system. And again, I can I can speak from my own experience that I've I've taken a lot of psychedelics. I've done them in excess of 30, 40 times, you know, in various doses kind of all along the spectrum. And it's not like I'm foreign to these experiences. However, I've also had an extended mystical state that was not induced by any drugs. And there was something very particularly different about it. And it was distinctly the perception of person on the other end. And, you know, I can go further with that. I don't think it just has to be person, but there's something there's a different relationship that occurs, I think, when you have that type of experience. Is the word person more accurate or is the word human more accurate? Was it an individual like an individual being was on the other end for you? Individual. Yeah, it not where I don't think human is the right term because the experience extends far beyond the normal limit. It was not bound in a physical manner in the way that a human is. However, despite the fact that it was unlimited, it very much gave the sense of personness. And I don't know quite how to describe it. Other than, you know, this kind of apophatic attempt, right? What what it wasn't. Well, I have a thought on the power between two. You know, we both have microphones and speakers. And when we connect, there's this possibility that if your speaker. I think you all know the problem described when you can hear everyone else echoing and the volume just keeps exponentially rising to the point of that whistle and it's ear piercing. There's something about the there's two creators co-creating that's different than just one creator with sort of a plain environment. I don't know. You could maybe work off that. Yeah, the feedback is not there, right? Because you have the adjustment of the other individual, right? And so in one way, you might be looking at quote the same thing or maybe the same form. But you have two different perspectives. And so you get back into the which side of the elephant are you on, right? And it's having the different sides of the elephant in that case that creates that does the co-creation. Because if you're just seeing the front of the elephant, you're in front of the elephant and then you're hearing front of the elephant, front of the elephant. I like that feedback metaphor. And that's really good. Well, and I think that's a great point. I think that's a great point. And that's really good. And it does again. Yeah, I agree. That's a great metaphor. To me, it's again kind of picking up on that solipsistic effect, right? When I'm talking, I don't know, there's something off when I imagine that every time I'm talking to somebody and I'm creating something with them through this mutual sharing and understanding, it feels really gross to imagine that what I'm actually doing is projecting you and having a conversation with myself, that there's no legitimate novelty there or no legitimate synthesis that feels wrong to me. I don't know if that makes a good argument, but thinking about Wilson from the Tom Hanks movie. Yes, right. Right. Yes. I'm sure someone else has made that example. That's a distinct lack of intimacy. And this sort of hints to the thing that I think is actually causing the meaning crisis in some sense is the intimacy crisis, our inability to be intimate with one another. And why? Because we've lost submission. Well, why have we lost submission? We don't like the big container. We're not going to submit to that. And it's like, well, there's no reason to submit to anything else ultimately. But of course, you have to appropriate so you go into communities and then the communities have a problem, whatever that problem is, and then they break up. But there's no larger container. So the no larger container, as I pointed out earlier, or perhaps not strongly enough, you can't fix the community either. Maybe the community doesn't blow up if you've got the Jesus container to point to, to fix the community because communities that are self-referential are going to blow up and not be able to be put back together again, which is what happened to Rick. Whereas the community, a good community points past itself to an ideal it can't embody. And it's the ideal it can't embody that allows it to repair itself. It's not flawless. Churches still break up, right, Pastor Paul? Every day. But they can reform. And the thing Rick complained about was not the breakup, but it was the fact that nothing formed in its place that could replace it. And that's the thing that the Christians have, even though they're not viewing the Jesus container. I hope I hope I'm not going to burn in hell for this, but oh, well, no, not for this. Anyway, for everything else, probably. But it is that's important because it's not just that you can move to a new church, but the church can repair itself potentially or even make corrections long before it blows up, hopefully. Right. Like like God willing. Right. As my my Orthodox Jewish friend says all the time, God willing. Right. He's not allowed to say that was perfect, Mark. Perfect. Yeah. No, that's right. That's right. Good. That was super helpful. Oh, super, super intimacy and community. You were talking about it seems to me like that's exactly the big problem that we're having. Right. That's what you're saying on sort of a personal level. I've noticed that people are having a harder and harder time, it seems, imagining intimate relationships that don't go all the way to the sexual territory. I don't know how salient that is in this scenario, but that's just what popped into my head. I've recently been interacting with a lot of people. If they read a comic book that's about two men who have a deep friendship, turns out that they're gay. If people read about an older person and a younger person, it just keeps going into that territory. And that seems like a massive cultural wave that's happening. And I'm wondering what do people lose when that's the framework? Like where is the space for friendship? What a great point. What a great point. That's an awesome point. So that goes to Verveki's having versus being mode. Right. And I have my disagreements with that. It's correct. It's incomplete. So if you don't have a being mode relationship with other people because of an intimacy problem, we'll say, then you're just going to relate to them as having mode creatures. You're never going to get to the point where you're relating to them as in the being mode. So that's very present in my opinion. That's dead on. I have to briefly point out the symbolism happens of Paul's battery exhausted moment there. It works. It's online. He's talking. Keep talking. I can see I got to fix this. This is the discord square. Keep talking. Which looks really weird. So yeah, no, I think that's an excellent observation. That is dead on. I think when you combine that with having versus being mode, what you're coming up with is you're coming up with the intimacy crisis, causing a having mode only relationship with everything around you. And so you're falling into materialism effectively. And then you can go back to the fore horsemen conversation and look at Bishop Barron saying, we flatten the church. Well, the flattening was due to something that came before the flattening. And I think it's that same underlying problem of falling into materialism because we've lost the mystical. Right. And that goes back into what's everybody looking for with drugs? What's everybody looking for? What's the problem is trying to solve? The problem everyone's trying to solve is a problem, roughly speaking, of enchantment. Everybody wants enchantment back because it's been removed from the world and they don't have a container to put it in. They need that Jesus container in order to get that done. And it's the lack of intimacy, I think, that's caused all these collapses to happen. Well, and I'll throw in as well, you and to your, I think, actually, to both you and Mark's points, it seems like there's a type of corruption of the categories. So almost what I picked up from what you were describing was a type of desperation for intimacy. And in that desperation, we go to the least common denominator. Well, if I keep breaking all the boundaries, I have to run into intimacy at some point. Yes. Right. Yes. And you think if you break down every single structure, that's all that's left to find is yourself. Turns out that's not really how people work. Right. Break down all the structures, all that you find is nothing. Nothing. Right. And it's, yeah, it really is ironic. And in the kind of desperate plea to make something work, it seems like we are in some sense throwing the dirt on our own grave, which is that in this attempt to reestablish intimacy in our human connections, we end up making it so that right to Joey's point, all we realize is our lack of intimacy. Right. So what ends up happening is those moments that are supposed to be deeply intimate. Now we suddenly are starting to go, well, is sex that intimate? Is there something here or is it just the last boundary I have to break? Well, and go ahead. We've been breaking it on the other side. I mean, pornography is just the inverse of it. Right. It's all sex and no intimacy. And in fact, it's the idea that, I mean, that article that I've read a number of times in my videos from the New York Times where this guy is, you know, he's asking permission at every little movement and then he ghosts her. And she's like, well, I wanted, there's a telos to sexuality, which is intimacy. And once it's divorced from it, you know, there has to be, I mean, in any kind of relationship. I love how you opened this up though, Nick, because it's not techne. You know, when you're married a long time and you begin to, you know, you're just always sort of like this with the other person. Once in a sense, a couple can have a joke about how you've sort of got the other one mapped, but just like with marketplaces, which are full of people, once you have a map and once you reveal, oh, I've got you mapped. Well, they're going to change and undo the map. And that's because there's watching going both ways. And so again, I see it more of the spirit of finesse, which is it's relational. Well, and I wanted to point out you brought up going the other way as well. And that's exactly where I was. I was also trying to go is that we've by going to this least common denominator. So too, if we destroyed the potential for intimacy that is not sexual, and that's a great loss. Yeah, like that's a very big loss. More so, I would say, you know, the eventual loss of that least common denomination. But you can't just make it a greater and greater denominator. You know, if you're breaking the fabric down by which people find value in their social relationships to begin with, and, you know, yeah. But once you can't find anything new in a system, once it loses novelty, you're tumbling towards nihilism. Right. It may take a long time, but you'll get there. of the mystic, of the mystical, that's the re-enchantment. Enchantment is novelty. In a materialist world, you can't have novelty because everything is knowable. Even if it isn't known, it's knowable and that's only going to lead you to nihilism eventually. Now you may you may grow old and die before you hit the nihilism, granted, but maybe not and I think that's the world we're living in and then if you couch it, you know, and I like I like all the all the couching so far, but if you couch it in having versus being. There's no point in in being mode if you're not reaching out past materiality. There's no being in material. Once you're, you know, so once the once the tea loss is gone in essence, right, everything can be defined as material, but now there's no there's no being mode available to you, right, and then and then I would you know my argument is it's you know John John says why I like the word becoming better, you know, being instead of being he says so it's having mode and becoming mode it's like no no no no because there's a way in which you can get stuck in being mode right so you go from relationship to relationship to relationship to stay in love every six months or nine months you know however long your love lasts so that doesn't cut it but what does cut it is to say oh well I could be there has to be having mode being mode and becoming mode but how do I become I have to break down my axioms again right well if I do that I need a place to do that it can't just be a community right because communities can corrupt and if I do that in the middle right I'm dead right I could I could get devastated something like what Rick Repetti sort of almost described happening to him right because he he came all the way out went back into drugs basically right so you need that that Jesus container that larger container again to have people help you in an intimate connection and you have an intimate connection up so you're not just relying on the horizontal in it intimate connections because that I think is where Breveke falls short he talks about horizontal connections but he's not talking about the vertical connection up and out he talks about emanation right but he's not taking seriously the emanations drawing you forth as as as you so brilliantly put it there pastor Paul right it's drawing you forth and up to become something that is more capable than you were before so you don't get stuck in being mode just taking some acid or some mushrooms or whatever over and over again once a year to have that that enchantment that temporary enchantment that doesn't bring transformations bring maybe it brings the transjective or shows you the transjective but you're the same person yeah oh yeah that novelty thing really stands out to me um I think recently people have been searching for novelty almost entirely on the horizontal plane and neither up nor down people don't seem to want to go deep into things um and I actually uh interestingly enough wrote a sonnet about this the other day on the bus would it be okay if I read that yeah sure go ahead please okay now I doubt I have good performance ability so I'm just going to apologize in advance um but here we go oh novelty why do we seek for you only in that which is not yet made ours why can we not seek to our first loves be true oops I messed that line why do we look for that which by the hours grows old and dies and not to that which lives eternally behold a single tree can more beauty end of wisdom give than can ten thousand flowers viewed hastily oh novelty we have even to you proved false and would not know your truest charms so if you are willing to wait patiently to learn what is most beautiful and true the fruit found in a lifelong lover's arms is more novel than infidelity wow wow that was great are you married right great yes I am so on point in the conversation too oh man okay well you don't fall you happy now what's that Calvinism confirmed he wrote that and then we had this conversation what's going on I'm a member of the CRC yeah what you guys don't know is he writes 500 sonnets on the bus every day about everything I wish I wish I didn't get like that a lot wow wow that was amazing that's if you have a thousand Shakespeare's on the bus eventually they'll write whatever possible eventually they'll get the equivalent of a monkey right is that what we're going for exactly the typewriter wow very cool very cool well shall we shall we land the plane on this did we did did this thing have an arc or do does some does one of you want to bring something else in I've probably got another 10 minutes so I don't I feel I feel pretty complete I noticed that uh that Catherine jumped in here yeah she had something to say here to add to after do you have something to say there she is hi so I'm not sure if Catherine knew we were live streaming in the admin she was able to skip over the six person limit on this room I wondered how someone got through that limit I did not realize I was just happily listening while working in my kitchen so we are live streaming on the internet right now Catherine hello internet hello internet this is my kitchen um I didn't catch the whole conversation sadly but I thought that the sonnet was amazing and fantastic and serendipitous um I really appreciate the uh the conversation that you had with the old og guys the other day I thought that was really really good um yeah I I do think that what we're doing here is different and the fact that it has a little bit of a heritage and a longevity that you can look back at and analyze now is a big deal and I think um figuring out how to do this well I do think is going to be pivotal to ongoing community both you know I think across the board you know religious secular communities whatever it is because there's just such a breakdown um I think the fact that we have so many people from so many countries in bridges of meaning saying the same thing means that it's not just you know an American problem a Canadian problem so yeah I didn't have a lot to say but I'm happy we're doing it I'm happy we're doing it too all right I think that's uh probably this probably makes for a good video I'll have to figure out how to title it but thank you all for so again I made this little impromptu room because the other day I jumped into them I was in the open studio and we started having I thought some good points and I thought boy I'd like to I'd like to share these good points further so we went into tiny studio and did it and Sam was kind of like are we streaming on the internet so I created this little room so now when you come into this little room be warned you might go out to my channel but um I I like this I like this possibility of bringing in more voices because again we're way smarter together and Nick your observations and Mark's observations the other day about the big container and the sonnet um this this is this this is why we're doing this this is the kind of stuff that I'm hoping for from a community that I certainly can't get just talking to my little computer screen in the corner of my office so yeah wait all the perspectives live right and people bringing like I mean we just talked about the same thing from three different perspectives maybe four right yeah pretty clearly right and the skepticism and we've got crazy materialists and crazy CRC people and I don't know writing poems on the bus right right no it's great it was I mean and that's really important to see people you for people to see other people intelligising in real time in the moment like this is all unscripted and you know and yeah maybe not everybody can do it but at least everybody can see it and get a sense for the work that we're doing and why it's important and Katherine's point how widespread these and common these problems are even though we use different language it's really we're talking about very similar problems if not exactly the same issues yeah go ahead Ian oh yeah I give me a chance to solve the intimacy problem one sec is it this one maybe it's this one just just hold on with me one second guys I think I have it in here somewhere it's a multi-purpose tool I think you're still in school so the best solution for the intimacy problem is going to be the wine bottle opener but after that the rest of them are probably good too thank you appreciate it Joey it's funny because it's the only one that's actually bent out of shape I don't know why they made it that way just so you could lose the cork I don't know anyway you know I always get stuck in there you just break the head and then broken glass it's they should do something about it anyway all right well thank you guys I I just had like a half hour and I thought let me try this see what happens and both times I've tried this it's been really cool I'm sure we'll have some bad times too but uh that's you don't have the good times without the bad times so and thank you for popping in Katherine I had no idea how someone I thought I thought I set this room to six how did that happen so that's that's the admin admin privileges admin privileges oh she's got admin privileges my goodness all right y'all it's wonderful to connect with you guys so um likewise I'll see I'll see you guys later thank you Paul yeah thank you Paul