https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=qOhmY0ingZo

 Hi, this is Paul and Sam. Many of you recognize Sam from the, from various of my videos. We're going to talk estuary today. Sam has made a couple of unlisted videos with a few ideas about estuary. And so I thought, well, why don't we have a conversation about this? So let's jump in. Sam, so you've got lots of ideas, maybe more ideas than I have. So let's, let's, let's start with, let's start with some of your thoughts. Sure. I feel a little bit like Bob Dylan. My unlisted videos are often more popular than my listed videos. But yeah, well, I mean, I've been listening to you and other people talk about the estuary and, and even just beyond what the estuary is sort of just broader ideas of where our community could and should go next and even who is our community and what, what makes it a coherent thing and, and who's in and who's out and all of those sorts of questions. So, so I made a couple of videos really just kind of processing my thoughts. And I sent those to Paul and a couple other people. I would share them more widely, but I realized that I doxed myself in, in those videos. So I won't give the link publicly, but hopefully we can talk through all of that here. Okay. Okay. Well, it might, you know, I've had a couple of conversations about this. I had a conversation yesterday with the thoughtful ape from the Discord server and, you know, perhaps it's helpful for me to, to lay out some of the genesis and origin of these ideas. And in many ways, these came about after, obviously some of it comes about out of my frustration as a minister in terms of trying to find ways to connect with people who won't darken the door of a church. A part of it comes, part of it comes from my experience of making videos about Jordan Peterson, starting the local meetup, being a regular participant in the, in the bridges of meaning Discord server, recognizing that a lot of people need a space that isn't exactly church and churches. It's in churches mission. And I think the interest of the church admission to find ways to create those spaces. And I think that makes churches healthier because actually right now, someone just sent me a video of a guy who's making, he's a Christian on YouTube talking about politics and all the normal issues evangelicals talk about in all of the normal ways evangelicals talk about them. And I listened to this and I think, you know, I can understand how in some ways this individual is serving the church. But there are many, many people who for one reason or another simply can't engage in that conversation. And I recognize that churches for a very long time have sort of an insular self-sufficiency. To the degree that they can't have a, they struggled to have productive conversations with these people. Now, if you live in the Bible Belt and most of your friends go to church with you, then this might not seem like a problem. But if you don't live in the Bible Belt or you've got some aspect of your life or some significant relationship with a person who has an aspect of their life that sort of puts them on the outside of church. Churches have a tremendous, they're sort of like Henry Ford selling cars. You know, you can have any color you want as long as it's black. And that's pretty much where the conversation ends. Now, obviously Ford Motor Company has changed its way since the days of Henry Ford. And so then in watching what had happened around my YouTube channel and with the Bridges of Meaning Discord server and with our local, what was then a Jordan Peterson meetup, I thought we need, the church needs to have a space for conversation. Now, someone could rightly criticize me by saying, yeah, but Paul, you're mostly having this conversation. Most of the members of your church don't participate in the conversations you have. And that's fair. At the same time, the members of my congregation have been generous towards these conversations. They've been generous with my time. They've been generous with our facility. And as the members of my church, not all of them, but some of them, as the members of my church, bit by bit, get become, you know, come into community with some of these members who are outside of the church as part of the meetup. I see bonds growing. And it's also the fact that for many members of my church, their children won't come to church. Their grandchildren are not being brought to church. And part of this is because the children of the membership have come to the conclusion that, OK, church is doing their thing, but it's functionally irrelevant to my life. And I think they're wrong. Maybe until I get married. But maybe until I get married and maybe there'll be some itch that I don't understand that I'll want to somehow have my children be raised in some kind of faith. But the church has simply done an exceedingly poor job connecting. I wanted to say connecting what's happening in the newspaper, but my newspapers, maybe they're still thinking about the newspaper. What's happening in the day to day manner of people's lives with what I believe are, in fact, what the church is talking about, should be talking about, but often in different language. And so for me, at least in terms of the church, an estuary is a place where the church can get to know, the church can learn a little bit, the church can learn some things and those outside the church can learn some things. Because my experience of those outside the church is often they have a list of biases and prejudices about the church, which are about as unfounded as what the church has about those outside of it. And so I look at this disconnect and say, you know, these people, these people can understand each other. These people are neighbors. These people are friends. These people can have a productive conversation. And in fact, I think both sides would welcome and enjoy productive engagement with each other surrounding things that matter to both of them. This doesn't seem impossible. And in fact, my experience on my YouTube channel and with the meetups and with all of the things that have flown, have flown, have flowed from there has been, I'm finding that both sides are enjoying it. Now, both sides tend to be busy and skeptical. And so I find resistance on the church side. Well, if these people really are interested in what's going on in here, they should come and sit in the service. Well, OK. All right. But even people that I've seen coming in from watching my YouTube channel, who, quite frankly, get more hours of me each week than the members of my own congregation, those people come into church and they're kind of like, what? This wasn't this isn't like what I expected Paul's YouTube channel inside a building to look like. Exactly. So so this is this is this is where this all began. And I, you know, right away when I had no idea how much impact releasing one word would have that demonstrates that it was a well chosen word, a well chosen word. But I'm frankly delighted at the productive mess that I see it creating. So I see you as part of that productive mess, Sam. So let's let's do some messy production together. All right. Well, I mean, I think part of this is that America or well, the West and perhaps America in particular is entering a post-Christian age that is very unfamiliar to itself in terms of its own history. In times past, how the church related to the larger community was more straightforward and that we had that the church has a lot of experience of living in that world, but it's starting to live in a new world and that this is bringing up all sorts of new questions that need to be answered in terms of how churches relate to things. Like, even when I was a kid, like going to like the Cub Scouts, it sort of made sense that the Cub Scouts met in like the local mainline community church and that some of the people in the Cub Scouts attended that congregation. But not everyone did. But it wasn't weird that it was at the church and the nursery school was there. And yeah, kids, you know, even Jewish kids went to the nursery school that was technically at a mainline Christian church. And, you know, like all those sorts of things that, you know, talking about going to church didn't seem weird. But like that was, you know, the 1990s, I guess. And I'm not that old, but even I can notice that things have changed in the couple of decades since then. And like you, well, so I grew up, I mean, I'm from the Midwest, which is like if you were to draw around the Bible Belt, you would say, yeah, I live in the Bible Belt. But then it's like, well, Chicago's not the Bible Belt. Chicago is a different thing. Chicago is a coastal city in the middle of the country. And if you grow up in sort of the snooty suburbs, then it's even more like the East Coast or the West Coast than, say, if I were to drive an hour north into rural Wisconsin. Right. But at the same time, rural Wisconsin is a distance only an hour away from me, whereas it's not an hour away from Long Island or something like that. So for all. So that's something that that I can kind of see that things are changing. Like when I grew up, you know, like I said about the Cub Scuts and all that, that was kind of normal. But in like high school, it was very weird to talk about religion. In college, it was even weirder to talk about religion. Working in liberal oriented tech companies since college, it is even, even weirder to talk about religion or and it's super weird to even talk about politics or anything that doesn't sort of meet a party line anymore. So over the course of my life, I've mainly lived in liberal places and I've mainly worked and been surrounded in liberal places. But I grew up in a very conservative, you might even say fundamentalist oriented church and have mainly attended churches that are kind of like that. Like you talked about. So in the video where you talked about, like I think a good example of this and then we can branch into other directions. So in the video about the founding fathers, where you talked about Sam Adams, you talked about Park Street Church. Right. And you said you had maybe had cousins or aunts or uncles or some sort of relatives who went to Park Street Church. And Park Street Church is if you go to Boston, you can't miss it. If you go to the Boston Commons, there's one big super stereotypically New England looking church right on the Boston Common with a big steeple and it's on the Freedom Tradle. And Sam Adams is buried in their backyard. And it's, you know, it's a holdout conservative Puritan church right in the middle of Boston. And when I lived in Boston, that was where I went to church. And you know how weird it is for me to be the person who went to that church. When did you go to that church? I went when I was in I was in grad school in Boston in 2016, 17. What service did you go to? The traditional one, of course. You would have been there with my sister and my brother-in-law. Probably. Yeah. Because they were there every Sunday morning at the traditional service. They sat in the same seat. You probably would have recognized them. That it's a somewhat big church. It's almost a thousand people on a Sunday, maybe 500 or something. But there are but my sister and brother-in-law, my brother-in-law has been there his whole life. And my sister, you know, went there, you know, when when she met my brother-in-law. And, you know, so anyway, so yeah, yeah, no, yeah. And Gordon Hugenberger was my pastor. Gordon Hugenberger, Gordon Hugenberger, Gordon Hugenberger. I did the eulogy at my sister's service. And Gordon did a nice talk at the calling hours for us. Wow. Wonderful. You know, my sister, my sister and brother-in-law just just love them. Love them. So, yeah, funny. I didn't know we had this connection. Right. Right. And you know how weird it is that I would go to that church. Yes. Yes. Just but Sam Adams is buried in the backyard. So I guess it just makes sense. So so that church is sort of something like a symbol of the relationship to Christianity and modern American society. Right. It doesn't it's there in the middle still, but it doesn't know how it relates to anything anymore. And it's on the freedom trail. Right. And so and so Park Street is, you know, some people have lighted up the street. I likened the movie First Reformed where First Reformed was in fact a museum. You know, you had a little worship service there with a few odd people, but it was it was basically a museum. And so Park Street's Park Street remains a living, breathing, vital congregation, but they are also a museum. And my niece for one one of her summer jobs was the basically at Park Street giving the people talk to the waves of tourists that would come in understanding how that church functioned within the broader ecosystem. And yeah, and surely churches continue to function within the broader ecosystem in American society today. I mean, it's national news. Jerry Falwell Jr. and his wife and the pool boy. So but the way they function within the ecosystem is is quite a bit different than during the Revolutionary War period, even if it may not be the case that fewer fewer Americans go to church today than went to church on Sundays during the Revolutionary War. I mean, a lot of people premise it on, well, fewer people, fewer Americans go to church today. No, not necessarily. A lot fewer went to church, you know, in that period than today. And if you read history of that period, you begin to recognize that, you know, the the religious convictions of George Washington and Ben Franklin and Thomas Jefferson were interesting. And so but but today there is there is a severe disconnect where in some ways religious and people who don't consider themselves religious are are having real difficulties having conversations. Yeah. And and the default is that at least in sort of like if you're a millennial working at a tech company with a lot of other millennials, the default is that religion is weird and silly. And if you accidentally let slip out that you went to church this past Sunday, people like take note of that and maybe quickly change the subject. There is no natural way to bring that up in conversation. Except that with certain forms of what people would not consider religiosity. Well, I was meditating this morning. That would be considerably less weird. Yes. Saying you went to church on Sunday. The fact that maybe you went you went to yoga. You go to yoga in the morning before. That would be considerably less weird. Or even a mindfulness retreat or something. And, you know, the desert of Arizona or something wouldn't you know, people might get interested in that or doing some interesting things at Burning Man. That that's totally normal. But like going to an actual Christian church regularly on a Sunday, that that's weird. And people don't know how to deal with that. And and I a lot of Christians that I know that are in those environments just learn to keep it quiet. Right. You even as evangelical as much fervor as they have for spreading the good news. They they even then after a while learn how to just not really bring that up very much unless with it's with trusted people. So so that that's why I think is part of the context for this whole estuary thing is that the circumstances for the American church like Europe maybe has been dealing with this a little bit longer than we have. Although even that is just so different. Right. When there's state churches and you're like like Italy, you know, yeah, sure. Way less people go to church in Italy than go to the church in the U.S. right now. But it's Italy for heaven's sakes. You know. Right. So it's just a very different and new thing. So it requires a little bit of a shifting of priority and strategy in terms of how the church is going to relate to the outside world and places like Sacramento are probably at the cutting edge of having this be a difficult problem. Yeah. Well, Sacramento is Sacramento. Sacramento in many ways is sort of an estuary in terms of the cultures of America, because we're the state capital and a very blue state, but we're also a valley ag town. And in the Central Valley of California tends to be where you'll have your red state critters. But you've got a fair amount of blue state critters. So Sacramento itself is extraordinarily diverse and and does and has created for itself a culture, which I would say is estuary friendly. And in that way, it's it's not exactly the Bay Area, but it's certainly not Fresno. So, you know, it's so so that's and as an and you're literally an estuary. Yeah, it is literally an estuary because the Delta is right here. And so the you know, the as the retired chief hydrologist for the state of California goes to my church says, you know, the the size of the of the Delta watershed here is a quarter of the size of the Mississippi watershed. And when you think about how much how much water flows through the Mississippi Delta, the the California Delta is a significant estuary for for the West Coast. But Chicago is built on an estuary, too, but only kind of because our rivers flow into freshwater lakes. So there's no it's not really quite the same thing, but it's kind of the same thing. Well, we'll let it count for now. So but right away, people and and I'm not blaming anyone for here because I, you know, others have said, well, you sure didn't give a lot of details with that. You basically said a word and everybody jumped to their own conclusions about the word, which is fine. But but the the initial idea was that I Paul Vanderclay is starting something starting an estuary in which all these other people can inhabit. And OK, in a sense, I've already done that by my YouTube channel. So as I said, the church channel, there's a Living Stones, Christian Forum Church YouTube channel that has less than a thousand subscribers and most videos there get, you know, less than less than 200 views. And that's mostly me and then my personal YouTube channel. And so there is a difference between them. And that's sort of the difference between Living Stones online and estuary estuary is much more my YouTube channel where I am I am thinking out loud, having conversations with people of various backgrounds and, you know, exploring what can be explored. Now, how this and then you and I have spoken before about there are lots of there are lots of cool ideas that I have and what others have in terms of how to pursue like minded ventures like this. But I am not in a position at this point to be founder of Estuary Inc. And that I do have a day job and I don't intend to leave the Christian ministry to pursue this might become some could it even would it even be a parachurch organization? I mean, what kind of thing would it be? But my my goal has been to well, let's let's see what can be done and maybe partnerships and find people and find money and and I'd rather see three or four or five estuary significant estuary enterprises launch. And the fact that even though I there's bridges of meaning, which is a significant the bridges of meaning discord, which is a significant estuary project, just in terms of numbers of people who are relating to it. But there I've been in conversation with other individuals that are not very visible on my YouTube channel, if at all, who are in fact, thinking along these lines and starting things that are that are very similar to this, but not necessarily in alignment, not necessarily Christian. But I mean, I've been in conversation with a lot of these individuals. And so I am not looking to sort of found something to either unfold or exclude these efforts. My goal is much more to facilitate more and more of these efforts that, you know, to see them launch. And so that's and so then when I watched your, you know, I talked to you and Hank, Hank's been on the channel, you guys coming out of the I like I like the fact that in some ways, some of these beyond meetup projects are sort of growing out of meetups. Yeah, because you and Hank and some others in Chicago, you've now got a face to face relationship, you can, whether or not you can do with COVID, but you can you can go and see each other face to face, you can know each other's families to a degree, you can, you can have a in real life relationship. And I would love and and that's been the case of our, our Jordan Peterson meetup here in Sacramento that is continuing to evolve. There's another pastor in Edmonton, Alberta, who is also doing some of these things. And he's a Christian reform minister. And, you know, I've, I'd like to see, you know, other Christian reform churches and other not even non Christian reform churches up and down the West Coast also develop into some of these things. And I in many ways I see urban Abbey, the the host of what was going to be conference this September and hopefully Lord willing September 2021. You know, with myself and Peugeot and for Vicky, and I had that conversation with Scotland Morrison about urban Abbey and its ethos. These are all estuary like enterprises. And whereas it may, it may come to pass that one day, I am the leader of some estuary Inc at some point, that day is probably not in the next year or two. And it's my practice to think in public, because if I wouldn't have a YouTube channel, if I didn't think in public, I find it extremely helpful to think in public because all of you get feedback, I get feedback and all of you can error correct my thinking whether I like it or not. And that's actually a blessing says the book of Proverbs. Right. And you don't just get handpicked curated feedback, you get all sorts of feedback that you didn't expect and maybe some that you don't quite want. But it's out there and it happens and that's part of it. And it's the way of turning conversations and making them a way of budding up against reality instead of just having them be pretend, I think, that's something like that. And also then to have my ideas tested much more rigorously by all of you, you know, maybe my idea of not starting the estuary is a bad idea. And maybe that bad idea will get beaten out of me in this process that could happen to maybe I had an idea with a word that that I can't pull off, but someone else comes around and actually makes it happen. And so, you know, Christianity has this way of both infusing people with value and also making individuals to one degree or another disposable. And I think both of those ideas are true and correct. And so my participation in this is, you know, in some ways disposable. By making people disposable, you mean that it creates something that's bigger than the individual. So even if the individuals drop off, it keeps going. Exactly. There are other ways. When I first heard Jesus, I was like, oh, that's what you mean. No, because and the apostle Paul exemplifies this in the New Testament when he says he looks at the Corinthian church and some of them are fighting, well, they're fans of Paul and other fans of Apollo and other fans of Peter. And Paul's like, you know, no, we are the body of Jesus Christ. And so Paul VanderKley, you know, to whatever degree God uses Paul VanderKley, so be it. But the mission and the effort goes far beyond him. Out of love for people. Right. So we should at least mention Jordan Peterson in all of this. Right. Because part of what's going on with your YouTube channel and Bridges of Meaning and all of this is connected to something that he got going. And it's been three or four years since that ball started rolling. I'm not sure if we've really found any clear of the words to describe what exactly it is that's going on. But it was something like there had been this built up animosity and confidant of the people who were confused and distrust and lack of ability to communicate between kind of, I don't know, the Christian culture and especially the intellectual American culture. And that he's somehow just like with, you know, some strange lectures, bridge that divide almost immediately in a way that was new and refreshing and that a lot of people found exciting and meaningful and some people even found life changing. Right. And so you, your channel got going just sort of trying to talk about what's happening there and sort of building off of that. And so something involved in what was going on around the wake of Jordan Peterson in 2017, 2018, thereabouts is connected to what we're doing. But your criticism of Jordan Peterson, which I think is totally valid, is that he was not institutionally minded. He was, you know, the one man traveling show. He went around to a whole bunch of cities. You saw him. I saw him. Hundreds of thousands of people saw him all over the world giving his one man evangelization, evangelization tour, to, you know, telling people to clean their rooms and get their lives in order. And to the extent that it did things, it did a lot of good things. But it was so focused on him that, you know, some health stuff and whatever, and he's off the scene and seemingly that influence just dissipates. Right. There are some things that have stuck around. They're sort of clearly moving in the wake of and in the direction that he had last been pointing in. But it's interesting which of those things have kept their momentum and which haven't. But the thing is, is he didn't have an institution to keep momentum beyond himself. And so we want to do something. We the church, we the church, want to do something that doesn't have that downside and that's able to pick up on some of the good things he got going and to give it institutional support and structure and longevity and perhaps a clearer focus and a clearer T loss than what he was doing. And so we don't want to just be the same version of Jordan Peterson but just Paul VanderKlay. And then, you know, once Paul, you know, quits and retires or whatever, that it dissipates in the same sort of way. And that is, I think, the difference. And so what exactly is it that we want to do that does that? That's a real good question. And part of the reason that, so we had, you were there, we had on Fridays on the Discord server, we have our from 10 a.m. to 12 p.m. California time, we have our little question and answer for me, which we do different things. And then Andrea with the bangs, who I had a conversation with about Estuary said, oh, let's have a, let's talk more about Estuary after the Q&A, which we did. And where was I going with this? You know, part of the point, Joey, who's from our meetup here, I thought he made a really strong point when he said, because my point was, I have a hard time, I have a hard time laying down in words what's actually going on. Because yes, we are in Jordan Peterson's wake, and we're also sort of in my wake, I sort of played around and made some extra currents in his wake. And we created some structures that haven't endured. And the meetups that we have created downstream of Jordan Peterson, I think, I think, is a really good point. And I think, the rest of the Jordan Peterson, I think, have endured while, to my knowledge, most of the rest of the Jordan Peterson meetups have just evaporated. And I think part of the reason we have skills of doing that is because our experience with institutions like the church and the institutional church have helped us gain a bit of longevity and structure and institutionalization. But the best, the best I could do was offer a metaphorical image to what I saw happening. And that image is an estuary. It's a very prophetic thing to do. Well, and it's because some people might say, well, Jordan Peterson was around for two to three years, and that's a long time. Well, I don't think two to three years is anything. Yeah, well, that's all Jesus really did, too. That's right. But I think, I think we have only begun to see the impact of that wave that Jordan was and rode. And I think what we are doing in this space is actually of, potentially, a vital transformative power, not just in our own individual lives, but potentially for the church. Because I think what we are doing can offer churches that have painted themselves into a corner a new idea of doing something different. And I don't want, I don't want it to narrow too quickly. And so, for example, TJ Charlie at the Discord launched a new Discord. And at the, I haven't told him this yet, but he'll hear it, I'm sure. It was so funny because when the Sacramento group launched the Bridges of Meaning Discord, the reason we did it was because many people out there are not going to have the opportunity to have a face-to-face meetup group. And so, at least in the meantime, as a stopgap measure, this can be an online group for people for whom face-to-face meetings are likely not presently, nor may they ever be a convenient way for them to get together. And we have a number of individuals for whom that is true. And then when Charlie launched the Outpost, he gave the reason for being for the Outpost almost exactly what I had heard the local guys say. And so, I told Joey and Tyler, Rick, I said, you know, that is in many ways the highest form of flattery. Because don't look at what Charlie is doing as competition, look at it as complimentary. Because your idea was in fact so good that, well, maybe he didn't quite get that idea from what you had created, but the idea was so good he decided to take the initiative and do it himself. And I would love to see that sort of thing multiply. When, when after I did my YouTube channel and I saw this second wave, the Rando's and Mary and Karen and others start their own YouTube channels, that to me was the greatest compliment they could ever give. Because in a sense, they saw me doing something. Hang on, someone's really in earnest to talk to me. So I'm going to pause this. Wrong numbers, one thing wrong addresses. You're having services here for my niece this week? No. You're not the way? Do you know the way? It's like, you shouldn't ask a pastor that question. Anyway, so. So, so I, I want to see people start stuff and try stuff, because you don't know where it will go. And sometimes I'll talk to Karen and Mary and, and, you know, Bern has his power and, Bern Powers has his channel and, you know, Bern has his power too. But, you know, if, if we can, if we can incentivize not just individuals to try things, but even have people come together. And, you know, I've seen that in our local meetup and get some things going. Well, I'd rather start 10 or 15 things than one, because, you know, who knows where 10 or 15 things go? Often what happens is 10 or 15 things go and not, you know, a bunch of them peter out, but some along the way pick up that the real key is that you're investing in people and they are gaining capacity and learning and trying. And again, it's the same reason I think out loud in public in that I get smarter when people disagree with me. Yeah. And while giving people responsibility gives them a chance to learn from the feedback of experience and success and failure too. Right. And it's also okay if we try and do things and not all of them work either. Right. I think that there have been some people who are a little bit too scared of failure to, to want to try and do new things. It's okay if we mess up and it's likely we will. And, but then we will learn something and we'll keep getting better. And that is how you get better. So I guess maybe I'll, since we've scared away anyone, but the dedicated after 40 minutes, I think that I would like to share some of the thoughts that, that I had when I imagined you first talking about estuary. So I'll give something of like a condensed and refined and slightly better version of the unlisted videos that I teased about. So, so what I think is a really interesting- Either way, you and your wife are adorable together. You really are. I was just so charmed by it. Thank you. And so speak, so my wife is in a group called Don't Mom Alone. So there's a podcast called Don't Mom Alone. And then they have like discussion groups, like sanctioned discussion groups. Right. And there are leaders of those sanctioned discussion groups and the leaders of the sanctioned discussion groups have a joint private Facebook page where they can discuss stuff and share stuff and coordinate stuff. And she has a super slick website. And if you want to start your own Don't Mom Alone podcast listen group, then you just click a couple buttons and they send you some resources and you can register and you can find groups if they already exist, et cetera, et cetera. And then the host of this Don't Mom Alone group will go on traveling tours where she goes to these groups and hosts a live version of the podcast at these groups. And that's exciting for the people because they get to meet the celebrity in the flesh and then have some meet and greet and elbow rubbing time afterwards. And I think she's probably writing a book and that sort of thing. Right. So that's a little similar to what you're doing and a little different. Right. And so and also it's also just interesting all the different voices in this. There's just really clearly a spectrum from openness to conscientiousness, I guess, to use Jordan Peterson's terms. Right. The people who are like, oh, we'll just try a bunch of things and we'll see where it goes and isn't the world an exciting, wonderful arena of possibility. And don't try and put too many boundaries around it because we might kill what we have going. And the people are like, who knows what the rules are? What's going on? We need structure. We need lines. We need a plan. We need to, you know. Right. There's just a little bit of that personality clash and some of that, you know, we, those two different temperaments need to work together to use the best that each of those perspectives have to offer and not just ignore each other because they're both partially right. But I guess I sometimes am a little bit more in the practical. We need to do something. We need lines. We need a battle plan. We need an organization. And also, I don't know, I've tried to start some startups in the past and stuff like that. I'm a little bit, I don't know, entrepreneurially minded and sometimes think, you know, how do we make this as successful as we can, as quick as we can? And there are dangers to trying to do that sort of thing. But also, if you don't do that sort of thing, you can be leaving harvest unharvested or wheat unharvested in the fields. So thinking about that Don't Mom Alone podcast, I feel like right now we have a couple meetup groups and a couple things that are similar to ish, similar ish to us out there. But there is no shared coherent structure, really. They're like, no one, no one besides like people really on the inside know that your Sacramento group really has any tangible connection to our Chicago group, right? There's no website that lists our two groups as part of the same whatever anything that one could find out there. And so part of me thinks that we could benefit from a little bit more of that sort of thing. And I think that you and I both agree that a lot of the Jordan Peterson stuff in your stuff has been driven through the internet. And that there are wonderful things about the internet and that it allows you to connect to people all over the planet Earth. And it also can have something of a self filtering effect where you find people that are different from you in some ways, but there's at least something drawing you together. But there's something just a little bit disembodied and dissatisfying about something that's purely internet based, right? We're human beings, we need flesh and blood interaction. We need the words to be made flesh, as I said, instead of just being ephemeral. And so I think that like, I think you and I would also both say that some of the most meaningful stuff that's come out of this are the interpersonal interactions from our live in person group. And so really, I think what I really want for this group to do a little bit better is to make it easier for other people to get that. Because your group has had the benefit of at least you, as well as a bunch of you know, other interesting folks and the Chicago group, you know, it took a bunch of things going right for it to be able to succeed. And it almost didn't. And stuff like that. And so there are some of those barriers that we could make easier for others to overcome. Like I think I said in one of my videos, there's no New York City meetup group, surely there's enough listeners of your podcasts or the various other podcasts in New York City, where there's critical mass to get something like this going. But it hasn't happened yet. And things like that. And you know, ditto Boston or Houston or wherever you want to name. So what, what can we do to help make that easier? That really is what is at the front of my mind. And like, you know, I was like talking to my wife the other night, I'm like, so you go to that podcast group on Thursdays, could you tell me a little bit more about how it works? And when she was talking to me about I was like, well, that's a great idea. Yeah. So I feel like when I first heard you talk about the estuary, this is what I this is what came to mind, like, oh, Paul's trying to do something like this. And it is it has been interesting listening to what everyone heard you say when they said when they heard you talking about the estuary, it was something of a Roe Shark test where different people, you know, immediately had came to mind what their vision was. And that said a lot about who they were and what they wanted, and also about what you had been communicating. So I feel like some ways that we could foster in person interactions are the meetups, we already know how to do them. And we know that they're good when we can get them to work. And I think we just need to figure out a couple ways that we could be more intentional about helping more of those things grow. And I feel like that is the foundation layer of turning this into a structure that isn't just technologically mediated, but is interpersonally mediated. And Luke is totally right that there is something absolutely different about interacting with people in an actual in person community than whatever techno babble interactions that we have in between. So I feel like building that foundation layer is really important to anything else that we want to do. But a group that gets together once a week, once a month, every other week, whatever, needs something to talk about, right? It gets boring if you don't have new things to talk about. A book club that doesn't read new books doesn't exist for much longer. And so I feel like that's the role that the internet media that your channel and the other constellation of related channels can supply. It's the material and it's new material that can sort of drive the conversation forward and keep it interesting and keep new thoughts come into people's head and allow things to not get too stale, right? I think that's really the role of the internet media in terms of that. And maybe we could talk sometime, I don't want to lose my train of thought just yet, about how we could maybe even help that, right? Help the internet side of things be a little bit easier to find and navigate than it currently is. Right now it's a little esoteric and takes a little bit of expertise that some people will invest the time in to learn, but some people won't. And so we're leaving some audience behind by making it as difficult as it currently is to find all of these things. So I think that the meetups are like the foundation layer and that there are ways to help get them started. Like you and Job and Van Donk were going to do your West Coast evangelization tour, the first missionary journey that got blown off course by a pandemic and crashed into an island and had to, you know, go. Poor Job had to go back to the Netherlands. And Job had, well at least he got to go back. So that's one sort of thing. And then I feel like sort of you going around or other people going around and hosting those sorts of live events, because you saw Jordan Peterson in person, you've probably been to some other sort of things. It is more fun seeing people in person than it is watching a YouTube video. I will pay 30, 40, maybe even 50 bucks for a ticket to go see some really interesting people talk at a theater in my city that I won't pay 30, 40, 50 bucks for a whole year subscription to their YouTube channel or something like that. And it's exciting seeing the audience and hearing the live interactions. And I don't know, I can remember the live conversations that I saw either Jordan Peterson or other people have much more clearly than I can remember a particular YouTube video. I can remember particular things that Jordan Peterson said when I saw him in person. And like all of his YouTube videos are kind of a fuzzy memory at this point. So there's something about going to a live event that I think is superior to an online YouTube conversation. And then I think retreats like the thing that you had in Connecticut are also a really cool idea. And then I think sort of like conferences like the thing that it was in Thunder Bay would also be cool. So I think like we've in a certain sense, we've already kind of trial run or at least thought about, I'm not proposing anything that radically different, really. I'm not trying to claim any stroke of creative brilliance or novelty. I'm just trying to say, here are a bunch of pieces. Maybe if we put them together like this, it would work better and reinforce itself better. So I've been going for a while now. I'm curious to hear what you think Well, I agree. And in many ways, what you've been asking for is more of a structure around, I mean, you're exactly right. The Connecticut event, I was going to do another such event in May or June. We were going in March, we were going to go up the coast and stop at Salem, Portland, Seattle, Vancouver. And what we've been trying to do with each stop is just like we did in Tucson, is to give the local church and some of the people who are watching my videos, kind of to bring them together at the same place. Because what happens in the church is that the church has, the pastor isn't watching my videos, probably, maybe some of them are, but most of them aren't. They're like, well, will anybody show up for this? And then when people show up, churches are like, oh, people will show up for this. We don't, we usually have to like give away bad food or have some, you know, a tub full of candy to have people show up and they never come back and we don't actually talk to them. And maybe we're giving them free babysitting, we call it Vacation Bible School. And so then when people actually show up, pastors are like, and they show up willing and ready to talk about the kinds of things that we talk about on my channel, then suddenly pastors are interested and like, oh, well, whether or not they stick with it, there's potential there. But what I'm saying is like, say COVID goes away and you go back to Salem, Oregon, and there's a pastor there, what does, what concrete steps or instructions can that pastor follow to do something that they can actually, that's actually possible for them to do? What are we asking them to do? Are we asking them to subscribe to their own meetup.com account, create their own thing with its own, you know, unique name? And then, you know, like, what is the connection between you being there and that pastor from Salem CRC or whatever church that it is and what happens after that? And how is that connected to Chicago? How is that connected to Sacramento? How does it reinforce itself? How is it not just its own island left to fend for itself and those sorts of things? Yeah. And the problem with the current system is that connection is me, because I know the name of the pastor in Salem. And in most cases, I trust those pastors to say, to have enough, to have both enough initiative and experience to say, okay, what next things do I need to do to sort of help this group fan into flame? So Pete Vanderbeek up in Edmonton, Alberta, he's, he's a, he's a transitional specialist. So he doesn't have a church, he goes around to different churches, when you know, there's a gap in their pastor or something. Exactly. And so he's been doing this in Edmonton, because that's where he lives. And he's actually got a group going, of course, Vin Dank has his group and Vin Dank's been slowly, you know, talking to his congregation to have the congregation pick up on this. But you're very much right that we we don't have a curriculum, which would tend to be what let's say this mom's group has. And part of the reason I've been actually one of the things that I wanted to talk to, I let me let me say this, everything that you're saying that you're saying I agree with, and I would love to see take the next steps. Okay, so don't hear any resistance from me, because we definitely need more structure. And the structure that we have now is still quite implicit. Part of the reason that I am, I am hesitant to make the, you know, I look at, you know, you and Joey, both you and Joey, I've got some, you know, you've got some other connections by in some other, you know, we worked for that same millennial tech company that exactly eluded to earlier. So there's so there are connections and relationships out there right now. But also what I know is that there are more connections and relationships out there that are outside of the groups that you guys know. And so I don't. And so if we start something with this, I'm totally fine with that. I just can't put in jeopardy some of those other relationships, because there are, you know, right now everybody is the problem is that is that I know more than what you guys know in terms of the potential and the opportunities out there, and not all of those things I can talk publicly about. So there, then I've got you see, there's a whole nother layer of this, which is part of me is wondering, at what point the Christian Reformed Church is going to, you know, stop with its rash about Jordan Peterson and say, you know, this, this, you know, I look at my own denomination, I think, how slow can you be on some of this stuff, people, you know, you're you're worried about this culture war over here, forget the darn culture war, and start talking to people. And I don't care if they're right, left, center, I don't care. I don't care what they have, if they have eyes and ears and a mouth and can talk and talk to them. So, so I, but you're exactly right in that if we had more structure, it would be easier for Rob and for Pete, and for john, to get more support, that the pause that I have with that is, I'm really hesitant in terms of some local branding. So what that first of all, a mom's group, I mean, those things, any pastor knows, women's Bible studies, moms group, I mean, those things are about as easy as, you know, tripping on a bad sidewalk. moms, once they have that baby boy, are they desperate for community boy, do they would need wisdom. I mean, it's just, it's a great idea. I don't take anything away from them. But it's the thing naturally flows. There are there are other aspects, you know, one of the really interesting moments in your conversation with your wife was, you know, you're talking about this stuff. And part of you is like, wouldn't this be great? Would you go to this? And your wife's like, No. And and part of where this group, the the groups have grown out of is that there is a male female dynamic to this. And whereas in church, I'm in favor of women's Bible studies, I'm in favor of men's Bible studies, and I'm in favor of Bible studies, where everybody's together. I like all three, and I'm not gonna, I'm not going to prejudice against any of them. So so part of this is the reason that, yes, we need more structure. And when we come out of COVID, I think it will be really good to probably have a bigger, a more coordinated in terms of the next missionary tour to finally get up to the Pacific Northwest, but also for me to come to Chicago, and for me to go to New Jersey, because I'm from New Jersey. And you know, the New York, New Jersey area, and Boston, I can do Boston, and I will do another retreat. And it would be nice to have at least some platform by which there's more cohesion here at this point, it's just all sort of running through. It needs to be building on something. Yes. Right. Instead of just sort of flashes in a bunch of dislocated pans. Right. Right. Right. And, and the, you know, because when I did the I did research before the Connecticut, before the Connecticut retreat, you know, I did that survey monkey, and I put it out there. And the message that came back through very clearly was that, you know, yeah, you know, we watch Paul on YouTube, and it'd be fun to meet Paul and to have two or three days and to have a private chat with Paul, all that would be fun. That's that's sort of a function of kind of the celebrity stuff. And that's that is what it is. But, but also what came through strongly was that people wanted to meet each other, because people have the sense that a lot of the other people that they're, they'll all the other people out there listening to this channel, and interested in estuary and these conversations, they're also interesting people. And so there is and that's what I think. And are there some near me, because that's the weird thing. Like it used to be when you know, shows were on cable news, you could reliably trust that if you brought up a popular TV show at the water cooler, that someone there might know what you're talking about. But when there's just so many different podcasts, and so many YouTube channels and stuff like that, well, man, I really love this pastor from Sacramento, but I have no clue and I have, you know, have extremely low probability that I can bring this up with anyone I know, and they'll know what I'm talking about. And so it's frustrating and a little bit lonely to have something that you enjoy so much, but no one to share it with in your in person life. And so we need to find a way to help make it easier to bridge that back into reality. And to give it more visibility. No, you're exactly right with this. Because, I mean, you more than others have also been saying, much to my fear, sometimes, you know, when are Christians going to wake up to this? I mean, to me with my denomination, I'm less worried about that, because I know those cats, that I can, I can handle those cats. I've lived my whole life in that the broader evangelical world. Whoo, that's a lot bigger world than the issues out there, as you well know, more than anyone. Those are complex issues. But I, you know, so, you know, one of the churches, you know, we were talking to, we're talking to Trip in Seattle, and, and if we had something a little bit more visible, with a track record, with a track record, that hasn't caused any problems yet, and has had multiple successes. I'm keeping my wife away from the pool boy. We don't have a pool boy. Right, because people need track records to trust doing a new and risky thing. But I, and so in some ways, on one hand, I very much want to keep addressing Christians and the church. On the other hand, I also want to keep them at bay. Because, because I'm a minister, because of the type of content I have, because of some of my commitments, I will tend to trigger a, a tribal ambition among people, that, oh, look, maybe, maybe Paul will be able to do to the atheist, kind of like Jordan Peterson did. And, and, you know, that tribal game, that, you know, I listen to a lot of, I listen to James, so James Tour had a conversation with Stephen, so James Tour's world-class, both world-class scientists, Discovery Institute, and I was listening to how James Tour is conducting that conversation. And again, I've got a world of respect when James Tour talks about the fact that we have no idea how life really started. I mean, a lot of these scientists are just, they're just making crap up, and they've basically, they've basically willfully allowed a whole generation of people that just say, well, science knows how life started. And I love it that James Tour is coming out and saying, you're all full of shit. You know, we don't, we don't have any idea how this started, and you can't prove it. I have my, I have my credentials, all of you know my credentials, and so when I'm calling BS on all of you, you have to listen, because he's a credible scientist. But when James Tour, as he was conducting that conversation, he slid into this evangelical tribal mode that I think is, because it's so- I mean, you said Discovery Institute, and I immediately know what you mean. Yeah, because, because it's so tribal, I think it betrays the actual mission of the church. Now, now, tribalism is natural, it's normal, it's essential to human beings, but when it comes to the church, what's interesting, what we see about Jesus is, he doesn't seem tribal, and that's where that story of the unauthorized exorcist, and why my identification of Jordan Peterson as that unauthorized exorcist, is so foundational because Jesus didn't seem to be terribly anxious about his intellectual property. Mm-hmm. And that confidence, I think, should be, is a value that I try to, I try to express in my openness, but I think it's also something that anything that I wind up putting a fair amount of my life into, I want that organization to have that as well. And I, my hope is, and I think I've seen some of that has come into the culture as we've established it so far. And, and so for me, I, that's part of the reason that I'm a little careful about some of these church relationships. On one hand, I want to give ministers a, I want to give them a little vision for, this can, this can open up new conversations with people you really do want to talk to. It might not bear immediate fruit, it might not even bear fruit in your lifetime, but this is the, this is the kind of time scope that churches are used to dealing with. We plant seeds. And are capable of dealing with uniquely. That's right. That's right. And we plant trees that, that will bless generations two or three, you know, two or three generations from now. That's what we need to be doing. And so it's, the church is too often like the Gene Wilder version of Willy Wonka, where those foolish children sell out short. And whereas, come on kids, stay out of the fudge pond, you know, keep your hands off the goose laying the golden egg, you know, hold off on the tribal grabbiness and have a credible conversation with someone. Yeah, well, I mean, being a little bit personal, like part of the reason why I'm excited about this is like, honestly, I would love to be more involved with my local church than I am, but I can't be. And I just, you know, have some natural compunction to want to be part of the kingdom work in whatever way that, that is available and open to me. And for whatever reason in God's plan, a lot of doors are often closed to me that I don't quite know why. Well, I do know why, but I don't know why. And so I will put my energy and my focus on those who let me. That's not an outrageous thing to do. And so this is something that I feel like I am welcome to participate in when a lot of other doors are closed. I wish it, I kind of wish it wasn't this way. And for those reasons, you know full well that I'm scared of having this be too associated with churches. If this is like a ministry wing of the CRC church, I'll start getting the jitters. And, and you, you know full well that I am a living embodiment of what will make this a difficult sell to a lot of churches. Yes. Yes. You know, atheists and Christians fine. Sam less fine. And so. Because atheists are pre-Christian. Sam's a heretic. Right. Exactly. And so I know full well, while I have been elbowing you, like why aren't you, you know, I've said to you, why aren't you on the cover of Christianity Today? You're more interesting than 90% of what they talk about. And so like why, why don't more people know about all of the exciting things that are going on here, which is something that I thought so many Christians have been longing for for decades. And yet when it starts happening, it seems like they're, you know, conveniently ignoring it. And it's like, what, what is that about? And it's because of weird political stuff going on is the only reason that I can seemingly understand. But so, but all right, so that's the church thing. There are a whole bunch of questions and issues about how this will relate to churches and to denominations and all of that stuff. And those will be thorny. And we both generally know that. But I think the other question is, is how is it, so this is an estuary, right? We have saltwater creatures, we have freshwater creatures, and we have creatures like me that are capable of swimming in both, but not fully welcoming either. And how do we find the saltwater creatures and how the saltwater creatures find us? Right. And if it's just these individual ministries at a bunch of individual churches with different names, and that don't have much institutional oomph behind them, or don't have any media or online thing connected to them, how are they going to find the people that they want to reach? Right. And that's where I think having a clearer, more transparent, easier to follow connection between the online world and the brick and mortar flesh and blood stuff, what yeah, will allow for that to happen. And we need to be clearer about building that bridge, such that people can cross it and find it. I think that's true. And I think that's fair. We've at this point, I mean, I sort of followed in Jordan Peterson's wave, the meetups have followed in my wave, my wave isn't very big. And I think what we've had to offer is a culture. Part of what I see is that most efforts to get big on the internet, betray the culture we are trying to grow. You know, I, you know, I got a really lovely little note from Paul and Leitner saying, he said, you know, part of, you know, Jordan Peterson got his rise, because he basically, he, you know, he, he put his surfboard onto the political riptide. And Jordan Peterson was, and this is something that I point that I continue to make, Jordan Peterson was far more important than merely the political riptide that he put his board onto. His most watched videos aren't his most overtly political ones. That's right. That's right. So, but, but Jordan Peterson got his status rocket ride to one degree or another because of the politics. And I, I watch, you know, again, that someone just sent me a video today of someone I'm not going to name him. But when I listened to these, an evangelical, he's basically on his video making the point that to be a Christian, you have to be a Republican. And whereas I, I'm a member of the Christian Reformed Church, probably 70% of the Christian Reformed Church are solid Republican voters. That's, you know, at another 20% are solid Democratic voters, another 10% swing, or maybe that's 10% or solid Dems and 20s. I don't know what it is. We don't. But not in the Jerry Falwell sense of swinging. I, I will not play, and I think people understand that I will not play these political games. I will critique woke religiosity from a theological point of view, because that's my interest in it. But a lot of the cheap, the cheap ways to get big, you know, I simply won't go there. Yeah, and it would ruin our culture if you did. Yes. And if you did, I'm sure a lot of us out there would start poking you for it. That's probably true. So, so that's so but you are right in that partly because I mean, we use Jordan Peterson, I mean, it wasn't our group has for a long time not talked a lot about Jordan Peterson because he hasn't putting much material into the stream. And even when he was on his book tour, he wasn't putting much material into the stream. And so we use Jordan Peterson as a way to find new conversation partners that we had a fairly high confidence level would be interested long term conversation partners as we explore things together, you know, rebel wisdom sort of in there, verveky, I mean, verveky for a long time was sort of a tough sell with a lot of my audience. The Christians, the spoke the Christians too much. You know, the Jordan Peterson, verveky was just too, he felt a little too new agey or too lefty for some people. But, but I think john has, I think john has demonstrated to this audience that he is a, he is a credible conversation partner, who is not going to and you know, that's, that's part of what part of the culture of, as Savilla said, is that he's a very, very, very, very what part of the culture of, as Savilla said, you know, this little corner of the internet, where we are not playing cheap political games, everybody has their politics, you know, but we are not discriminating against people because of their politics. I mean, Mary's got her- Even when verveky and Peugeot get together, they will talk about current events, right? And they'll talk about he who will not be named and, and stuff like that, but they're, they're going higher. Like verveky, verveky is a meta theologian. I think that's what verveky is. He, he talks about the building blocks of theology itself, not about an individual theology per se, although sometimes that is seemingly what him and Jordan Greenhall talk about, is trying to, now that we've reverse engineered how theologies work, let's use that to build the one that we want. And, and so, so to give Andreas his due, so Andreas, you know, that he who is often first, his, like when I've been talking with him about this, he's like, when I hear you guys talk about the asteroid, it sounds like you're creating the religion that's not a religion that, you know, verveky and Weinstein and others are talking about. And I'm like, I see kind of part of your point back. I, I, well, that's certainly not your goal. Yeah. Right. No, I, I think there are some out there who, out of frustration with the churches available to them, have looked at the estuary as, oh, now I'm going to have this, this can function in my life like my church. Probably not. Hopefully not. Yeah. And this is why, I mean, Luke is like, well, the church should be this way. I'm putting it outside the walled garden of the church for this reason. Now, that doesn't mean that individuals won't derive, hopefully, some spiritual sustenance by listening to me and others think out loud. And I mean, I do theology on my channel, some of it. And so the fact that people are deriving some spiritual sustenance and edification from that people, many, many people have told me they derived much from Jordan Peterson. So I am, I am not going to, certain Spanish words work better than English words are still in my head. I'm not going to, I'm not going to dismiss or disparage people for, for having that dynamic in their life. And I would, I would estimate at least 50% of North Americans who identify as Christian are, in the words of the seeker movement, unchurched. And so the degree that these people can find something on Living Stones online or on my YouTube channel, I am not going to despise them for that. I think eventually they are going to, they should look for a way to, to get into a in-person church. If some estuary local chapters actually become church-based, become churches or church plants grow out of them, I'd be thrilled. So I'm not cutting off those avenues, but by positioning estuary as downstream from the church, that's part of my intentionality here in that I am not trying to start a new religion. I already have one. Our Catholic members have one, our Orthodox members, our Protestant members have them, some who are in other religious traditions, you know, and, but I'm not going to give the cliche line like, well, anyway, I won't go there. Yeah, we coexist, but we don't have coexist bumper stickers. Right. And, and, and so, no, we are not trying to start a new religion and any attempt to start a new VanderKlay religion, that I will get angry about because I already have a religion and I have a master. So, you know, I'm taken. Right. And about, I do think that, you know, I'm not going to and about, I do think that, so obviously there's a couple things that are slowing us down at the moment. COVID is just a huge hamper on all of our plants at the moment, but at some point, it'll go away, hopefully. And like I've said this a couple of times, it's like we're sitting at a red light and we could either be, we could either have our engines revving, waiting for the light to turn green or we could be caught asleep at the wheel when it does. And so I feel like this is a good opportunity for us to start to lay the groundwork and the plans and the institutions that will then be able to actually be implemented once COVID goes away. Another thing that's kind of slowing us down is the absence of Jordan Peterson. Right. He was something of the engine or, you know, something of the pathway into your, this corner of the internet for a whole bunch of people. And that has, you know, that bridge has kind of fallen away. And so there's a bunch of people who are already in and we still get some new people, but the influx of new people slower than it used to be mainly for that reason. Jordan Peterson was sort of like a hurricane that blew all this salt water up into the estuary, all the way up rivers into churches. So, yes. But who knows, he could come back, right? He could be Hurricane Jordan 2.0. Who knows? Right. The second advent. And that we could be ready for that if that were to happen. But we, you know, I'm not just here to say, oh, we just need to grow faster and we need to be concerned about numbers and stuff like that. I think some people interpreted me as saying that and that's not what I'm saying. I think that you are right. And Joey said something similar, that really what we have to offer is a culture that we have helped foster and develop. Part of that is that we selected for a group of people that kind of already had a bunch of those traits because it took a certain kind of person to get all the way to the Discord server. But also, I think that through our interactions, through your channel, through the conversations, through the other channels, we've embodied a culture that is spreading, right? People learn, people watch others, they see how others interact and they start to imitate that consciously and unconsciously. But that is something that can only grow so quickly. A culture like that, yes, it can grow, yes, it can spread, but only at the speed of interpersonal transmission. And that is limited. And if we try and accelerate faster than that, then we will be turning into something that we aren't currently now, right? Instead of spreading what we currently are now. But if we don't grow, then we'll become decadent and slowly people drift away and sort of will be stuck with the hardest core of the hardest core. And that's not really even what the hardcore want anyway. And so that's what I'm saying. And I feel like when I've been hearing you talk about that, Sheree, it sounds more Sacramento-centric than what I and a lot of other people who are perhaps further away from Sacramento envision and kind of hope for. Because we hope that it will include us. And I don't want to just make you the bottleneck and that you have to do everything. I'm just saying, here's what you need to do while I get to sit on my butt and just watch you do it. You know, there's a whole bunch of us out there that I think have energy and talents that we're ready and willing to pour in to make this happen. But we do also need you in some ways and in some capacities. And how exactly that works out, we'll have to figure out along the way. Well, one of the things that I've been thinking about, I've had a number of ideas that I haven't talked about yet. I think I would like to organize a, you see, this is where the distance and the internet factor is different from a lot of the other work that I do. Like within my church work, I would get people in a room together. And I would facilitate a process. And because I have relationships with multiple of you, I would start to get that going. And that might happen. The difficulty, when you start taking those steps, you already start to develop your hierarchy. Because now we're going to have Job and Sam and Joey and Tyler and Warren and and Vendankh. And so now suddenly, what we're doing is we're taking, because there has to, you can only do it with a certain number of individuals. Because again, you've got the scale thing that happens with hierarchy. So now suddenly we have the rings are getting more defined. And we've already noticed some of those tensions in the Bridges of Meaning Discord. Because part of the new playing around with Friday Question and Answer is let's give some other people a chance to be in the inner ring. So you get these inner ring dynamics already forming. And part of me would like to hold those dynamics off as long as possible. Also because even though we've had now conversations on the Discord server, we've had conversations on Zoom, because we haven't had the face-to-face, person-to-person interactions, we, there's levels we don't know each other yet on. I mean, I've still never met you face to face. I know. We've spent a lot of time talking, but I've still never seen you. I don't even know how tall you are. I think you're tall, but I could be surprised either way. Rumor has it. But, and so that's my original plan was much more we were going to do the West Coast tour. I'm going to get out to Chicago, going to do another retreat. Thunder Bay is going to happen. And you can see, basically, so March was the retreat. September was the Thunder Bay. And I was really anticipating that that Thunder Bay event was going to, so then you can really have an idea about who's really excited about this if they're going to get to Thunder Bay. It's kind of a sorting process. Warren was planning on coming to Thunder Bay whenever it happens. And I want you and Warren to meet, because what I have a sense of is that there are more of you out there than you know. And I regularly get emails and correspondence from people who haven't written me before, but I've been watching for a while. And even a Discord server, which a Discord server as a medium, mediums have bandwidths. And I think we have a pretty good idea now, sort of what the Discord server can manage, which is why when Charlie starts the outpost, you know, who knows how many Discord servers we actually need in terms of those communities to flourish. So there's a lot going on here. But I agree, I agree with you that we ought to take advantage of this COVID pause and do some groundwork. Now, part of what I've been, and I can, I should probably, I've given, I've given Joey and Tyler some, so at Living Stones, one of the things that we've been working on is we've now got a package. So we've got a church app. I don't really have that fully together. We have a new church website, but we also have some church administrative software. This church administrative software is really set for doing the kinds of things we're doing, because there's a fair amount of overlap in terms of churches and this kind of work. It involves communication, if we want to do a conference, it involves payment, I mean, all of this stuff. And so we've got some tools now that we can leverage, because Living Stones, Little Living Stones, Little Living Stones is worship service and some Bible studies and some face-to-face diaconal work. That's what Living Stones is. That's all it is. It's a small church, but the software has a lot of potential that Living Stones is not going to take advantage of. And we can leverage some of that potential to start to build that program. And a lot of your ideas, I would like to see, I would like to see us do some of what Rebel Wisdom is doing, what Pangburn failed at. I would like to, some of the retreat stuff, and I think, because retreat is sort of, Rebel Wisdom does men's stuff and Pangburn at the conferences, and I would like to see us develop that. And then the question is, okay, what are our next steps? And I am still, like, for example, Warren in Australia has Bunches of Blokes. And you probably don't know anything about Bunches of Blokes. It's sort of an Australian, it's very estuary-like, but it's kind of a men's gathering thing. And it's sort of a promise keeper's thing. It doesn't really have the elements of promise keepers, but it's that type of thing. And they want to bring Bunches of Blokes to America. And so he's like, well, I said it's an estuary-like thing. So, you know, there might be some, but I would rather not have one curriculum. So when I look at the woman and her mom's thing, nothing against that. But that's a good vehicle if Paul VanderKlay decides he wants to be, you know, a celebrity estuary. And so we'll have little Paul VanderKlay meetups, and we'll have Paul VanderKlay groups, but the emphasis of, see, I not quite as narrow in terms of the mom thing. I'm a little too broad. That's part of the reason I don't want to do that. But I have thought of having monthly themes where I'll make two or three videos in a month on a particular thing. That can be a concentrated conversation piece. But part of the challenge that we face is that Jordan Peterson was so broad that under his banner, you had some men's movement type stuff. Christianity stuff, psychology stuff, Jungian stuff. I mean, it was academic stuff, academic stuff, philosophy, you know, evolutionary psychology. I mean, it was just so broad. And that one of the things that I've noticed in helping to start different meetups, different meetups have different concentrations depending on who the people are. Like our local Jordan Peterson meetup has a lot of conversations that single young men need to have. And so a big piece of our particular meetup is the fact that we have some younger guys and some older guys, and there's a fair amount of wisdom transmission. Now, yeah, same in Chicago, someone might look at my channel and maybe see some of that. And there was some of Jordan Peterson. But if we were to say, what our bridges of meaning is about is, you know, basically wisdom development for young men. Well, now we've got a niche. And niches are powerful because, you know, it's concentrated and it's focused. But suddenly, you know, how many of the s how many of the in the in the discord would sort of be that's not my niche. That's not what I showed up here for. That's not what I showed up here for. And this is sort of where someone should pause and come to an appreciation of the genius of the church. Because whereas, if you do enough church shopping, and I'm sure you have given your searches your circumstance, you very quickly see that churches have specialties and interests and so on and so forth. But somehow in the church, they cohere together. And so I'm reluctant to, you know, either make it the Paul VanderKlay celebrity corporation, or a niche corporation, because if people are actually going to part of the difficulty we have in our culture right now is there's so much speciality and specializations that people's lives get segmented. So now they're in the moms group. But then pretty soon, you know, what happens to those women when their moms go off to college? You're, you know, wait till your kids go off to college and see what that does to your wife. You know, suddenly, they're having an identity crisis because they were a mom. And at that suddenly, the college kids are like, stop moming me, stop moming me, if you don't stop moming me. So and so we've at this point, at least managed to have a culture where we actually have a fair amount of diversity. And that diversity also holds interest better. Because you don't get tired. Oh, no, we're going to talk with these, we're going to talk with these, we're going to talk about, you know, this subject over here. So that's, that's part of the dynamic of why, you know, we need to build a platform, but I don't want to build the Paul Vanderclay groups, or right. And that that was so part of my suggestion in my last video, I actually thought was a decently good one that was sort of making perhaps a new YouTube channel, whether it's called the estuary, or whether it's called bridges over estuaries, or whatever, estuary bridges of meaning groups, or whatever it is, whatever it's called, or something else, that was sort of like a trying to be something like a central hub in this corner of the internet, that wasn't tied to any particular one person that perhaps had a rotating cast of hosts and curators that would like interview you and interview Peugeot and interview Bishop Baron and interview Mary Cohen and all these people, and make commentary videos on all of them, and then maybe do some sort of some role in terms of making announcements and stuff like that for this things that are going on, where it was sort of basically just trying to summarize what it is that the average consumer viewer in this corner of the internet likes, and helping tie it all together and sort of like representing them, but not being the name of any particular person. It's sort of like, it's basically Rando's United with more structure and more strategy and more organization, which is the theme of this thing. It's like, here's kind of what we're already doing, let's just be a little bit better at it. So just sort of a slightly better version of Rando's United. And I think that's a great idea, and I'd love to see that happen. YouTube is an interesting place in terms of videos and in terms of developing a following. It isn't, yeah, I don't know. I don't, yeah, that's a great idea. I don't quite know how to pull it off. Because, you know, like you said, sort of sounds like Rando's United. But I'm not claiming too much creativity with any of these things. I've just said, here's what we're already doing, let's just, you know, a little bit more. And I think part of this is, yeah, it's going to be, it's interesting to be, so tomorrow I am, we, myself and Pajoe and Vervecky have a video scheduled where we're going to have a conversation together. I like your idea. I don't know if the timing is now. Okay. I, it's just, and I don't, I don't know either. Yeah. I don't know either because I suspect that if we tried to start such a thing now, we sort of get what we've already got. And so part of me wonders if, you know, and again, the second coming of Jordan Peterson, if Jordan comes back, boy, I could have talked about that for a long time because I've thought a fair amount about it. It's just so hard to know. So I think, I think right now what I would like to do is find a way for us to put, you know, because right now the, I have to wrap this up by fourish. So, you know, sort right now Vendonk has sort of been, you know, it was Vendonk and Jobe that did the West Coast tour. And of course, Jobe, you know, some people, some people want to see me, some people want to see Jobe. And, and it would be better if we had a bigger platform, more organization. We can, you know, and I was thinking, so I was thinking probably another retreat at my sister's place. I was thinking, I was all, you know, part of what Rick and I here at Living Stones are setting. We're putting a ton of work right now. When you look at the Discord question and answer stuff that Rick and I are playing with things, and basically we're setting up equipment and stuff here at Living Stones so that we can put on a conference here and probably bring in some other YouTubers and do a two or three day conference. And at Living Stones, you know, that level would probably be 100 people, let's say. And, you know, now again, because of the software, we can do registration. I mean, we can do a lot of things, but this is obviously going to happen post COVID. Sacramento is a nice place to fly into. It's a little easier than Thunder Bay. It's a little easier than Thunder Bay. So, and so, you know, we're, but if we, you're exactly right, if we had a bit more of a platform, we could begin to, we could begin to start putting things, it's hard to put things on calendars right now because of COVID, but at some point, probably, hopefully by December or the spring, we can start to put things on calendars and say, okay, we're going to hit these cities going up and down. And if we had more structure and organization, you're exactly right. It would be better if I could say to Rob, who's the pastor at Salem, Rob, here's a little bit more of a group. And so, you know, Rob's, Rob's ducked his head into the estuary a few times and, but pastors get busy because they have day jobs and families and all those things. And so you're exactly right. If we had a little bit more of a program, but again, the question is basically when I would go into a, when I would go into a place to start a new meetup, it's all just facilitation skills. I go in with zero agenda. Now that's deceptive because many of the people have been watching my channel, so they've been brought up to speed in terms of a conversation. So I sort of know where the conversation is going to go. But as I've done with the videos, okay, what's your story? And I sort of help people give little snippets of their story because something fundamental in this that is, in my opinion, anti-celebrity has to be the valued stories of the individuals in the group. And so that's another challenge in this that, that part of me, part of me in this culture wants there to be an anti-celebrity aspect to it. Yeah. Where it's not, it's not the Paul show and, and you're not just a night with mooks. This isn't just the, the, the, the mook troop formulation, you know, exercise. Right. Right. Yeah. So, so I, I agree. And I'd like to, I'd like to find some new ways to develop, develop this. And yeah, you know, how I'm just, you know, if you would, if you would say, Paul, you had to do this tomorrow, I could lay out, okay, we'll do this, this, this, this, this, because as a pastor working in denominations, working in organizations, there are certain ways that organizations tend to approach these things. And I've had experience with all of that. And part of my experience is there are ways to do it quickly, but there are always, there are always trade-offs with these ways. Okay. So now here's our, here's our board, or here are our stakeholders. Well, once we do that, now suddenly we've got other people on the fringe and we've got an inner ring. We've got an outer ring. You've always got those things naturally, but that's part of the reason it's, that's part of the reason that it's been much more ad hoc that, okay, Vendonk wants to do this and Job's on board. And actually Vendonk has a, another organization that was actually paying for gas for the tour. And so there's been a lot of other things sort of behind the scenes that I've known. And there are resources that, that can be available to us because there are some people kind of that have said to me, you know, there, there could be some, you know, there's interest in financial backing, but I don't want to make those asks until here's our plan. We're going to do a conference. These are the people we want at the conference. We're going to need this much seed money, you know, and, but I don't think we're at that level yet. We've done a retreat. Probably next step is a conference here at Living Stones, just because I got the facility. Right. We got the volunteers in terms of the meetup, but, and this is also part of the reason that I say you and Hank want to say, no, we're going to do the first conference is going to be in Chicago. And, and I say, go for it, you know, say we're going to get Vanderclay and then put your list together. And, you know, we're going to get these people and we're going to do it in Chicago and we can find a space and we'll maybe have Paul help us find a space, but we'll get a space and we're going to do a conference. And these are the dates and, you know, you know, Joey and Tyler, you know, you snooze, you lose boys. So, and that's it. And it's that, it's that non-centralized dynamic that I also want to incentivize. So, and for this to work, it'll need to be the sort of thing where there aren't barriers for the volunteers to be able to contribute in the ways that they want to. But it's also the structure that affords them to be contributing to something, right? Right. And gives them a mission and a role, right? That they can volunteer to sign up for. And, and it is, and it is also the case, as many have said, there needs to be a financial aspect to this at some point, whether it's a 501 C three or whether we, you know, my bias has tended to be we run it. It's some of this stuff is easy to run through a church because you've got certain advantages by virtue of how churches work money wise in America. And it's a legit, it can legitimately be considered a ministry by a church to do this kind of thing. Livingstone struggles in terms of administrative volunteers, but it doesn't have to be living stones. It could be, you know, a cross point in Southern California is a large church. But if we decide to go the 501 C three aspect, that's, that's okay, too. It's just that when you okay, now we get our 501 C three, now we have to have a board now. And part of it is that I listen to your vision, I listen to the vision of some of the others out there. There are some differences in these visions. And I don't want to waste a lot of time putting a bunch of you in the room and watching the expected spat over the, the non overlapping aspects of your visions and the priorities that a centralized thing would would need to create. So part of me would say, let that let this Chicago discord shame everybody else by just how good and smart and how much you're doing, you know, put the Sacramento put the Sacramento meet up to shame, you know, and, and maybe two, three years from now, there'll be a clear, something will emerge that everyone around will say, we're going with them, they got their act together, they've got the culture, right, they've got some language on this that actually works and is cohesive. And they put together stakeholders and they're really going. I'd love to see that happen. Okay, well, we'll do our best. Chicagoans are known for getting things done city of broad shoulders, the city that works city that works and you Chicago, you Chicago guys, you got you got a lot of talent there, you got some entrepreneurial gifts. So I say, I say put everyone to shame. And so you know, you know, hey, we're gonna hire Vanderklae away from living stones. So hey, go for it. You know, do it, do what you can. Sorry, or maybe you find someone better than Vanderklae and you hire him or her. I'd say go for that too. So all right, well, we got it. We got a minute or two if you got any last words, Sam, I kind of hog the end of it here. Oh, well, you know, I, what I'm not trying to do is trying to put this in a bottle and sell it. But what I, I do just wish that there was just something a little bit easier to communicate about and to share. And that doesn't seem quite there yet. And I think we need to move in that direction. Okay. All right. Good. Well, thank you, Sam. And yeah, I will keep talking. And again, I'd like to, I mean, here's an irony Thunder Bay wasn't on any of our radars. And they came up with a I mean, and I was the third one to be invited, or the fourth, actually, because there's a local, there's a local professor of the local university there that's also going to be talking with us. But you know, they took the initiative and put something together and, you know, history favors the bold. All right. All right, Sam. Good talking to you. Good talking to you too. We'll talk to you later. Talk to you later. Bye bye.