https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=JvWkxPC-VLU

 The city's the man who does not want you, Council of the wicked, for a standing way of sinners, or to sit in the seat of mockers. But his delight is in the love of the Lord, and on his lawn he meditates day and night. He is like a tree planted by streams of water, which yields its fruit in season, and whose leaf does not wither. Everything he does prospers, not so the wicked. They are like chaff that the wind blows away. Therefore the wicked will not stand in the judgment. Nor are sinners in the assembly of the righteous. For the Lord watches over the way of the righteous, but the way of the wicked shall perish. The Lord watches over the way of the wicked. The Lord watches over the way of the wicked. The Lord watches over the way of the wicked. The Lord watches over the way of the wicked. The blessed is the man who does not want you, Council of the wicked, for a standing way of sinners, or to sit in the seat of mockers. But his delight is in the love of the Lord, and on his lawn he meditates day and night. He is like a tree planted by streams of water, which yields its fruit in season, and whose leaf does not wither. Everything he does prospers, not so the wicked. They are like chaff that the wind blows away. Therefore the wicked will not stand in the judgment. Nor are sinners in the assembly of the righteous. For the Lord watches over the way of the righteous, but the way of the wicked shall perish. The Lord watches over the way of the wicked. The Lord watches over the way of the wicked. The Lord watches over the way of the wicked. The Lord watches over the way of the wicked. The Lord watches over the way of the wicked. The Lord watches over the way of the wicked. There we are, just a little bit of branding for you all there. Love Dogbark's music. I put the link below. I put the link in the crawl where Dogbark's channel is. He's got plenty of music. He and Freddie have been going down to Old Sac trying to do a little bit of music on the street. I talked to Dogbark last week about that song and I asked him where he got the beat from. He said, well, there's this little toy piano that was in the house. And you know how those little toy pianos have those buttons that you can press the beat? So that was the beat. And then of course Psalm 1. And it was just beautiful. It was just beautiful. And of course Freddie and Charles dancing can be seen in greater length than perhaps unwatchability over at the Freddie and Paul show. Those of you in the No Wait, No Ads, Who Can't Wait for Things got to meet Sean, who is the colleague of Bowtie Brian, who was on the Freddie and Paul show. And had just a tremendous conversation with Sean, had a great conversation with Aaron Wren this week too. They're both in No Wait, No Ads. They'll come out next week. So those of you who are impatient and have $7 to spare can see it right now. Otherwise it'll be all beyond next week. Look at all this. The Grim Grizz grift has just colonized me. And so here I am just trying to learn from the grift. But we are not here this morning for grifting. We are here this morning for the Bridges of Meaning question and answer. And those of you who would like to ask a question, there might still be room in there depending on how long my answers are. Those of you who would like to ask a question can probably get one in still this week and the link is below. A lot of questions about Hermes. The questions tend to be some people who write them in after, sort of get them in next month. And so that's where we're going to start. I've got to set up my preset here. Bing, bang, there it is. There's the Bridges of Meaning. Short questions for PBK. Short is always nice. I'll try to sneak in a real short one. Did Jesus deconstruct death? Well, you know, of course it depends on what you mean by deconstruct. I don't think it's a bad way of talking about it. One of the things I've been mulling over, which hopefully this afternoon I'll have a little bit of time to make a video on, is some thoughts after the Symbolic World Conference. I've watched some of the talks and I sort of want to connect reconstruction with imitatization of the gospel. That's a big word. But it's very interesting when you say look at some of the liberals. Like actually this will show up in the sermon because I've got a rough draft for the sermon. I haven't done the video rough draft for the sermon yet, but that'll appear tomorrow morning. Look at me, just doing all the...I'm dogfooding here. Just doing all of the promos for upcoming videos. One of the most interesting moments in the Symbolic World Conference was Father Stephen DeYoung gives this long talk about Nietzsche and the resurrection, which of course is just sort of catnip for Jordan Peterson. And he gets to it. And of course Jordan Peterson basically completely takes over the question and answer period by...if there's one question he asked, the one question he had when he got up and proceeded to talk, more talk than ask, was basically the question that everyone in the room could anticipate him asking, which was... Like, do we...what really comes after death? Are we really raised from the dead? That's the question post-enlightenment. And well, I'll talk about that in the rough draft for Sunday. The resurrection...I've also been doing a lot of thinking about deconstruction and reconstruction, so I did a video about that a few weeks ago in the middle of February, and it had Peugeot on the title and that it also had a question and answer to the naked pastor, because one woman talked about the fact that she had left church and... T. Grogg, you're going to colonize the comment section? Don't push too hard. There's a lot of wrenches around, so I'm just warning you. I don't want to wrench you, but there are a lot of wrenches around, so I got to get T. Grogg in for a full treatment, Randall's conversation, as T. Grogg has a religious sliver in his paw that really needs to be pulled out. When Jesus rises from the dead, it's fundamentally a different resurrection from Jesus raising Lazarus or the son of the widow at name or Jairus' daughter. Christ's resurrection is a...it's like but greater. I really like Jonathan Peugeot's argument for the resurrection, because Jonathan Peugeot's argument for the resurrection is that kind of the complete contrarian, the resurrection is validated by all of the tiny resurrections that we see normally. This morning I finally finished ContraPoint's video on Twilight, which I turned it off after 10 minutes when I first started reading. It's almost three hours, because I was sort of waiting for her to get beyond just Twilight, but I think it was really excellent. It goes into a lot of good things. You just use ContraPoints, use whatever pronoun you want to for ContraPoints. Life is too short to fight about pronouns. I know some of you really want to die on that hill. Don't tell this wife. Yeah, there's something about the trans woman lesbian that just sort of makes me smirk. It's like the ultimate troll of the attempt to banish the gender binary. One of my favorite tweets of the week was Benjamin Boyce with two trans women YouTubers complaining about the demise of feminism. Then my response to that was that principalities and powers always rise to the level of their incompetence. Things will find their tell-offs whether they embrace one or not. When they do, they run their course, and sometimes they recycle, but they do. In some ways, that's what we're talking about with respect to death. One way to understand the Gospel is death has been reigning over the world right from the beginning. I've been in Mark where Jesus, this Sunday, Jesus goes to Jerusalem and they have these debates with the...Jerusalem would obviously be the peak of a particular hierarchy with respect to the state of Second Temple Judaism before the destruction of the temple. You have the Sadducees, you have the teachers of the law, the Pharisees tribe is there, you've got all of these people. It sort of marks out their first century culture war. Jesus basically shows himself to be the boss. Right from the start, they hit him with the authority question because their authority is...is this the thing with these questions and answers? You just always get me preaching. Their authority is based on their platform, which is the platform of the temple, which continues to be a significant platform in the world today. Their platform is the platform of the temple. Their platform is the status that they achieved to a degree with the Hasmonean dynasty, with the revolt against the Greeks. Their platform then, however, is really...the Romans are part of their platform. That's the easiest way to say it. Because, of course, how did Herod the Great get his throne? Herod the Great got his throne from Caesar and everyone in the world, the Roman Empire, got their throne from Caesar. Caesar is the King of Kings and the Lord of Lords. And so Herod gets his throne with Caesar. And then no matter where people were in their position in that hierarchy in Jerusalem, they were all captive to the Roman preoccupation and telos of keep peace in that part of the world so taxes can flow and grain can continue to grow. And so they can continue to move from Egypt to feed the hungry masses of the super city of Rome. There's the economy of the Roman Empire in a real nutshell and the Roman concern with Judea. Keep it peaceful. We've made allowances for the strange religion of the Jews. They can have their temple, but don't shake the status quo. And so the first question out of their mouth when they want to debate Jesus, it's sort of like Second Temple YouTube. The first question out of their mouth is whose authority do you represent? And of course, a lot of YouTubers would say God, of course, but Jesus is way too savvy. And so because Jesus understands that they are captive to an economy. And so what he really wants to do is expose the economy that they are captive to. And it's one of these open secrets that everyone knows. Everyone knows who they are captive to. They'll say it in the corners. They'll say it to each other, but they won't say it out in the open. And one of the interesting topics that have been going around in our local estuary lately has been open secrets. And in a lot of ways, this little corner, Jordan Peterson, Jordan Peterson was Jordan Peterson fueled his status rocket by exposing an open secret. That's a reliable way to fuel a status rocket. So Jesus just says to them, well, you tell me where John the Baptist received his authority. Was he from God or was he from Earth? And they know they can't answer this question because John the Baptist was a rock star. And John the Baptist was put to death by a Herod. And so it's already a touchy subject. And what it exposes is that the Jerusalem hierarchy is captive to the politics of the day. And Jesus basically says, I'm going to transcend all of this and I'm going to pay the price for it. Now right there, when he tells his disciples three times in the Gospel of Mark, he's going to be killed in Jerusalem. He basically says, I am willing to reveal the open secret and I'm willing to pay the price because this is something Renee Girard makes good use of. Every regime in the world uses the sword and all of its various permutations to keep its power. That's basically what Renee Girard says. There's the kingdom of Satan, in a sense. And Jesus says, so death reigns over humanity. And I am in fact going to die. Now many people were martyrs before. In fact, the tradition was that the blood of the prophets was spilled outside the walls of Jerusalem on a regular basis. And that wasn't just a historical footnote. That was a symbolic image, a historical symbolic image of these power dynamics. And so then Jesus says, and what's really amazing about this quote, and what's always fascinated about this quote, is that we don't find it in the Gospels until we find it on the lips of Jesus' adversaries. He says he will destroy, he doesn't say he will destroy it, destroy this temple and in three days I'll raise it up again. Now that then draws the connection between this paradigm and reign of death and temple practice, which is filled with blood. And actually one of the videos I didn't make this week, because it's not actually an easy video to be clear, but actually if you look at towards the end of the Contrapoints video, Contrapoints does a nice job of talking about some of the understanding and meaning behind blood sacrifice. And the temples are absolutely dripping with blood and the Israelite cult, and I don't mean that as in terms of a modern cult, I mean that in terms of the temple, the altar, all of this ritual practice is simply filled with blood. I am currently going through the book of Leviticus with my men's group at Living Stones, and it was amazing when Contrapoints basically says, you know, you can't understand Jesus unless you understand the book of Leviticus. Contrapoints is exactly right. It was amazing how much Contrapoints got right in that video. It's a ton of stuff. So all of this death and blood is this strange liminal thing, and again Contrapoints gets that right too. It's the strange thing where blood is a liminal space. Blood inside the body is life. When blood gets poured out of the body, it's death. Blood is this liminal space by which we pass through when we are born. And so blood both desecrates and purifies. Blood does that both. It has this combination of things. Water doesn't have that combination of things. Blood has that combination of things because it's a liminal space. And things pass between the sacred and profane over blood, and blood basically is death. Now again, you might point out the Jehovah's Witnesses. I know, Trey, I got the note from John Van Dock. I know you're trying to work the John Van Dock way to get a special Rando's conversation. I love John Van Dock, and John Van Dock gets all the conversations he wants, but poor John Van Dock isn't a portal. But you'll get your turn, Trey. You'll get your turn. Stay in the corner long enough and you'll get a chance to talk to me. That's just the way it goes. So blood is this liminal space, and blood represents life and death. And you might say, well, well, well, Jehovah's Witnesses, of course, sort of really interesting what happened in the Second Great Awakening in the Burndover District with the Jehovah's Witnesses, the Seventh-day Adventists, and the Mormons. But anyway, if you just think of it very phenomenologically, I'm alive, stick a knife in me or a sword in me, and blood pours out, I die. And at a very low resolution, phenomenological way, you can say life is in the blood. If you have the blood inside of you, you're alive. If your blood pours out of you, you die. It's that simple. It's very symbolic. It's very pragmatic. It's very factual. It's all right there. And Jesus basically says, you can shed my blood and I won't die. But I will die. But then I'll be raised from the dead. And in my resurrection, there's also going to be ascension and I will reign until I come again to finish the story. And so, yeah, does Jesus deconstruct? Depending on what you mean by deconstruct, yes. But this dance we do with deconstruction and reconstruction, Waves of Obsession did a tremendous video. So I've had, so I have limited hours each week to devote to YouTube. I know that surprises a lot of you because I put out a lot of stuff. But I have limited hours. And when I had my little calendar mishap and opened the floodgates to Rando's conversations, which I've tremendously enjoyed, I decided to honor them all. Yeah. There you go. Paul didn't speak of the Eucharist, but I was thinking about it because of course that's where it all goes. And once you even contra points, once contra points starts with this stuff, it arises at its telos. Now contra points is obviously got an agenda in this. And but yet in a way the telos can't be denied because to have a trans woman in gaudy garb and backgrounds, walking through this stuff. It's just too archetypal. So Jesus deconstructs death and the resurrection and what Jesus basically says, and what Christians who, Christians who can answer Jordan Peterson's question, If you believe it, and you got to deal with all that stuff about belief. This is exactly how the church conquered Rome, because Christians would say, death has been deconstructed and Rome, you no longer have power, the power, you no longer wield the power of death over me. Now, you can see this played out in in movies all the time. But Christians go a step further by not just because here's the funny thing about Jesus resurrection. Again, I've made this point many times. If it had been me. See, a lot of the times we sort of judge Jesus. If I had been Jesus, I would have done it this way. And whenever I think that way I realize how stupid I am. How sinful I am, how carnal I am, how silly I am, all of these things. Because if it had been me, I would have showed up at Peter and showed up to pilot and showed up and said, how do you like me now? Jesus doesn't do that. And of course this bothers people, because people are like, well, if, if, and of course, I think if I had been a gospel writer and if I'd been making this stuff up, I probably would have had Jesus do that because it's basically what happens in every single Christ figure motif that happens in the movies is that, you know, so Neo, we can pick on the Matrix Neo, of course, dies and is raised from the dead. Harry Potter dies and is raised from the dead. Harry Potter dies is raised from the dead has a showdown with Voldemort and wins. Jesus doesn't go to pilot. Jesus doesn't go to Herod. Jesus doesn't knock on the door of the Antonia fortress and say, how do you like me now? Now, of course, if Jesus had that would have inflamed the messianic aspirations of his followers, which were already really to a fever pitch because of the miracles that they saw. Because if you can, if you can raise a person from the dead with a word, you can kill them with a word. Why? Because we reliably know how to kill people. What we can't do is raise them from the dead. But if you can raise them from the dead, certainly you can kill. So then why doesn't Jesus use his power to kill? Jesus is deconstructing death. There we go. 24 minutes on the first question. You get me preaching. Second question. Question of the week. That's been the question of the month in some ways. Do you feel you could perform an exorcism? What do you think about demons and demonology? There will certainly be more videos and conversations on this. John Vervaike and I are going to likely have a conversation about Hermes. Father Eric below, is it good idea to talk to Hermes? Vervaike seems to think so. Edit. I see you addressed this topic in a video. If you don't have anything to add, feel free to move on. Thank you, Father Eric. A big part of what's happened in this corner is the scrambling of facile assumptions in modernity about what we mean by the word spirit. So philosophers have ideas. And when some of the ideas get mimetic, they get reliably low resolution. And then they get multiplied throughout the culture to the point that the ideas basically arrive at something like herd immunity. And this is what happened in the Enlightenment. I've been reading a really good book on the Enlightenment that, again, you guys have been getting around those conversations because my quota of time that I have to do videos is pretty much full of those conversations lately. So once I get that balance right again, I'll get a chance to do more book things and things like that. Facile assumptions. There you go. So basically downstream from, and of course it doesn't start with Descartes, but inherent in sort of a two worlds mythology, and I've talked about these zones many times throughout the history of my videos. Plato, in fact, and Socrates very much see this difference, sort of the line of the Age of Decay is in here where C.S. Lewis says it well, all instantiations of love in this age, in this dispensation, I don't say that as I'm not a dispensationalist, is a perfectly good term before dispensation. Dispensation, let's colonize the term. Dispensation basically means epic age, period of time, marked with significant boundaries. Every instantiation of love in this dispensation will end with death or betrayal. And so Lewis says that, and he's dead on right. But love doesn't end. And what he's pointed to is something similar to forms. I've run through this, I spent a long time running through this in videos a number of years ago. When my grandmother, I visited my grandmother once when I was in college. When my grandmother, I was in college, so 18, 19, 20. She lived across the road from the college in the Holland home. She and my grandfather and I would visit them regularly. And she says to me one day, because she's then in her upper 80s, and then I'm in my 20s, or late teens, early 20s. She says to me, you know, inside I feel like I felt when I was your age. And when I look in the mirror, I wonder, where did this old woman come from? And of course, as someone who was young, I heard that, just kind of thought, it's interesting, and went along with my life. I was distracted and busy and full of all the kinds of things that kept my attention then. Of course, the older I got, the more I realized what she was saying. Oh, that thorn in your paw, T. Grog. Here's the thing about T. Grog. You got to go to Luke's channel when he comes on the stream, because like me, he's a troll in the comments, but you get him into a conversation. He's a really sweet guy. I really like T. Grog. And I wouldn't have liked him if he hadn't come onto the live streams. And that's sort of the power of these live streams in the video. Anyway, I digress. You can use this argument as a dismissive, as something basically as a dismissal of eternal life. But inside of all of us, we have a sense of eternity. But that is inside of the age of decay. And so one way to think about almost any conversation that we've been having forever is the relationship between those two worlds. And you can find it described many different times. One of my favorites is in the Book of Ecclesiastes, depending on, you know, you can play around with just about any verse, but he has placed eternity in our hearts. So it's the reason death fascinates us. Because when you go to the casket of a loved one, and you look at now this embalmed body in the Dominican Republic, they didn't do embalming, they had to get him in the ground in 24 hours. So you do the funeral right away. I remember one pastor who died. The body was already starting to bloat. The body was already starting to bloat. They put an iron, an iron, because there it's not an electric iron, it's a real iron that they put in the fire, then it's heavy, they put it on so we would not puff up too much. But when you look in that casket, I looked in the casket at my father. I looked in the casket at my sister. I will likely look in the casket at my mother. My children will look in the casket at me. And now we have all these photographs and now I have like these these little electric electronic picture things and they cycle through. And I've got I scanned pictures from my father, he loved to take pictures, I scanned older pictures and so I see my father with myself and my two sisters when we're little. And he's young and vibrant, head full of black hair, wearing a clerical collar. And so we wonder about this. Now, almost forever one would say well the upper is spirit and the lower is matter. The upper is timeless, eternal, the lower is temporal and subject to the age of decay. So, on that sense we have a sense of spirit, but we also have, if you just follow the use of the word in our language. That's why I use school spirit because no one will deny the reality of school spirit we all, we all understand school spirit at least in the West if you went to a high school, because that school spirit dominated, dominated your identity. Maybe you were a jock and you're on top of the pile. Maybe you were a nerd in an outcast and you were over to the side. Maybe you were a nobody and nobody paid attention to you. And the teachers had their favorites and you had this complex spiritual realm in a school. And the building made a difference and the history of the site made a difference. And so you can understand in school spirit, the, the, the touch point between reality. Like the basically reality is is between heaven and earth. It's between spirit and matter. It's between eternity and now. It's between Kairos and Kronos. You have all of these dualities. So then another big topic that has been a topic for years and Jonathan Peugeot and John Vervecki have talked about this multiple times. It's been sort of the topic that they have gone back and forth on is the ontology of spirit. That has been their big conversation back and forth. And what Jonathan Peugeot succeeded in doing with his channel was imitantized biblical language. Part of there's always this tension between I talked about it in the live stream last week. Anticipated eschatology and realized eschatology. It's back and forth. And we have this in life. Every, every expression of telos has this tension because we almost always have a temporal dynamic, a temporal dimension, and we're moving towards something. So let's say let's use Grimm Grizz's channel. What is the telos of Grimm Grizz's channel? Now there's a variety of them. One of them is to break the fourth wall. One of them is to exercise the spirit of set from his dominion that he has held over children in the West since the end of the Second World War. And what Grimm Grizz did very well was the Grimm Grizz is a mimetic genius. He really is. Most geniuses are not appreciated because they're a little too far out ahead and they're a little too strange. Preachers are sort of liminal characters because we know enough to see something and we're conversant enough. And so we're just always translating. So what I've done often is take Peterson, Peugeot, Verbecky and put it in terms that other people down below can understand. And now Grizz is in that category too. But Grizz doesn't have the status markers of hierarchy like the others have. So maybe a telos that is in Grimm Grizz's channel is for Grimm Grizz to ascend a hierarchy, but it's probably not going to happen. It's just it's who he is. And people like Grizz, the minute he starts heading up a hierarchy, something, whether he does or something around him will pull him down. In all likelihood, not always. Some pretty amazing people have ascended hierarchies. But hierarchies of now, it might be that 50 years from now, Grimm Grizz will people will watch his channel sort of like people read C.S. Lewis today, The Great Divorce. And you have The Great Divorce, you have all of these references to people that Lewis was sort of talking with. People read The Great Divorce and it's like, I really need a commentary on this to please explain who all these people are, characters are. I understand the archetypes, but I don't know the references. It might be that 50 years from now, Grimm Grizz's channel will be, you know, after Grimm is dead, you know, the whole starving artist thing after Grimm is dead, everyone will be watching his channel and they'll say, yeah, you got to go to Wikipedia to find out who Jordan Peterson is, Papa Peterson, Papa Peterson. So anyway, Grimm Grizz is exercise attempting to exercise set and the children of set from the people that set is possessing. Is set a God? See, this is the memetic genius of Grizz because he takes that little poem, which I don't think was original to him, but he was able to use that and put it into the conversation and set colonized us in a way. Now if I were to, if I, if Grimm Grizz were to tell us, I was doing some drugs or I was driving across the Lonesome Prairie in North America and set came in and talked to me. It wouldn't have the same effect as John Vervecky talking to Jordan Peterson about Hermes. What's the difference between set and Hermes? They're both ancient deities. They're both spirits. Grimm Grizz has managed in a very Peugeotian way to show us all that set is real. And you'd say, of course set is real. I'm not talking to a television set, but I'm looking at a monitor right now. I'm looking, I've got the screen on my phone, I've got the screen in front of me, that stream yard is running. Of course set is real. And set has colonized me and set and its branding have taken over parts of me. Okay, has set possessed me. If you look at the Pentecostals, they in the, as Pentecostalism continued to develop and they really attempted to imitantize the practices of Jesus, including exorcism, they developed more nuance in their language with respect to exorcism. And so when I was in college, dabbling with various charismatic things, I remember a Christian Reformed Church because Christian Reformed Churches were dabbling in various things. And of course the Christian Reformed is a fairly flexible denomination. You've got a fair amount of liberty in it, which is really why the Christian Reformed Church is having this defining conversation. But I remember Pentecostals talking about demonic oppression. Hmm, that's an interesting word. Demonic oppression and the demonic oppression might be alcoholism. It might be an addiction to cigarettes and smoking. It might be pornography. It might be, oh, borderline personality disorder. It might be on and on and on and on. And oppression was basically a low grade possession because possession means, well, when Jordan Peterson talked about men living in their mother's basement covered with Cheetos dust, playing video games and doing porn all the time, he was basically talking about possession. And that's the reason I call Jordan Peterson the unauthorized exorcist of Mark Nine, because he was exercising the spirit of, now we don't have a nice little historical archetypal name. Grim Grizz might say he was exercising the spirit of set. But of course when Jordan, when Grim Grizz talks about set, he talks about television set and what's down for him from television set and he sees porn and video games as part of the family of set. So, Grim Grizz is practicing exorcism on his channel. Jordan Peterson has practiced exorcism on a broad scale by using YouTube, which is a very definite child of set. This is in some ways an image of exorcism. And the Gospel of Mark is, you can find commentary after commentary about this, I'm not making this up. One of the dominant themes in the Gospel of Mark is Jesus' battle with the principalities and powers. Now the Gospel of Mark doesn't use that language, Paul will use that language later. But set is a principality. And Grim Grizz is working on exorcism through it, Jordan Peterson has, I have been. So the truth is we're doing exorcism all the time. Another video that didn't get made with my Randos calendar blowout was a reworking of my second conversation with Jonathan Pujol where we go through angels and demons. Again, Jonathan Pujol was imitantizing this ancient language. When Grim Grizz talks about set, he is imitantizing an Egyptian god. We're doing all this imitantizing because this is the reconstruction and deconstruction we are always doing to make sense in the world and to understand the world. And as we make sense of the world and we understand the world, we participate in the world. So Jordan Peterson and Grim Grizz have been doing exorcisms. Now, when I talk to Jonathan Pujol about demons, he, as he usually does, sort of brings us back to the Middle Ages. Martin Luther is this liminal figure, very interesting figure. I've made the point that some have told me, some have said that the most discussed person in human history in terms of publishing is Jesus Christ. The second most is Martin Luther. Martin Luther was an interesting liminal figure because Martin was basically born on the cusp of the medieval period and the modern period. And so you'll find Martin Luther talking about devils all the time. It's even in his most popular hymn, A Mighty Fortress is Our God. And what Jonathan Pujol does nicely is talk about the devils, the devils that we have inside of us, the demons that we have inside of us. Do you have a smoking addiction? You've got a little demon inside of you. And that demon is a pattern. As in Jonathan Pujol takes the medieval image and then uses a modernistic word called a pattern. Because none of us doubt patterns, because actually a key thing to many of the scientific methods, they're all based on patterns. Because this is part of the reason C.S. Lewis makes the point that all of history is a miracle because it's a one-off. Because the whole thing together, the whole show is one pattern. But there are little patterns within the patterns. And what science actually does is recognize patterns, define context and context for patterns and says these patterns are reliable. And to the degree that you can colonize and harness and wield these patterns, you will have power in the world. So it's deeply religious. And so exorcism is basically recognizing patterns within us and interrupting them or dispelling them. In that sense, AA has been a reliable exorcist for the demon oppression of alcoholism. And a whole bunch of people will hear that language and say blatantly obviously. And T. Grogg in the comments section is going to say, there goes VanderKlay talking woo. Yeah. But if you look at Chad the alcoholic and you listen to his language from the big book and alcohol, I mean, if you learn the big book, you will learn a ton of wisdom. What alcoholics anonymous is, is basically a house of wisdom that has been perpetuating lit wisdom to help people not only exercise the demon of alcohol, but also improve their lives in many really important ways in a very Christian way because it came out of the Oxford movement. So we're all doing these exorcisms and we are always at play with demons. Now, again, someone might say, oh, but you're just using that language. I am indeed. I can use other language. Science basically tried to replace the language of demons and say we have a more reliable system. And that's basically what Sam Harris says when he says that, well, religion was ancient archaic technology. Yeah, it was. And that's why I read. CW Weeks has been some of you will recognize this book. Bernie Greisel recognize this book I saw this book a lot when I was, I had to go back and find it use I could probably could have found one back there and junks that kept at church and so I've been dog fooding a little bit. I've also been borrowing from the Hebrews. We're gonna do two questions this week, maybe with this fun little book. And Fleebus told me he said, oh, it's in the Internet archives. You can read it for free. It's like, but I like the hard copy. Because basic to paganism argues Kaufman is patterns that the gods of the world are subject to patterns. And so set is subject to patterns. That's the pagan world. And the Hebrew Revolution was that God is not subject to patterns. God is free. Someone might say Calvinism. Yeah, God is sovereign. Set the basis of Calvinism. Calvin doesn't make it up. He finds it in the scriptures. So we're always dealing with this. And in some ways it depends on the language. Now, I've just immanentized a ton of stuff. But we've been fighting this modernist fundamentalist fight. And the exorcisms of science have been extremely powerful over the last 500 years. Science exercised science. And I'm going to use science. The difficulty is, oh, let's just say Hephaestus. Verbecky makes this point. Hephaestus is the god of technology. And it's a god who limps. I love it when John Verbecky says that. I don't say it as nicely as he's got his patterns and his holy words. Because buzzwords are holy words. He's got his buzzwords down. Buzzwords are holy words because buzzwords are patterned, mimetic words. That's why they're holy words. They exercise and they enchant. That's why they're magic words. That's why Grim Grizz talks about defense against the dark arts. Because when Grim Grizz is wrestling with a god's set, he's wrestling with a god. Okay? Basically what modernity does is says, we got this. We got this. We are going to disenchant the world by our exorcisms. And we are going to offer you the life of the age to come here and now. Antibiotics, sanitation, refrigeration, washing machines, energy, electricity. All of these things, wow, they're amazing. We can do these things. Now information technology, agency, in agency, out of electricity and tiny little switches. 25 nanometers, 10 nanometers, 8 nanometers, 6 nanometers. We're going to go smaller and smaller. Quantum computing. And as we get into this, we discover, oh, wait a minute. We thought set, we thought we would wield set. And what we discovered was that the demons in us, set is wielding us. Because what's set using on the television? He's using us. So who is using you? And that's the moment we're at right now. And this is why talk about spirits is a big deal. Now Hephaestus didn't actually manage to win. Because, and you can watch the Matrix, the Matrix deals with all this stuff too. There are certain unruly programs, they call them programs in the Matrix. There are certain unruly spirits that just don't play nice. It's almost like they had, the problem with the kingdom below is that rebels rebel. And so if your kingdom is built on rebellion, you're never going to be able to keep order. And so it's like all the spirits got together and said, okay, they're doing this mass project of exorcism. We might see this as a problem, but actually if we infiltrate, we can take modernity and colonize it. Photography, photography is this amazing thing. I'm not going to believe it until you show me a picture of it. Okay. Well, look at these pictures. They're colonizing you. Various forms of beauty. And so it's almost as if Satan and his kingdom said, modernity? Yeah, we can do that. But there's always a few spirits that are like, yeah, you know, I'm only going to obey my master below when he's really watching me carefully. And so on the fringes, you get these little unruly spirits. And, you know, Roman Catholic exorcists have stayed in business because every now and then something really weird happens. And now, again, all of the modernists think all we'd have to do is get real evidence for one unruly spirit in our midst. And the whole facade of modernity would go away. You've got all of these people who don't believe in miracles watching Jordan Peterson listening to the story of his wife. It's the point about miracles. The gospel makes it all the time. Miracles. It's only this modern fabrication that leads us to imagine that miracles do what modernists imagine miracles do. They can't because they're outside of modernity. And C.S. Lewis walks through all of this beautifully in his book, Miracles, because he basically he says what modernity is is a belief in the whole show. Now, you can't show the whole show because you're a part of it. But then he walks through the whole show. I've done that in previous videos. So there's certain unruly spirits that just got to keep got to keep doing it. They keep Catholic exorcists and and Pentecostal exorcists and all of these exorcists in business. But it's the minority group. The main group set. Why would set why would set bother, you know, exercising some random woman in Indiana? We can have the nation. So then John Verbecky is doing internal family systems. What's internal family systems about? It's it's the recognition of again, why would this arise now? Well, it's because modernity is receding and we've seen the edges of our utopian aspiration. We basically thought. Well, it's a function of rich people are happier than poor people. Sometimes often it's it's you know, it's it's better to have more money than less in a world where money is really handy. Yeah, yeah, generally so. Having infinite amounts of money, does that solve anything? It solves some things. But then you watch really rich people do really weird things. Just read a biography of Howard Hughes. Amazing story. He could bed scar starlets. He flew airplanes. He bought things. He and he dies a decrepit old man with jars of urine around him. Yeah, that's what money will bet you. No mental health. You think money can. I don't know. There we go. So we've now seen the edges of modernity. And in some ways, the spirits are increasingly being revealed like the spirit of set. And so internal family systems just recognizes that just as. I was listening to Christian Baxter, whitey. Chris, why T. Had a great video this morning. And part of what part of what has been gratifying about this little corner is, you know, Jordan Peterson is building natural large language models of things like Nietzsche and the and the King James Bible and all of this stuff. And you can do that and increasingly we'll be able to do that on our personal computers, our own little personal large language model. I'm waiting for Logos Bible software. It's coming. They will do it to do a large language model within Logos. A.I. is going to be within Logos. And so I can because right now Google is often what I turn to if I'm looking for a particular Bible reference because Google is faster than Logos, even though I use Logos for other things. This little corner is better than A.I. Because. Grim Grizz Chad Kale. Christian Karen all of the little nodes in this little corner are way smarter. And we're able to we're able to work with each other and we play each other's videos. And oh which video did they play? Oh which part of the conversation did they play? And so I'm I am the luckiest of all because my stuff gets used and I get a chance to have my ideas perfected and improved by the rest of you. That's awesome. And anybody can join in. Just even T. Grog who doesn't believe a bit of it. He's having fun with it. I love it. So. Well, how does that deal with demons? Well, we're seeing the edge of this and we're beginning to recognize that well inside of us we have all of these. I right away when I started making videos five years ago started talking about my consciousness Congress because I just watched myself and I watched how Sam Tiedemann colonized a little part of me and Paul Antleitner did and Grim Grizz did and Chad did and Jordan Peterson did and John Ravecki did. And the Apostle Paul did and CS Lewis did and my father did and my mother did and my wife did and my children did and members of my church did inside of me are many. But sanity is not only. Having a productive conversation within. But having a productive conversation between. And churches have always been that. And now we're doing it on the Internet. So. What we're discovering is that. These little patterns, these little demons and these little angels are all over the place and they're up here and they're in here and they're all around. And when they get tyrannical, we call it possession. And there have long been unruly demons, unruly patterns. Again, the one of my videos that's most played is when I talk about the Egregores and Chris Macau really did an excellent job on that and that has been picked up by multiple channels within the corner again and again and again of. Some of these spirits come up and down and they come back around. Now I don't know enough Egyptian mythology to explain that. How strong that meme is or if it's just really clever play on words. It's enough. It's enough to colonize us now. So then John Vervecky and. It's funny because those of us who are talking without much filter on the Internet. Are displaying to the world the chatter and our conversation. And so what do you know about John Vervecky? Well, he grew up. Why do I always ask people about the homes they grew up in? Because that's when those are the those are the founding spirits in your consciousness. Contrast mom and dad. And said, uncles. The person who raised you, the person who raised you, the person who raised you. The person who gave you religion, the person who gave you a bicycle. I mean, these are deep within us. And you say, well, that's not spiritual. That's psychological. Oh, you think there's a difference? Oh, there is. And there isn't. There is. There is. There is. There is. There is. There is. There is. There is. There is. There is. There is. There is. And there isn't. So figuring out where those two things relate is a big part of the whole game. So there have been spirits that have been monkeying with us throughout the ages. And some of them are political and some of them are sociological and some of them are sexual. And and some of them are just plain unruly. And they disrupt. You know, it's I've spent a fair amount of time with unmedicated schizophrenics. They're really interesting. We had one that would come to a men's Bible study. And I would just because we're all talking and we're all sort of on the same page. There's a spirit of that Bible study. And in comes the schizophrenic. And he talks about Henry Waxman's daughter. So if you don't know who Henry Waxman is, some of you do. Henry Waxman's daughter lived down near this guy when he was growing up. Henry Waxman was a politician and his daughter lived near there. And for years I would hear a lot about Henry Waxman's daughter, obviously, as a young man before he came down with schizophrenia. He had a little bit of a relationship with Henry Waxman's daughter, at least a fascination. So I kept hearing about Henry Waxman's daughter. Just running around in there. It's disordered. And then you look at Jesus and his exorcisms. And Jesus exercises some powerful spirits. And then you read the book Dominion. The book Dominion is basically about how Jesus has been colonizing the world by dealing with blood and all of these things that ContraPoints is playing with. So Hermes walks into the corner. Who is Hermes? He's the messenger of the gods. And it's been fascinating listening to the large language model that is this little corner, Process Hermes. So you've got Ron Copperman, who tells his story on Luke's channel where, yeah, he was into drugs and alcohol and all the woo stuff. And then I listened to Navajo, significant population of Navajo in the Christian-formed church. You read, just read any anthropology, read so many peoples that their religion was fundamentally animism just fall into. Now, on one hand, Vervecki is right. They fall into these axial age religions because they're clearly an upgrade. But part of the reason many people who for whom they are living with a real sense of demons around them come to Christianity because they're they're saved from the spirits. Now, they might be living in London or they might or New York or San Francisco or Los Angeles. But yeah, they know that demons are real. When I was in the Dominican Republic, we dealt with that stuff all the time. And it's interesting because modernity would like to sort of put it in a little box because that's what modernity does, because that's sort of the the emissary brain practice. But it can't be put in a box because it's part of the it's part of the thing that's bigger than us. So Hermes walks into the corner. I guess we're going to have to deal with Hermes. Will Hermes be a gateway drug for for John Verbal's? I guess we're going to have to deal with Hermes. Will Hermes be a gateway drug for for John Verbecki and the spiritual journey that he's been on? I think probably. Which way will it go? I don't know. I thought Sam Tiedemann nailed it on Luke's live stream. I played it in a recent video where he says, well, you know, if if you'll be able to spot the colonization of Hermes, if John Verbecki starts some weird sex cult, probably not going to happen. How will Hermes behave in John's life? I don't know. We'll see. Maybe Hermes doesn't come back. What is Hermes? You know, we've just got a tiny little tidbit of a conversation with respect to this. And the conversation is way more complex because many of us who work in ministry know that sometimes schizophrenia looks like demon possession. I know lots of people who hear voices. I know lots of very sane people who have heard a voice. I can pull up story after story after story after story of voice hearing. I know a lot of people that they have a little small voice or they have an intuition and that must be the Holy Spirit. Or maybe that's when you're back to Peugeot with these little patterns. So don't be hasty. Now, do I have a healthy? Do I have a healthy concern about those? Do I have a healthy concern about those unruly spirits? Yeah. It's so funny because modernist people will sort of laugh at the spirits. But then they're worried about the spirit of climate change or communism. And it's like, oh, OK. You don't really understand what you're talking about. You don't really appreciate the power of set, do you? Even though everybody on TV is wringing their hands either about Tucker Carlson or John Stewart. Oh, no, you do have a healthy understanding of the power of set. Jim Jones was a Christian preacher. Was Jim Jones possessed by a spirit? Yeah, he was oppressed by a lot of ones, too. Did a whole lot of people die because of his spiritual possession? Yes. Was it exercised? No. But things run their course. And those who got close enough to Jim Jones could begin to have a little bit of exorcism in them. Two questions, more than halfway done. Sorry to everyone else who... So I'm going to end the questions now because I'll never get through them there. And what's funny is that y'all are going to game this whole thing and you continue to game it, and it's fun to watch the gaming. And so some of you will be like, if I really want to get my question answered, Paul just wrote, no more questions this week. So someone's going to write right now at 1107 at 1108, their new question for next month. Well, maybe Paul will give up on Bridges of Meeting. Yes, sir. Nine digit error got in. The reason I do all these Randall's conversations is so that both so that you can colonize me and that you don't possess me. Because what I find and T. Grog is a great example of this. T. Grog as the troll in the comments section was a little bit more unruly for me and it triggered some things in me and I watched myself getting triggered. And then once I knew T. Grog a little bit in the live streams, I knew a little bit of his story. Oh, OK. Now he's not so triggering. Now. Now he's much more friendly. Now I think we can actually have a much more fulfilling conversation because here's the funny thing about time. In many ways. This little corner and my YouTube project has been about YouTube slow. What do I mean by that? The game of climbing up the YouTube hierarchy is get bigger and bigger names in and have non Randall's conversations to climb up the status hierarchy of YouTube. And, you know, no. I've got no problem with Chris Williamson or Justin Briarley. Because they know, you know, and anybody who has a YouTube account knows if you can get a big name on your channel, you'll get a bump. And so I've got many requests for conversations from me for your channel. Part of it is you just want to talk to me. Part of it is you want my attention. Part of it is you have a sense that maybe we can play together and that'll be fun. There's a lot of different things going on there. But we're doing YouTube slow. I'm not overly concerned about how fast this grows. In fact, I'm more concerned if it grows too fast. I like the fact that. Part of me likes the fact that when I post a Randall's conversation, some of them still get less than a thousand views. And those who and some who look into those thousand views find gold. So there's a little opponent processing going on with respect to that. But. The fun thing about this is. Building a relationship with you guys, you know, CW and his fascination with. Dutch Calvinist theology. I just find that adorable. I love it. And and T. Grog and this this this thorn in his paw, you know, that thorns going to come out T. Grog. It's going to come out. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. You're too. You're too nice of a guy. You're too nice of a guy. You're fighting it so hard. This little corner is going to exercise you of that. And you're going to be you're going to be another rando who is who is. And that's why everybody when you come in, everybody just smiles and says, come on in. It's just sort of like it's just sort of like an AA meeting when an alcoholic comes stumbling in and says, y'all are full of shit. And everybody just laughs. That's what I used to say. And now I'm one of them. So. We'll see what happens because it ever happens differently for everyone. But we're doing we're doing relationships slow. And it means that. My name will always be smaller than Jordan Peterson's. But boy, am I going to enjoy these relationships. That's what it's about. Is that story simply a meetings without explicit and title? Not really. Estuary meetings are exactly what they are. They're a chance for interesting people to find a way to talk about interesting things with each other. And when that community is built, good things happen. And I'm you know, I didn't know it was it was a sad thing to give up this Sunday morning Sunday school class. And I talked to Sean this week. He was talking about the Romans class. And, oh, I love doing Romans. I love doing that. And again, some of you are like, well, you can do you can do you can do your Sunday school right on YouTube. I can. But I know it's difficult for y'all to understand that this is not my day job. It's connected to my day job. Sometimes my day job gets a lot further because of this. But I have a schedule and a ritual to my week. And for me, you know, on Wednesday nights on Zoom, I have a group of four to six guys. That's all. And I don't open it up to Internet people for the most part. And we have a Bible study. And it's just a few guys. And now, as more and more people find their way to living stones, these numbers are growing. And, yeah, you know, I keep talking about a dying church. It might die, but it might live, too. You don't know. So the most amazing thing about humanity is the people. It's just the case. And if you can't see that, yeah, I do. If you can see that the ideas are cool, too. But the people are way cooler than the ideas. So as sure as just a way to bring people together. And what A.A. is, is an example of the power. Of people. And again, A.A., they're a bunch of exorcists there. They are regularly and reliably exercising the demon of alcohol. Now you could say that's a form of speech. Please talk without a form of speech. Go ahead and try. I don't have any question. Just want to say your beard is coming in nicely. My beard grows reliably. And I've said it before. I don't like to be bothered shaving. So I just let it grow, grow, grow. And then some people, why don't you let it keep growing? Because if I let my beard keep growing, my head, the bottom of my head just keeps getting bigger and I begin to look really weird. So and then like hair gets in my mouth. And so then it's like, ah, cut it off. So. Brian of College Station, what characteristics of your church make estuary thing a particularly good fit? Oh, that's an excellent question. What kinds of churches do you think would especially benefit from trying out something similar? I think any church could benefit from it. It's. I years ago, I found I found I found Henry Cloud's book Boundaries that I read. It's a fine book. And I I would I sort of handed that out as a broad spectrum antibiotic for many relational difficulties, because when people have relational troubles, it's almost always almost always sort of a boundaries issue. And and Henry Cloud just had some really easy ways to say this is yours, this is mine. And these are ways that we can sort of come to agreement on that. Estuary. Part of what makes estuary fun in this church. Is the diversity of this church? My Sunday morning. Bible study was mostly made up of older African American women, some of whom lived in the Jim Crow South and they had great stories. And I thought. Then I was meeting in the evening with people who had found me from the Internet or meetup dot com. And they tended to be younger, whiter Californians, people who had basically lived more in Anglo culture than African American culture. And I thought, boy, it would be fun to get these people talking to one another. And I knew it because I won't I won't name her here, but one particular woman who has great stories. I've got a number of women in this church that have great stories. And and and I just thought, wait until these evening estuary people. Hear what she has inside of her. And and I know it was going to happen. And then just watching it happen was a source of great joy. I just see them just like she starts telling stories. I said I wasn't going to say anything this week and everybody's like, no, please talk. Great stories, great stories, all about most of the topics and estuary at Living Stones are about re knitting community. Because in a place like California, where everyone is so separated, people are longing to just be together. That's what this little corner is about, too. They are connected. But don't is always sort of seeing that because the donk is one of these older guys who's not very not very much online. So for the donk, he gets a little annoyed at this little corner. He's like, estuary. OK, John. But then he has to begrudgingly say that we wouldn't have estuary without this little corner. And so there's a transjective relationship between them. So I think it would work in any church. I think it's particularly helpful for churches where both the skills of community and the practice of community has broken down. There are a lot of churches for which if you go to a church that every Sunday, either before or after church, all the kids are going over to grandpas and grandmas house for coffee. The cousins are all gathered around. And for many Christian reform churches in rural areas, that's still the case. Sundays. And this is one of the beauty of saboteurism. Sundays basically meant TV stay off. Cell phones go in the drawer. You're going to go to grandma's house and you're going to listen to grandpa and grandma replay those darn stories. Those structures were still in effect. Set hadn't destroyed. I can't tell you how many times I see kids in car seats with iPads and cell phones. And these parents sometimes are helicopter parents. And I'm like, you're destroying your kid. You know, why don't you just destroy your kids? You know, why don't you just give them cocaine to play with? What are you doing? Going to a restaurant. A family of four and all of them, including young children, are on a phone. It's like, yeah, this is how to destroy a culture. This is how to destroy it. You think set isn't a god. You don't know what we mean by that word. So I think estuaries are most needed in places where set possession is at its worst. Because I've yet to be in an estuary meeting where someone is sitting and looking at their phone. They're looking at each other. And as Vindank will tell you, the real key to estuary is listening. Listening to other people. So, yeah. So I would say the more... If your church is in an area where basic human community has been ravaged by modernity, those are places that need it the worst. It's the sick that need the doctor. An estuary is a doctor. Do you have a beard care routine or does God love your beard more than mine? God loves my beard or he wouldn't make it so reliable. I walked into it, my wife and I walked into a store one day, and the guy behind the counter looked at me and said, your beard is magnificent. I'm a barber, but your beard is magnificent. Maybe it's compensation for not much on top. So if you've got it on top and not on bottom, you know, we all can't get the whole thing. Is it a good idea to talk to Hermes? Well, and this is back to the Hermes conversation. There was an old guy in the church I went to in college in Madison Square Church in Grand Rapids. Maybe I'll name him. He's dead by now. His name was Artie Berger. African-American guy, deep voice. Grew up in the Black church, found his way to this Christian Reformed church that was kind of a mix of Pentecostal and African-American, and they had been a chapel and they had always sort of worked. They hadn't fled the city when African-Americans sort of moved into the area that had traditionally been Dutch as the Dutch were getting bigger suburban houses. Old story. And Artie Berger was an elder there and he was in and out of office, but he was almost always an elder. And he had a gift of healing with his prayer. When he would pray, when he would pray, people would get healed. And then he had a reputation. And then people would seek him out. And at Madison Square, we would have these prayer services where we would have elders and deacons and people from the church praying up in front. We'd have music and singing. And if you had something in your life that was hard, you could go in front and you could pray for it. These were wonderful services, loved those services. And everybody would want to pray with Artie because Artie got results. If you asked Artie Berger, he would say, I don't heal anybody. Jesus heals, not me. Jesus is the name above all names, Jesus. And so, you know, Hermes must bow his knee to Christ because Christ has conquered the principalities and the powers. Christ has conquered Zeus. Christ has conquered Hermes. Christ has conquered Set. Set is ravaging the world right now, but Set's day will end. Now, what, how does God continue to work and work through even the ancient gods? Oh, you know, I think that's a really interesting question. And, you know, if you listen to Jonathan Pujo and Roman Catholics who are part of the problem with Protestantism is that most Protestants don't read old enough books. We sort of, I was laughing with Sean about this, that he was Seventh-day Adventist. So, you know, you read the Bible, then you jump to the Reformation, and then you jump to the particular group that you have fascination with. So, Christian Reformed, it was the Bible, the Protestant Reformation. You might pause at Augustine to pick up a few things when you get to Calvin and Luther, and then you'll stop at Kuiper and Bob Inc. and off you go. What the Church Fathers did, they not only did exorcism, they also did some colonizing, and they colonized paganism. And of course, C.S. Lewis writes well about that. So, yeah, we will see what the coming of Hermes will mean to the corner. Is it possible that Hermes will destroy John Vervecky? Yes. But we're not exactly sure what Hermes this is. And Hermes is very interesting. I mean, of all the ancient gods that could walk into the corner, of course, Grim Grizz has reliably brought Set into the corner, or actually revealed Set as being already in the corner, and tries to unmask Set and dethrone Set and defang Set, but yet we live with Set. Hermes is the messenger of the gods. And of course, when Jordan and John are talking about that, there's, you know, there's a degree of excitement about the diamond and Socrates. Yeah, but Socrates wasn't born in the 1960s. He was born in deep modernity. And was Socrates a non-theist? Boy oh boy oh boy oh boy. Yeah. Little point here. Whoops, whoops, let me get it. Look at a dime before 1945. Do you know whose picture is on it? They're called Mercury dimes. Yeah, yeah, yeah. Oh, thank you, Mountie. I appreciate it. And thanks for the new member. I don't really know how these gift memberships work. I don't know if anybody's dropped them in there. I just know that when people drop them in, pick one up, there's someone asks, where are all the women? They're all in the membership area. This dynamic between masculine and feminine, just fascinating. Anyway, so yeah, we will see what will become of Hermes. If we call a Mercury, will that be any better? It was interesting too because the physical description that John gave reminded me of the angel that talked to John in the book of Revelation. That was an interesting detail. We'll see. We'll see what comes. What are the reflections? What are your reflections as your kids are getting married this summer? Any thoughts about that? If anything, your parents said to you before your wedding. Oh, it's about time. That's, that's my dominant thought. Young adults are delaying marriage. I understand why. My wife and I, you know, she was she was 21. I was, she was 21 turning 22. I was 24 turning 25. We were young. There's sort of two routes to go with marriage. Take a long time trying to pick and just jump in and make it work. Even if you take a long time picking, you still got to make it work. And your picker at 28 will be a little different than your picker at 21. But maybe not as much as you think it is. I remember Walter Wanger and his book on marriage as for me and my house. And some of you might want to buy the book books. Find book. My pastor in Grand Rapids recommended that book to me before we married. I did marry my pastor in Grand Rapids at that marriage thing just never always has confusion in English. But the book has the book basically has one point as two points. I've made it before. Don't leave. You want to not get divorced. Don't leave. Because if you leave, you're probably going to get divorced. It's really hard to get back together after one party leaves. Sometimes it happens. Don't leave and learn to forgive. Marriage is a marriage is an incredible thing. Some people have easy marriages. Some people have hard marriages. I know a lot of people are trying to avoid miseries by not getting married and not having children. Life is trade offs. Some of the biggest I at this point in my life. If I imagine never having had children. My daughter had to come into town for a business thing. I just was excited thinking my daughter's gonna be home. I got home. There's my daughter there. I gave her a hug. Nothing special happened. She was stressed about this event that she had to hold and near the Capitol and all of this stuff. But just seeing my daughter again, watching her grow. I know enough people and enough sad stories that for some people it's also just torturous because what's happening to their children or what happened to their children is just agony. You want to live life in the shallow ends or you want to live life in the deep ends? If you want to go deep, marry. Don't leave. Learn to forgive. You'll go deep. I think part of the situation with our contemporary life is just that it affords people to live really shallow lives. And if someone is possessed by sat living in their mother's basement covered with Cheetos dust, spending all of their day playing video games and watching porn, it is a shallow life indeed. It is basically just as shallow as one of these homeless people who basically is possessed by meth or cocaine and has a daily habit of panhandling to get the drug, buying the drug in a small amount, using that day's amount of drug, sleeping it off until late morning, mid afternoon. Just cycle. It is a shallow life that is possession by a demon. I can use that language and nobody flinches. Any update on your reading of hero and hero worship? I go back and forth with it. One of these days I'll dig into Mohammed again. I mean, you guys have been watching my channel long enough, you know, things come and go with me. Some of the deep things, you know, I loved Guy Landau's diagram that he wrote for me. Some of the deep things, they come back around reliably. So I'll keep reading it. It's a good book. I really enjoyed it. It's a lately a lot of my book reading has been either on audiobook or I'll go through a chapter slowly and multiple times. I sort of skim a book to find out if there's anything there. Then if I find out there's something there, then I'll dig. But, you know, CW says I need to dog food. So my own denomination. So Gordon Spikeman, you know, take a look at his stuff. How has your view on the destruction of deconstruction of faith phenomena changed after you have listened to so many stories? And how is the reconstruction going, in your opinion, in the church in general or the TLC or on the CRC? Well, again, if I get a chance this afternoon to make a video. Someone just said that Candace Owen, Candace says just said she's going to go orthodox. Oh, I feel I. Hey, it's enjoy your day in the sun. God bless you all. I love you all. You got to know that. But yeah, glad you didn't become CRC. It's going to be a wild ride. Hey, maybe, you know, she'll who knows who knows what's going to happen. But this I actually have a lot of thoughts on this deconstruction reconstruction because it's. What's happening with people on the small scale is related to what's happening with the culture as a whole. You can't miss that. And. Some people are going to choose poorly. And. They're going to be some sad stories because. When I when I watch people leave church. Usually, initially, they have a sense of freedom. Oh, I'm free from they're usually free from the discipline and they're free from. Some of the negative things that were basically provoking the departure. But a little while later, things are going to begin to set in that. Well, you kind of have to figure out what you're going to do with your Sunday mornings. And you might be surprised how much less productive those Sunday mornings are. You might be surprised how. You're going to be possessed by something. Some spirit is going to dominate you. And what happens with a lot of people walking away from religion. Is they usually fall prey to more shallow spirits. I spend every Sunday morning going to coffee. There you go. Starbucks is happy. What do you do at that coffee? I sit and enjoy a warm cup of coffee. Beautiful. Warm cup of coffee is lovely. But then. Have your relationships grown deeper? Has your knowledge of the world increased? A lot of people just watch more TV. They watch more Netflix. It's like that's quite an exchange. They work more. Now, Tigrag, he's not going to last. You can just hear that. I mean, when you find someone working so hard at something, something's going to give. I mean, Sam Harris. This is a crazy relationship. I'm against religion. Try Buddhism much, Sam? Oh, yeah. Yoga pants. Yeah. It is fun. It is fun. I'm glad you're here, Tigrag. I'm glad you're here. But as a culture, we're doing this on a big scale. While people are doing it on a small scale. And so. The child of set, which is YouTube. On one hand, yeah, you can fill up your days watching. And a marketing news, all of this stuff. If you do it, you're going to be a dog on it somewhere along the line. Deep calls to deep, and you're going to stumble across something bigger. And that's going to lead you somewhere. Something that Jordan Peterson said, which I should probably find it. Maybe some of you will find it. He was talking about Daily Wire and he basically said, what's super interesting about the guys at Daily Wire is that they. They're fine. They're spending their days doing. I've heard I've heard similar things from other people that I know that are daily wire. So adjacent. They spend their day doing all of this political hackery. And what they really want to talk about is metaphysics. Well, well, you know, maybe it's, you know. I don't know. I don't know. I think I wonder if Chad, the Tyler gets more joy out of putting together a really nice shower. Then the Daily Wire guys get owning the libs. Yeah, yeah. I myself. It's so funny at classes meeting. The real shortage of ministers. Part of that is because there's a real shortage of pay for ministers right now because churches are really struggling. But how many times on YouTube don't I hear someone and think all they really want to be is a preacher. That's all they really want to be. It's all they really want to do. So I think I got the greatest job in the world. I told I tell my kids with a lot of jobs, you can work for meaning or you can work for money. Sometimes you get both. But usually if it's a real meaningful job, you're not going to get much money. If it's a real money job, it's an interesting relationship with meaning. I noticed that Jordan Peterson's channel via Daily Wire is now just sort of part of the anti narrative circuit. You know, the person's on Rogan, they're on they're on Jordan. Dave Rubin's going to pick it up. And it's like we have our own little counter narrative community. And we're all talking about the same thing. And now the DLC is often talking about the same thing. But that's part of what's good about having randos on. Now, again, sometimes randos when Raj came in, you sort of have the hot girl dynamic. Everybody wants to talk to Raj all of a sudden. But I know it'll be interesting to see what happens with Jordan and Daily Wire. I can understand the relationship, but I think I think it's I think it's harmed his channel more than it's helped. Grim Grizz from Grim Grizz Grim Grizz. He's talking about himself in the third person. I guess you can do that if you have a pen name. Grim Grizz used a clip of you speaking on how you've constructed a content filter made of people in this discussion about building an eye of Horus with the DLC. With all the people watching these things, they might recommend what flavor of things do you hope they bring or recommend to you? I'm not going to recommend anything. Because I am. We do as Jordan Peterson says, we do not own our own house. You are not you. You are not the you that is at the podium of your consciousness. Congress, the decider often are the one who feels they are deciding the vote counter, however you want, whatever metaphor you want to use. Is only marginally in charge of the much bigger you that you are not even conscious of. And how this little corner has been a benefit to me is my view of myself is distorted. It can't help but be distorted by me. It's called bias of all these biases. Your view of me has your own biases, but with enough of you, we can get beyond some of those biases. And even though everything that you do of mine, I see through my bias. I find the accumulation to be really helpful. I was thinking this morning how a big part of Jordan Peterson's channel was people were interested in it and they would just take clips of his. And then at one point in 2017, 2018, people were making these clip channels of Jordan Peterson stuff basically just to feed algo and go up the hierarchy and get big channels. So Adam Frenden got to start doing this. And you could monetize that so you could get clips of Jordan Peterson, put them on your channel, monetize the channel. And basically you are monetizing Jordan Peterson. Well, YouTube has to mind its own business. And part of that business is everyone because YouTube is monetized, everybody is always trying to game YouTube. And so right now, one of those big efforts is AI. YouTube is very wary of AI generated videos because YouTube knows that just as YouTube is hacking or salience landscaping, AI can do that. And a whole bunch of people just making AI videos, just putting them out endlessly on YouTube will fill up YouTube and destroy the platform. So one of the things that YouTube did, which Adam Frenden complained about, was YouTube basically either overtly or just didn't post ads on clip channels. So you could still do clip channels for Jordan Peterson. You just wouldn't make any money at it. And so actually that made them better so that only sort of the true believers who really had a yearning to get this little sound bite from Jordan Peterson out there in the world. Only those things survived. That was good. So at first we sort of listened to Jordan Peterson and thought, oh, I can't really do what Jordan Peterson is doing, but I'll just repeat it. Because that at least lets me participate in it. And then when I watched, I watched Chad's video this morning. It was outstanding. I watched Christian Baxter's video this morning. It was outstanding. I always watch you, Grizz. Don't, don't, don't feel, don't feel left out. I always watch you, Grizz. I watch, I watch more of your stuff than anything else, except I do a lot of fast forwarding and speed-throwing because I've seen the branding before. So what's happening now is that you all are doing the synthesis. You're doing the synthesis. And I'm doing synthesis and you're doing synthesis and we're synthesizing together. And so actually I watched both Chad's video this morning and Christian's video this morning. And I thought part of me would like just to repost that video on my channel because it is so good. In other words, I'm sort of making a, making a clip channel out of Chad and Christian. Chad has what? 600 subs. Christian has less than 400, something like that. You know, these are small channels, but they are the value that I see in them. Wow. And when Luke is streaming in the morning, I am there. He starts before I wake up sometimes. And I then of course I've got things to do in the morning. And so I catch up late, but we're thinking together. And what we're finding is that, yeah, Jordan Peterson has the same guy on that Rogan had yesterday, although Jordan doesn't do as many shows. I like Rob Henderson, the Shriver woman with her. The book sounds interesting. I think we need a good critique of therapy in America and in Canada. I mean, there's some marginal interest with some of those things, but, you know, Jordan's kind of going through the motion. He's more interesting at the conference, but only marginally so. You know, I was somebody, people are sending me their reflections on the conference. And, you know, a lot of Jordan is map territory. Looking forward to his book. How much new stuff will be there? We'll see. I, even though on one hand the audience may be smaller, it's sort of like estuary in that the flotilla, I'll give you another word for this little corner, it's a classes. Classes is a word we use in the Christian Form Church. The word classes in Dutch was basically a flotilla, which is super interesting. The classes that is this little corner is working on really important stuff. And it's also deeply personal, as Luke keeps pointing out, because to a degree, I know Luke, I know Grizz, I know Chad. Now, that doesn't mean, I know there's other little drama, that doesn't mean everybody's house is in order. Oh, I'm a minister. I'm a Calvinist minister. Nobody's house is in order, including mine. Chad and Cale and Neil had an outstanding conversation that I listened to a few days ago. Just outstanding. And it's so funny. Cale's like, Paul VanderKlay is going to hell. And part of me is like, Cale, you don't know all of Paul VanderKlay. Paul VanderKlay, that dude is a sinner. He is a sinner. And I don't just say that because I'm a Calvinist. I say that because I know myself. I am a sinner. The Apostle Paul called himself the chief of sinners. And we all read that and say, I don't know. Yeah, hunting down and killing Christians. Yeah, that's a biggie, Paul. We'll give you that. But I found many ways to fail in loving God and my neighbor throughout my 60 years of living. But we're getting to know each other, which means that so and then watching Christian go back over his conversation with Jordan Hall and then weave that together. And of course, Chad's been doing that. And so it's like we started with the clip channels and now we're doing that. And of course, Grimm gave us the language, the reaping and the looming. And this is a learning community. We're all growing together. And I know I'm sorry I am not as available as I could be. But we have an opponent processing relationship going on with respect to hierarchies. And I know that there are many of you out there that have asked me to be on your small channels and I want to get there. And like Christian was asking me, when can I when can you come on my channel? I think Christian, I'll get there if you stick around because and this is also the dynamic of church. People ask, well, how can I get it? I visited a church and they weren't very friendly. I've been a member of this church a number of years and I don't know anyone. Well, that's probably because they don't have an estuary and they need one. But I'll tell you, if you start going to a church every week, a small church, a great video with Tom Robinson about small churches, plug in like crazy, his little Methodist Church in Fredericksburg, Pennsylvania. God bless him. Just outside of Harrisburg. Not too far where Sean was from. But you start going to church every week, a small church. You will have that pastor's attention. Trust me. So you stick around the corner long enough and you participate in good faith in the conversations. And like Sean said, he said, I Sean is trying to run the biggest homeless shelter in America. He doesn't have time for getting on live streams and barely had time for a randos conversation. God bless him. Keep doing what you're doing, Sean. Keep doing what you're doing. Keep doing what you're doing. You too. Bowtie Brian, keep coming on the Freddie and Paul show when you come up. So happy to have you come. You encourage us so much. But so are you more in love with a Hollywood star? Or the wife and family and people at your church? You get a lot more out of the people around you. They might be boring. They might be annoying. So, yeah, you know, it's I'm I'm thinking about. So I was watching the Symbolic World Conference. And again, in Chino, we played with some things here at Living Stones. The max I could do. The max I could do. For a conference would be 100 people. We got parking lot limitations. We've got space limitations. But when I think about what I want to do for a conference. Yeah, you know, so the opponent processing with the hierarchy. Bring in a celebrity. Because to a degree, you got to pay for it. And, you know, hierarchies bind and blind. So, you know, if you're going to bring in Jonathan Peugeot. Jonathan's got to make a living. He's got a speaker's fee. You got to pay the speaker's fee. You got to pay the expenses. You got to put them up. And you got to put them up someplace decent. And you got to do all of that. It all costs money and there's financial risk. But I would love to do a conference where. Yeah, we'll have some plenary sessions. Because that's fun too. But there'll be a lot more. There'll be a lot more little estuary groups. And I want to do a conference that isn't just sort of flat. And then boom, boom, boom. And one on top or two on top. I'd rather do a conference that's more like a cone. And so when we put together Chino, I told Jon Vendock. I said, you know, you got to get Chad there. You got to get Grizz there. You got to get you got to get some of these guys there. You got to fill out the card because. Well, I go pay a lot of money to go listen to Jordan Peterson talk. I listen to him on YouTube. To me, I'm way more interested in the people there. OK, and that's true. And so then how do you structure a conference that actually optimizes and facilitates that dynamic? So when you left the conference, you talked to PVK, you talked to Chad, you talked to Grizz, you talked to Cale, you talked to John Vervecky, you talked to Jordan Peterson, even though he's got security. Maybe maybe we do a conference, you know, hierarchies, blind to blind. If you're if you're at the point that you need security guards. It's it's no it's it's a fact of life. I get it. I get it. It's a sad fact of life. So. So, you know, I I don't think it's going to happen this spring, but I did an event early on with about a dozen people at my sister's place. We just talked for three days. It was great. And Sam says that's too small. You couldn't do it. So it's like, OK, well, what if we did a conference and we got a whole bunch of people there? I mean, if you could go to a conference and meet, you know, Christian and and Chris from Waves of Obsession and Grim and Chad and, you know, if you got a conference that actually brought a whole bunch of Karen Wong doesn't live that far away, she'd come. If you went to a conference that actually brought most of these people together and was structured so that when you left this conference, you actually had some time with these people. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah, to me, that sounds fun. I got to figure out how to do it, though. Because air airfare costs money. Speaker fees cost money. Hotels cost money. I should do I should make sure that Living Stones gets some money for the fiscal wear and tear on the place. I don't know. I'm thinking I'm thinking. Slickarius wonderful to meet him up at the Battleground estuary meeting. How much wood would a wood chuck chuck of a wood chuck could chuck wood? What would a wood chuck do if there was no wood to chuck? If you were stuck in a cabin in the woods with just one game of Civ, which civilization would you choose and what victory type would you shoot for? I must confess that I play civilization like I read too many books. I start many games of civilization lately. I've been playing Civ six and I've been playing Hammurabi lately. Kind of a cheater, Civ, but it's sort of fun. I was I was playing Dido Dido is a really weak Civ. What's really fun is my son Jared is going to move home for a little while. And when Jared is home and Ben is home and sometimes one of my daughter's friends is home, William, sometimes we have four of us in the same room playing Civ. That's so much fun. Nobody ever wins. Well, Jared, you see, because Jared and I, I usually establish a sea kingdom and Jared establishes a land kingdom and I can usually keep him away with my airplanes and ships and he'll roll on me with his tanks and he plays. He plays Gilgamesh and his donkey carts. So got to be careful of Egypt and Gilgamesh early on because but Hammurabi, boy, if you can go to if you can get crossbow early enough anyway. Yeah, I play Civ six, but I every now and then I don't play it that much every now and then I'll play Civ and it's like I just I should stop thinking so hard about things and just relax a little. And so and that's only when usually my wife has gone or something like that because if she's there, I do something with her. But if Jared and Ben and Willie are around four persons in the same room, too much fun. What is it like to say we talked about this in videos years ago? Yeah, but the videos are out there. And what's really fun is when I noticed this that again, some of the channels, they go back and they grab stuff and it's like, that's really important because the old stuff is meaningful again that the graph that Guy Landau did on the channel. That's how I that's if you want to know, Grizz, what I think about or what what finally sort of reaches the top of the hierarchy when I have an hour or two to make a video is the thought because tons of thoughts are going through my consciousness. Congress, it's the ones that get stuck on. It's like T. Grog hanging out around a whole bunch of ex atheists trying to debunk religion like a boss like it's 2004. I've lately I watched Troy, the Brad Pitt movie. And then last night I watched Immortals. Some people recommended it. It's 2011. It's so interesting. These videos when sort of new atheism was at its peak because so many of these new atheism lines just seep through in these videos about ancient all of these people living. I don't believe the gods because they don't care about me. I don't want the British accents for some weird colonial reason. I'm like, ah, yeah, it's back to the odds. I don't believe in God. There's not a flying spaghetti monster. Yuck, yuck, yuck. Oh, but he's going away. My friends, just, you know, bring out those bell bottoms. That's what I should do. I should go to mid journey and make a picture of Sam Harris and bell bottoms. That's about right. Kate. Oh, Kate. This is a question. Oh, boy. This is a question about the work arena. Gosh, it's going to go on forever. Do I have anything this afternoon I got to do? How long can I live stream? My dog's with me again, which has been great. She's such a good dog. She's just chilling right there in the kennel. So I got to keep an eye on time because she's going to get hungry. This is a question about the work arena. How should one handle extreme levels of frustration when issues aren't being resolved and your queries or concerns go unanswered and or disrespected? When you're brought up in private, you're hung up on to answer another call, then brought to Steelman, then brought to Steelman into the discussion, including the boss. This question on here is the protestation query of the large Christian group. A third effort. The sting is particularly lightning like as the persons are not living by standards you hold yourself to. Or moreover, the behavior is mind boggling and anathema for general standards of the industry at large. When should one cut date? You still need a music person at Living Stones. You got to get chemo on the channel. Chemo's been playing piano. Another guy came into church last week. I see Rick walking a guy over and just coming in at the end of the S-Jour meeting. An African American older gentleman, maybe my age, maybe a little younger. He's wearing a tie and a suit because, you know, black church. And comes in and this S-Joury meeting and he's like, kind of like, what's going on here? He's just watching us do the S-Joury thing. He's like, after the meeting, he's like, this was really cool. I've gone to church all my life. I've never seen anything like this. Then he came to the worship service and heard a great sermon. I thought the sermon went well. He said, I'll be back next week. I said, OK, look forward to seeing you. Will he? Don't know. If I had a dollar for every person that said I'll be back next week and weren't back next week, I'd be richer than I am today. Kate. I'll just make a few comments because these kinds of OK, these kinds of questions require wisdom. So Bote Bryant last week at the S-Joury, he didn't say anything for a long time. And then when he opens opened his mouth, everybody wanted to hear more of what he said because Bote Bryant. Very smart guy. I have to do a randos with him, bring him down to the channel. He said he said wicked questions are questions that can't be answered. And I would appall. I would append that and say questions that can't be answered algorithmically. There's no algorithm for answering your question, but you can gain wisdom and. Wisdom is gained when you confront something that can't be resolved algorithmically. In other words, if I would give you the answer, you sort of work the answer again and again and again and again like it's in a machine. Those kinds of things can be resolved. And we're usually looking for how to resolve those kinds of things. I want an answer that will resolve this problem, because the problem you talk about is everywhere. Every business has it. I've all got frustrating employees. There's one guy who works for the state who comes into our estuary meeting and he's always got a new story about either stupid woke ism or stupid bureaucracy or. And he's a funny, funny guy. He's so much fun. You know he he he told the story of during COVID. Of course, everybody worked. Remotely and then states were like wow we get a lot of work done and save a lot of money in office space so the state got rid of a lot of office space. And then after a little while state because I've got people in the church who are also high up in the state bureaucracy. Not in the political realm but in the bureaucratic realm, and they begin to notice that actually some state workers work better at home. Some state workers don't do anything at home and state workers themselves are an interesting group. So lately the emphasis and of course with something like the state of California this massive thing. Like many bureaucracies like many businesses. Oh remote work remote work. Oh, everybody needs to come back to the office while they sold a lot of office space. And so this guy works in a division where everybody needs to come back into the office. And everybody's like, you got rid of the office space, even if we all came back we couldn't fit. So, what are you telling us, but of course, it comes from up on high and get the middle managers and so then they realize that the middle managers are all lying to them and go to my conversation with Andy Wilkins about middle management and such. And so it's an open secret and then it was funny because then he comes back to another estuary meeting he says guess what the bosses admitted their lie. And they said there's not enough room for everybody in the office which everyone knew. But when they admitted their lie suddenly it opened the door to all sorts of other complaining about open secrets and lie, and they just had to shut the whole thing down again. The way we learn wisdom. Is by making decisions. And so you have a decision to stay in the frustration, or to leave marriage is the same way, because what you will discover in marriage, whether it's a really good match or really bad match, whether it's a really good marriage or really difficult marriage is that partner does not work by the spirit of geometry that partner works by the spirit of finesse. And there's no algorithm. There's wisdom to have a happy marriage. There's wisdom to have a good business to be a good employee, but there's no algorithm for it. And so it's all about, and you're doing the feeling. I tried this it didn't work I tried this it didn't work. Well, fortunately, the, the consequences of leaving a job or less than leaving a marriage. So, you work the problem. And and I would encourage sort of a. This is sort of a great revaki and sort of a play approach to it. And again the Andy Wilkins conversation was really great. He said, you know, I, I get, because he starts at the bottom he starts working ways up, he always said, I tried to think like my boss. And I tried to imagine myself in the boss's place, and then I would watch what the boss did. Now, you might discover that your boss is an idiot. Or you might discover that your boss sees things that you can't see, and hence is making compromises, and those compromises are leading to frustration. You might discover that your boss to is a middle manager and your boss is just trying to deal with the crap hand that he's been dealt. So there's all of these levels to it and whether or not. So, number one, if you turn around and look at yourself with respect to this and say, I'm frustrated. Okay, you're frustrated. What's that frustration going to lead to, because so many people destroy their own lives, because they can't handle the frustration. I remember doing an, I did a class for parents of adult children, not that I knew anything about it more than they did, frankly, but I had some ideas I wanted to talk about, and if I'd had estuary back then I would have done it as an estuary group. And I said, basically this is a key to life. The key to wisdom is learning how to absorb pain without reactivity. So, are you in a bad marriage. Keep your head. Are you in a bad work situation. Keep your head. Yes, you're reacting. I get it. If you can learn to stop reacting. And of course, everybody's working on this yoga studios will try and teach this meditation is about this Christianity is about this. Jesus goes up and across. And unlike every other single person that was crucified. Jesus could have worked a miracle, pop the nails out, you know he could have played Homelander, you know slew them all with us he didn't even need laser beams out of his eyes just say, you're all dead, and they die. Or is it all Roman fleet storm. Yeah, get off of Galilee and go wreck those ships. That's the kind of power Jesus had. So Jesus at the crucifixion showed how to live with pain, and how to make pain productive now. And that's the key. Because if you can understand how to make pain productive and how to say I'm in this crappy job. I've never said this don't waste your sorrows. I mean this crappy job. What wisdom can I gain from this crappy job now there might be a time when you just say, I'm done littering from this crappy job, I'm going to get another crappy job I'm going to learn with that crappy job has to teach me. Maybe it'll be less crappy I'll learn less but maybe I'll get more money and have more enjoyment, or a different lifestyle will afford different things. This is all wisdom. So, first of all, learn how to deal with pain, the pain of frustration with the stupidity that you're seeing. And then figure out what you can learn about the world from the stupidity, because there's tons of lessons in there. And if, as it sounds, you're not in a position to do much resolution of anything. Then you have another little fun game that you can play which is called colonization. Can you colonize your bosses. Well, what do you mean. It's inception. Because if you go to the boss and say I'm sick and tired and just complain at your boss. That's, that's not really very sophisticated colonization. And then you go and say, when friends and influence people, oh you know, find something that your boss did right, even if the boss did 1000 things and only one of them was right find the one thing that was right and compliment the boss on that, because the one thing you got right was you wore pants to work today. Good job. It might want to not use that one but it might be at that level. You know, you held your pen. Good for you. And then find a different way of talking and say, wow, you know this thing happened over there. What do you think about that. Ask a question. Well, and then the boss might begin to look at you not as an idiot or complainer, or a problem yourself. But as, oh, there's a human being that wants to talk to me, they just said something nice about me. I'm going to say something that might be of interest to them. And you start working it. And, you know, don't get too ahead of yourself with respect to the boss or anything but that's right. Oh, we're talking about yoga pants still huh yoga pants colonize. So, just, just. And then keep a hold of your own frustration and decide you're going to sort of play with it. You might learn something. You might get a you might actually be able to fix it. Or you might decide I'd I'd like a different set of problems now. I'm bored with these problems and go find a different set of problems with a new job. Free advice. Free advice. Yep. All right. What lots is said about the children of divorce what level of study has there been done on the effects of divorce on friends family and extended family Oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, that's really good question. So, hope I'm not disclosing too much. I as I said it's taken my children, a little too long to marry their love interests. I understand the dynamic. But I'll tell you, not anything against all of them but my, my second son's girlfriend, because they live here in Sacramento we spent a lot of time with her. You know, before he proposed, my wife and I are like, you know, first of all, Jared has to propose. I mean, we can't, we're not gonna. We're not gonna, you know, we, we tease him and stuff but it's got to be his decision, you don't, you don't. Don't marry someone because your parents want you to marry that person. And they can't listen to their advice maybe they have wisdom I don't know but you need to do it. That's a that's a that's a key thing in marriage you got to make the decision it's got to be your choice. You got to make it freely. Even the government understands that. And so when you know, months we're turning into years and we're getting closer and closer to his girlfriend my wife and I are like, gosh, if he doesn't marry her if he breaks up with her. We sure are going to miss her. We have so much fun with her we love her so much. And same with, you know, others of my, my children's. We love them all the same. We don't know them all the way as well though. But boy, you know, and, and for the most part I'm, I'm, I'm really happy with my children's selections. Divorce. It's a heck of a thing, and I've seen my son had a basketball coach. They're two guys that were coaching a team together. And one was the ex of the other one's wife. And we went to the basketball party at the end of the year little kids basketball. They were all together in the house and it's like, how does this work. But it did for them. No, it sucks. It sucks. And when divorce happens, it's terrible. Yeah, grim gris. See I'm looking below. With all CS Lewis's loose you talk why not more of how we're living in the great divorce we are living in the great divorce. The little clip I made of, you know, the, the nothing that's eating the world. Because he has a pool and five kids and we don't all Kate. Okay. Yeah, a pool is a really nice thing in the Central Valley of California, and five kids are really awesome. And what I, what I hope for each of you gris Kate, any of the rest of you is a good marriage and a good spouse and lots of children. What more could I, I want for you. So I have, yeah, used up all the time. Well, because I'm a sucker for you guys. I'm going to drop the link. Anybody wants to come in and something to say. Maybe. Let's see you got this branding. Got this branding. Not time for that. Not time for that approaches are that's where that's where the alignment is between Graham and I. Okay, so what is bringing down the fourth wall project. Well terrible spell. And part of that spell. Humans have a campfire circuitry. For whatever reason, probably because it. So like the television engages that. And like that's when your tribal elders are passing on information and stuff so like those things are hijacked and make you everybody feel like their audience. And like you'll like if you watch characters and series that do break the fourth wall and that's, that's what the fourth wall I'm referencing. The wall that behind which you are audience and not a human. Okay. Hashtag paintball for Jesus at grim gris. Hashtag break the fourth wall. You do like the fourth wall that doesn't exist. Break the fourth wall a little bit. You really helped me break the fourth wall. It's just people. Good poetry is definitely it's asking it's definitely always trying to break the fourth wall always try. Hey, we got to take her. Hi, Paul. Hey, Mike. How are you? Good. Just figured out. Say hi and I had the opportunity. Where were you at? Just one of the local parks here. There's miles and miles of paths that connect to the written everybody knows like the Riverwalk in downtown San Antonio is famous. But yeah, there's like miles of green belt that all connect to it. So so when my work day is not so heavy, I usually pull over somewhere and take a walk. Listen to the live stream or whatever else is going on. So beautiful, beautiful. And you're in short sleeves. You're in short sleeves. So it's it's warm enough in the sun. It's 85. Oh, 85. Yeah, lovely. Oh, nice. But still no leaves on the trees. They're well, they're starting to get some buds. See, turn that way. It's pretty green over there. So yeah, it's nice. Virtually not alone on the Riverwalk. Yeah. Yeah, that Riverwalk is pretty commercialized, let's say. Yeah. Yeah. This is the the the dry creek walk here. So one of my favorite parts of Bridges of Meaning was when we were putting on our cameras at work. Of course, my work was boring, but I loved the tiling and the kitchens and the cleaning. And that's and I think that's you know, and you've really majored in that and brought, you know, helped make this a workspace, not just for the thinky talky keyboard class, but for the the the rest of the rest of the rest of us. So that's been good. All right. You got anything else you want to say? Otherwise, I'm going to play some branding and we're going to we're going to we're just going to ride and just going to ride our good friend dog bark out into the sunset. Well, you know, I just I have I've been it's I went on a crazy deep dive on wrestling after your video with Guy. Yeah. I you know, I watched it when I was a kid. And then at some point, you know, it's like the thing of, oh, it's fake. And then I was like, wait a minute. Like, I don't know, I kind of got the thing of like, maybe there's a good apologetic argument for like Calvinism. Like, you know, people complain that it's determined and it's like, well, what about professional wrestling? People sure seem to enjoy that. So I don't know. But, man, it's been interesting because I went and have been looking up all the, you know, the stories of all the people that I knew as a kid were now mostly retired or are and it's just it's it's just fascinating. So so maybe maybe get some more wrestlers on. I don't know. Yeah. Yeah. Well, because and now I don't know if you've seen because Chad's well, you must have seen Chad and Neil are doing wrestling promos now. The lobster suit. I love it. I love it. It's you know, it's it's really fun. It's really fun. And and y'all make it fun. That's that's the thing about people. People are fun. They really are. Yep. All right, Michael. Thanks for popping in. Yep. All right. I'm going to let's let's let's go out with a little bit of dog bark. I'm. I'm. I'm. I'm. I'm. I'm. I'm. I'm. I'm. I'm. I'm. I'm. I'm. I'm. I'm. I'm. It is the man. Does not want you. The way. Way. Way. Way. Way. Way. Way. Way. Way. He. Hey. Day and night. Day and night. Day and night. Day and night. He. Way. Way. Because it's a frivous Caesar, and his leaf does not wither. Every faith he does prosper, not so the wicked. They are like chaff that the wind blows away. Therefore the wicked will not stand in the judgment. Nor sinners in the assembly of the righteous. For the Lord watches over the way of the righteous. But the way of the wicked shall perish. The Lord watches over the way of the wicked. The Lord watches over the way of the wicked. The Lord watches over the way of the wicked. Blessed is the man who does not walk in the counsel of the wicked. Or stand in the way of sinners, or sits in the seat of mockers. But his delight is in the love of the Lord, and on his law he meditates. Day and night he lives like a tree planted by streams of water. Which yields its fruit in season, and his leaf does not wither. Every faith he does prosper, not so the wicked. They are like chaff that the wind blows away. Therefore the wicked will not stand in the judgment. Nor sinners in the assembly of the righteous. For the Lord watches over the way of the righteous. But the way of the wicked shall perish. The Lord watches over the way of the wicked. The Lord watches over the way of the wicked. The Lord watches over the way of the wicked. The Lord watches over the way of the wicked. The Lord watches over the way of the wicked. The Lord watches over the way of the wicked. The Lord watches over the way of the wicked.