https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=YNkjV70gPsM

 Hi, this is Paul. I've been making a commentary on the Jordan Peterson-John Vervecki conversation. I've done three parts of it. There's a wager out there between two members of the Chicago Estuary between Sam and Hank that this commentary is going to be four volumes or 10 volumes. The pace we're going, Hank, who aged in 10, seems to be the favorite. I actually hadn't done one of these for a week now, and I was sort of losing interest, which I tend to do. I thought, maybe I won't do anymore. I was reading the comments, and people seemed to appreciate them. I know I've had a lot of Peterson stuff on my channel. At some point, some of you who don't care for Peterson start leaving comments, enough of the Peterson stuff already. Well, something like this, there's going to be some Peterson stuff, so just don't watch it if you don't like it. I listened to a couple other commentaries about the conversation. I really liked the Rando's commentary. I really liked their title, Sofia via Nica, or Nikia. I thought that was a great wisdom through struggle, let's say, or wisdom through conquest. I thought that was a good title, and I really enjoyed that conversation, even all the times that Luke said disparaging things about me. Yes, I do listen, Luke. No, all kidding aside, it was a great conversation. There's another good one out there, too, by Damon Walter. He had done some commentary about the Peterson-Zizek conversation. This conversation, the dude shaved off his hair. If you got hair, wear it. Someday you might not have it. Enjoy it while you've got it, Damon or Damien. Is it Damon or Damien? Anyway, I thought that was a really good commentary, too, and I really liked how he was walking through those rice patties and making his points. Very impressive. It was really enjoyable. If you're looking for more commentary, definitely watch the Rando's, and if you're not subscribed to the Rando's United channel, if you like content on my channel, there's similar content with the Rando's. So, Damon Walter, and I'll put both of those links in the comment section. We had just sort of ended one section, and Jordan asked John to summarize Western civilization, so let's jump in there. We'll try and make sure I get my sound looking good here. I think the West is the attempt to, if I had to try and summarize the West, what an audacious thing to try and do. See, Ruck said that, because I asked him why Dionysius transformed into Christ, because we were answering simple questions, too, and he said, well, Greece met Judaism. Now, it's helpful to know a little bit about Nietzsche in this. The Apollonian and the Dionysian are philosophical and literary concepts represented by a duality between the figures of Apollo and Dionysius from Greek mythology. Its popularization is widely attributed to the work of the birth of tragedy by Frederick Nietzsche through the terms that already were in use prior to this, such as the writing of poets Frederick Holderlin, historian Johann Joachim Winckelmann, and others. The word Dionysian occurs as early as 1608 in Edward Topsell's zoological treatise, The History of Serpents. The concept has been widely invoked and discussed within Western philosophy and literature. In Greek mythology, Apollo and Dionysius are both sons of Zeus. Apollo is the god of the sun, of rational thinking and order, and appeals to logic, prudence, and purity. Dionysius is the god of wine and dance, of irrationality and chaos, and appeals to emotions and instincts. The ancient Greeks did not consider the two gods to be opposites or rivals, although they were often entwined by nature. And so you can go to the Wikipedia page and learn quite a bit about that. So let's go back to the conversation. Yep. I think Chuck said that, because I asked him why Dionysius transformed into Christ, because we were answering simple questions too, and he said, well, Greece met Judaism. Yeah, but Judaism also met Greece. I mean, Philo starts theology because of the interaction with Platonic philosophy. Philo, of course, the great Jewish scholar, Philo of Alexandria, about the time, if I recall, a little earlier than Paul of Tarsus. I think Christianity is trying to integrate agape and logos together. That's how I try to understand his project. Christianity is trying to integrate agape and logos. I think that's, you could do a far worse in terms of understanding Christianity than that phrase. And please clarify, please clarify that claim. Sure. So I think, I mean, we've talked a lot about the Greek heritage of logos and logos is also central within. Especially in the book of John. Yeah, especially in the book of John. And saying that metaphorically with regard to you as well. But also in the epistle of John is where John also said, God is agape. Right. And then that's the epistle of John. He makes that famous statement. If you spend enough time with higher critics and even evangelical scholars, the connecting of the gospel of John, the book of Revelation, the epistles of John with, let's say, John the apostle in sort of this offhand way. It's really quite dramatic because I'm not skeptical on these fronts, but it's really quite interesting. And neither, obviously neither are, they're psychologists and they know a fair amount of philosophy, but biblical studies, not their thing. And the idea is there's something about the way the logos gathers things together so they belong together. That's the original. So that everything comes together. Everything comes together. And then there's the idea in Plato of the ascent from the cave, the anagoga. You and Jonathan talked about this. The world discloses itself to me. That transforms me. And then I can see more deeply into the world than that transforms me. And I do this reciprocal opening. And the thing is, that's very much, you know, you know, Now, before we get to Pete, I mean, in the Randall's conversation, they noted, I thought this was a really good point from the Randall's conversation or the Randall's commentary that you know, Vervecky tends to, they're both professors and they can both get very professorial. I remember when Obama was president and George Will commenting on Obama of how, you know, he sort of thought he could set up there and lecture the nation and that would fix things. And people don't work this way. So they can both tend to be professorial. And Vervecky can get going. Who am I to talk about being long-winded? I'm a pastor, so we have exactly the same problem. But Vervecky can tend to get going with his long explanations. And so the Randall's thought part, perhaps they were also quite divided on why this video has the shape it has. But part of this is Peterson perhaps is intentionally sort of disrupting John as he gets sort of professorial and starts going down long explanations. So, but this point that John made, let's hear it again. Then I can see more deeply into the world, then that transforms me and I do this reciprocal opening. So that anagagay, this is a big point in John's awakening from the meaning crisis earlier in the commentary, he used the word transjective. So this back and forth. Now, I just finished my recording about living eyes up versus living eyes down. And I was making the point that for most of human history, society, especially us as groups have been living eyes up. So we look up at the emergent, and then our eyes move from up to down. Modernity sorts living eyes down, living eyes down first and slowly moves up. And so what we're seeing as we've had 100 years or so, actually more in terms of modernity, but a long time of living eyes down that now we have a lot of attempting to connect heaven and earth. And I see these two scholars as typifying that need now as a culture. And so then for John Vervecki, this anagagay, the leaving the cave, the transjective, I go outside, being outside the cave changes me. That changes the way I see outside and it's back and forth and back and forth. And I think that's a that's a real strength of Vervecki's system and position. And the thing is, that's very much, you know, you know, And agape, that's, do you define that? That's love. Yeah. Accelerating mutual disclosure is how it's even, Accelerating mutual disclosure. Again, if you look at meaning crisis, I think it's, it's either 13 or 15. It's actually his best description of agape is right before the one where he talks about agape, where agape is in the title. And it's mutually accelerating disclosure. That's one aspect, but agape as opposed to, Filet-O-Aus sort of shoulder to shoulder, Eros is sort of taking in each other. Agape is your wellbeing at my expense. It's in many ways the good kind of motherly love or parental love. It's the love of the superior to the inferior that affords agency to the inferior. And agape is this, this kind of love that nourishes and grows and empowers often sacrificially. Well, it seemed to me that the relationship between truth and love is that love is the, is the something like the goal and truth is its servant. It seems to me to be safe because I think so. This is how I've worked it on my, in my mind is that, well, I think the truth is the best servant of reality. Truth is the servant of reality and reality, I think best manifests itself as love. Well, one of the slogans I have, I'd say the goal of reality is love. It's interesting talking, listening to these two talk because of course, being a Calvinist, I have a pretty significant Augustinian framework and so in, you know, we sort of lean heavily, you know, the language I use is we're living in the age of decay. And in this age, love, the sacrificial quality of love could be at least partly attributed to the function of the age. And in the age to come, this agape love won't be as sacrificial in this age. And this is typified, of course, by Christ on the cross, which is the example of love, the example of sacrificial love, especially again, in the Gospel of John. But the culmination, basically, the age of decay is defeated by agape love. And to riff on a great line by black preachers, you just can't out give God. The age of decay exhausts itself, trying to exhaust the inexhaustible. And God wins by, do you think you can decay me? Go ahead and keep sucking. And that's how death is defeated by love. That's why this power itself is love. Well, what are the slogans I have in my... That's why this power claim is so abhorrent to me. The claim that power is the central... The randos also made the comment that Peterson seems to try to keep pulling John into culture war issues. And if you've listened to John, you know, of course, you can take some of what John says and apply it to culture war issues, but you're going to have to do that yourself. John isn't going to follow. John wants to keep to his lane. And, you know, as a preacher, I appreciate that because part of, I think, the corruption of the church in both the right and the left in America today has been its captivity to these culture war issues. Motivating factor for the foreign. Well, one of the slogans I have in my... That's why this power... That would have liked to have heard the slogan. Claim is so abhorrent to me. The claim that power is the central motivating factor for the Western endeavor is tantamount, I believe, to saying that it's the basic endeavor of the human species. And I think that's opposite of the truth. I think this agape is... And logos is more accurate. And so it's not just a counterclaim, it's an antithesis. Well, I'm trying to pick up on... And I think Peterson is right there. And you could map that onto sort of, of course, I'm dealing with Paul. I'm going to be dealing with the apostle Paul for a while in my preaching, but it's the spirit of the age. And it's the relational movement of the age of decay is my well-being at your expense. Agape is the reverse of that. And so God exhausts the age of decay because you just can't out give God. And so I think Peterson critiquing this cynical analysis of human activity, reducing it all to greedful power grabbing. It's sort of an Augustinianism on steroids. It's total depravity mapped beyond even what a Calvinist would map. And yes, Nate, I hear your complaint about Calvinist total depravity, although many Calvinists will say it's the only of our doctrine that is easily verified by general revelation. But Peterson is right here. And let's hear what Varick has to say. I'm trying to touch on the culture wars, obviously. Well, that's... Yeah. And I mean, I think, I mean, for me, you're saying something very analogous to a critique that I've built in awakening from the meaning crisis. Oh, let's hear it, man. Well, shut up. No, it's okay. I mean, like I was going to say, one of my signatures is, you know, it's in Latin, but it translates as love is its own way of knowing. And the kind of knowing there is like noticing, like news and insight. That's the Egyptian eye. Well, yes. It's attention back to the Peterson-Peugeot conversation. Noticing, it's not thinking, it's attention. And maybe you're tying that with that revelation of the form. You're tying that to that revelation of the form. You know, maybe what we should do is have John in a room and he can, we can pause Jordan and he can finish his thoughts and then go back to the next one. Maybe we need a John Vervecky commentary on this conversation. But conforming. Yeah. And that's exactly it. That's exactly it. It's, and this is very similar to the Buddhist idea of that what you're trying to do is shape attention and mindfulness so that you get that reciprocal opening so that your self-knowledge and the knowledge of the world become indistinguishable, become interpenetrating. Like what you have when you really love somebody. And it was interesting how the self-knowledge Luke in the, in the Randos video noted that the one aspect of Calvinism that he retained from his, from his time when he was in John Piper's church was Calvin's adage that, you know, to know you have, you need, there's two kinds of knowledge you need, John Calvin says, to know God and to know yourself. Committed long-term relationship, penetrating. Like what you have when you really love somebody in a committed long-term relationship. You're knowing of yourself and you're knowing of them become bound up because you indwell them and you internalize them and they indwell you and internalize you, right? And, and how much, how much death of the old you has this involved for you? I know that's a struggle. Now, actually him asking this question here, and now he's going to second guess himself. Strange question. No. And it isn't a strange question because again, I think they're, part of what makes this video so difficult to listen to and part of what has provoked my response, which of course the first piece of the commentary was very long, mostly on the nature of the video itself. But there are lots of layers to that and, and part of that, I think is, you know, they are colleagues. They do have a history together. Jordan's Peterson has Jordan's Peterson's journey has cost him plenty. Well, what about John? Well, John didn't go down the culture war rabbit trail. John didn't ride the status rocket. John didn't, you know, fall like Icarus. What does this cost John? It's a good question. And it's again, back to the Rando's comment. I really enjoyed that Rando's commentary. I learned a lot from it. I I'm so the real reward sounds so cliche. The real reward of the last three years have been the people that I've met. And just look at the guys on that Rando's commentary. You know, Luke, I joke with Luke, but I do love Luke. Michael, what a, what a gift. Sam, Nate, I haven't even had a conversation, a direct conversation with Nate of any substance. Julian, I haven't even had a conversation with Julian. Julian was one of the first guys to to come to come into contact with me. And all these guys are just they're just tremendous human beings. And they've got so much wisdom and they've learned so much. They're all younger than I am. But they, you know, I learned from each of them. So I've just distracted myself. But yeah, what has what has this cost, John? It's a good question. It's a damn good question. Why? It's a good question because it and now Peterson even distracted John from answering the question by why is it a good question? Instead of getting to the question itself, but it is a good question. It deserves to be answered. Why it's a good question. Things up the idea of the fact that there's a level of knowing that deals with the process of identification itself in both senses of the word identifying, designating something and assuming an identity in both those senses of identification, the kind of knowing that I most care about this participatory knowing involves and identification. Now we're back to the participatory is one of the four P's. Actually, I wish that they had taken this in a different way, which is you have to love to know. And if that's case, and if it's a Gopic love in the age of decay, that will mean suffering. You you know Christ in his suffering, the apostle Paul says. And therefore, if we're talking about the transformation at that level, we're talking about like that's what I mean about when I talk about knowing knowing yourself, I don't mean representing yourself. I mean the knowing that constitutes you as a self. And that's what's undergoing the transformation. Okay, that's the that's the Kono Se'er. That's the three P's of the four P's. When you're engaged in participatory knowing. When I really love my partner, right? I'm not just for me. What does it mean that you love them? Do you think if you express that? How would you express that? Well, I mean, it means a lot. It means that reciprocal opening I was talking about. But it means that I, I mean, it's like what Eckhart says. And again, I don't mean to be pretentious. Like you you know, he says you have to make a space. I don't think you're going to be able to help in this conversation. Yeah, that's true. That's fair enough. He says, you know, you have to God forgive us. The goal of Rhineland mysticism was to this kind of receptivity. You have to make a space so that the Son of God can be born within you. And again, no not being just religious, but for me to love my partner is to cultivate that kind of receptivity, a space in which she can be within me. And I don't mean in any purely romantic metaphorical sense. What I mean is she finds a purchase within me whereby she can realize herself in both senses of the word realize and she can come to trust that that space that place of realization will always be available for her. And she can come to rely on it a place through which she can transcend herself when she needs to. I mean, and being committed to that and finding that inseparably bound up with my own project of trying to realize who I am. That's for me the core of what it is to love somebody. And when I was playing this in the car with my wife, when we were coming back from our little weekend trip, you know, my wife said, stop that video. And I stopped it and she said, play that again. And that's really good. And you know, another one of the comments that the randos made was part of what made this video so good. And I don't know if it was Sam or Nate, I think it might have been Nate who made this comment that so often verveky is at his best when you get him out of the professorial mold and get him into the relational mode. And that, you know, when he, although he very much lectured at us for professor about agape, but this, I should just play that agape clip for you because I put it on my clips channel because it's just so good. Incarnating as a kairos to change the history of the world and to offer you to change your own personal history is a different kind of love. This is agape. We have to distinguish between three kinds of love, eros, phylia and agape. See, eros is the love that seeks to be one with something. And that can be spiritual, like being one with nature, or it can be being one with a cookie by eating it. Of course, we come to think of eros erotically, right? Being one with somebody by having sex with them. But remember, Socrates knew ta erotica, which wasn't just sex. Socrates knew what to care about. This is phylia. So this is the love that is satisfied through consummation. Phylia, this is the love that seeks cooperation. This is the love in which we experience reciprocity. We love the cookie because we can consume it. We love our friends because we are in reciprocity with them. What kind of love is this? And this is what Jesus claimed was how God loved individuals. This is the love that a parent has for a child. This is not the love of consummation. You're not trying to consume the child. That's evil. And it's not friendship. You're not like when you bring a child home from the hospital, I've done this twice, right? That's not your friend. It's not even a person. You can't, it's like it's basically a slug. But here's the astonishing thing. You love it. Not because of any way you can consume it or be one with it. Ew. You don't love it because, hey, you know, great friendship. You love it, right? You love it because by loving it, you turn a non-person into a person. It's the closest thing to a miracle. And that sounds hackney, I know, but stop that and think about this. You depend on agape. It's because people loved you before you were a person that you have become the person you are. Love turns non-person animals into moral agent persons. It's like, like, it's like somehow if I could just care about, right, my sofa enough, it would turn into a Ferrari or something. It's that powerful. And here's what Jesus was offering. That love is, can be made, it can be accepted and made available for all. Here's what is on offer. Here's why Christianity will take the Roman Empire culturally. With agape, Christianity can say to all of the non-persons of the Roman Empire, all the women, all the children, all the non-male citizens, all the sick, all the poor, all the widowed, can take all of those non-persons and say, we will turn you into persons. Persons that belong to the kingdom of God. We'll take another look at this in one of our next sessions. We'll take another look at this in more detail next time. Thank you very much for your time and attention. That's great. I wish you luck with it. Well, that's all we can ever wish anybody. I mean, if you're, if you're, the grace of God or, or yeah, or, or that there is a life to this relationship that will eventually grow strong enough that we can come to trust in it as much as we trust in each other. And that's what I believe is happening for me. And I think- Let's listen to that again. That relationship or, or yeah. Yeah. Luck, the grace of God, and then this. Or, or, or that there is a life to this relationship that will eventually grow strong enough that we can come to trust in it. There's a life to this relationship that will eventually grow strong enough that we can come to trust in it. Again, there's a lot of Christianity under this talk. And, and when they were talking about logos, this, the golden thread, I mean, they're looking for sources of life and power that are not enwrapped in human skin. Now, if you look at my starting living eyes up versus starting living eyes down, if you start living eyes up, you get to that quicker because you're coming emanation, you're coming top down. They're trying to come from the bottom up. It's going to be a while. It's going to be a ways until you get there. If you get there at all, as much as we trust in each other. And that's what I believe is happening for me. And I think there's kind of three loves involved and they're all bound up together. There's, you know, Socratic self-love, not narcissistic self-love. There's the love of the other. And then there's the love of the relationship. But, but talk, that's for me is like a Trinity talking about if those are separate is a mistake. You have to talk about it analytically as if they're separate, but they interpenetrate and inter afford each other in a profound way. They become Sam who knows more about the Trinity than I do. And even because he's always trying to disprove it, notes how much Augustinian Trinitarianism these two actually voice and then sort of back away from in this video. You come in an important sense, indistinguishable from each other. I've been trying to develop a counter position to the claim that our society is predicated on the expression of power. Okay. Remember he was there before. Now we're kind of going back to that again. And that our social relations are structured as a consequence of the expression of power. And therefore by inference, our prime motivation is power. None of which I believe to be true. I think that's an all of that's an aberration in the deepest sense. And I think that what we're talking about is the true path, let's say, to the degree that any of us are capable of realizing that. And I certainly don't claim to be, I struggle with it to my, to an immense degree. But I do believe that it's the proper counter position. And then that well, so what do you think about that? I mean, is the culture war that's the second time he's asked this question in just a few minutes. We're in that deep. I mean, is the counterclaim genuinely the adversarial position? I mean, what else would it be if it's not saying it's basically saying that the claim is something like the driving force of Western culture, but I don't know how you distinguish that from the driving force of human culture. Exactly. I don't think most of the people who make that claim would say that there's something, it's hard for them to say that there's something radically different about Western culture and the world spirit, let's say, without only attributing all that is negative to Western culture. And that's, I think, very difficult to do. So if the mainstream of Western culture is the mainstream of human culture, or akin to it, so akin to that shamanic tradition, for example, then the claim is that that mainstream is the desire for power. And that's the opposite of what we're saying, genuinely the opposite. It's the antithesis to that because that isn't isn't philo Nikea the antithesis to? Yeah, I think it is. Well, I mean, that's part of it. Is it genuinely the antithesis? I mean, so is this is this a claim of is this a claim of satanic possession of the West? I mean, is the is the is the culture war that deep? Well, I don't know. I mean, the claim is that it's about fundamentals, right? It's a fundamental critique of Western society. He just answered his own question. And again, there's this drive at the culture war questions means fundamental. That's why Derrida went after phy logo centric phy logo centrism. Yeah. And I think and there's in Foucault does similar things. But the thing you have, you have to remember is, you know, to you toward the ends of Derrida's career, right? He's reaching into a neoplatonic mysticism, negative theology is something he starts to take an interest in and Foucault, you know, you know, technologies of the self. And one of the common critiques I hear about Peterson from academics is that he he he treats Derrida and Foucault too lightly. He doesn't go far enough. And whereas John by no means sort of hit him with that, he sort of pivots into that here. He gets very deeply interested in the work of Pierre Haddow, right? And what is ancient philosophy and the wisdom tradition and phy Lea Sophia. And he starts to turn towards it and starts to recognize it as nothing of that. I know nothing of that. Yeah. Well, that's what so I mean, well, that's it. That's very interesting. And then he dies yet. Foucault also Foucault. No, Derrida. We were speaking of Derrida. I was speaking of both. I said, you see Foucault getting very interested in negative theology, neoplatonic mysticism. And then you see Foucault getting very interested in, you know, stoicism and Pierre Haddow's work on the whole Socratic tradition. So what do you make? Okay, so do you, is it reasonable for me to assume that Derrida and Foucault's thinking is at the bottom of the this counterclaim that I'm discussing, which culminates in the assumption that power and is at the core of the Western endeavor, like the exercise of arbitrary power. Now, Peterson is often criticized for insufficient self-criticism. But let's be fair here. He has just asked John Verveckis just opened himself and said, am I am I being fair? Am I being true with this? And again, I've this this complaint against Peterson that he isn't self critical enough is something I've never bought. And I think if you listen to enough of him, you hear him questioning and countering himself. And he he both sets that up as a virtue theoretically. And you can watch him practice it practically. Is that the center of the culture war that claim? I don't I mean, I think the the that's symptomatic of something that's been going on much more deeply and much longer. Fair enough. I don't know if that answers my question. Let him finish. But you know, because I'm looking for a corrective or perhaps for agreement. But that's completely up to you. Because if it's a corrective, then that I need, you know, so be it. I mean, if I take this in the wrong direction, or am I seeing it clearly? I get that's a great example of Peterson saying, you know, correct me if I'm wrong. And I think with a degree of trust here, I think he's being completely honest and truthful in asking John to critique that. Um, I want to say something other than those I want to I want to I want to say that that there are relationship to power as a criterion of realness should be properly acknowledged rather than be made an absolute or be set up as an antithesis. I think what's coming out, I would argue, out of 40 cognitive science is the is the growing claim that we don't have a single way of knowing the world. We have a propositional way that, you know, as it says, that is carried in proposition and results in beliefs we have, which is not knowing that. But we have also procedural knowing, we know how to do things, and it doesn't result in beliefs, it results in skills. We have perspectival knowing, which is neither about belief or skills, it's about states of consciousness and how they create situational awareness for us. And then we have this participatory knowing that we've been talking about throughout where I know not at the level of my beliefs or my skills or even my states of consciousness, but I know in terms of my traits of my character and how I've been shaped in order to fit the world in a way that seems to fundamentally matter to me. And I think each- So right, I mean, if there's a if there's something that John succeeded in tying this film together, it's his point about the four Ps, it's his point about these two ways of knowing. And I think that's a good way into John's whole project. Each one of these has a deep, has a different sense of realness attached to it. I think propositional has truth, I think procedural, our skills give us a sense of realness when they empower us. Our perspectival knowing, what's the sense of realness there? Well, we're getting a good sense of this from virtual reality work. It's a sense of presence, a sense of presence. And then what's the sense of realness for participatory knowing? And that's what we're talking about. We're talking about this, like people try to capture it with these words of faith and connection and belonging and fittedness and at one minute. And I think instead, I think what's happening is our culture is realizing that we have tried to reduce all the knowing, a la Descartes, to purely propositional knowing. And then we're slowly realizing the inadequacy of that. I think the fact that we are trapped in ideological battle means we think we can capture all of the meaning-making machinery at the propositional level. But what 4E cognitive science is saying is no, no, human, you talked about tracking. The skill of tracking affords our conceptual abilities, but also states of consciousness afford us being in relationship to the world. You can have totally ineffable states that nevertheless seem the most real to you. And also these transformations of ourselves also carry with them a sense of realness. And I think what's happened is the West is realizing, but in a negative way, that the propositional reduction is inadequate, insufficient, and it's groping for the closest thing at hand. And the closest thing at hand is what technology makes salient to it, which is power and control. This is Heidegger's critique, but I think we have to go deeper. Okay, so that was a long stretch. And I want to summarize it because he's just walked through his four piece of knowing, which he's going to return to again and again in this video, but he did so in the context of the culture war. And what he's saying is, and I think he's correct in this, that modernity focused on the propositional. Why did modernity focus on the propositional? In one way, it was a function of living eyes down and starting eyes down. So we want it, and I think it maps onto Jordan Peterson's, the beginning of maps of meaning, a world of objects. So modernity begins in the propositional. And what he's saying is that as it becomes increasingly apparent to many that the propositional is insufficient to go the whole way. Now, again, some of you have started to pick up on my little meme about the naturalist lab leak. What do I mean by the naturalist lab leak? Well, what the scientific method discovered is that if I close one eye and I take out personhood, I take out consciousness, and I establish sort of an imaginative, monarchical vision where there's a world of objects, I can use this power to basically scale up propositionally, scale up mechanistically, and I can know things very powerfully. Well, pretty soon we were doing this in the lab, and then we said, well, let's take this out of the lab. Let's do this with people. Well, we learned some things, but it also invoked a meaning crisis. And so now remember, this is also in the context of Derrida and Foucault, of whom I know next to nothing about. But what John says basically is that at the end of modernity, as modernity is, as the car is running out of gas on this pure propositional way of knowing, we're a little frantic. And so we look around in technology and what we find is power. And so we look at and what we find is power. And so again, this is his answer to the culture war question. We have to say, no, no, there's a place for that. But your skills ultimately depend on your situational awareness and your situational awareness, the states of consciousness you get access to ultimately depend on your character. Now, actually, I think this maps nicely onto a point that one of Jordan Peterson's best conversations with Roger Scruton in the UK, where Peterson talks about competence. And I think in some ways, part of the three P's together for Vervecky maps nicely onto competence. Because for Peterson, competence is sort of a way out of this, what bloody postmodernism trap that Peterson is always seeing. You don't hire a plumber by the plumber's gender or by the plumber's skin color or ethnicity or country of origin. You hire a plumber on the basis of competence. And that's all of these three P's. That's participatory, it's procedural, and it's perspectival. A plumber majors in that. Now there's propositions all along the way, of course. And my critique of Luke in the Randos commentary on this would be almost every time you dogmatize against dogma, you just reinforce dogma. Every time you use propositions in order to undercut propositions, you once again demonstrate the utility of propositions. So propositional knowing is not going away. But as Vervecky nicely says, it is overplayed in modernity and is insufficient. Now, again, Peterson expresses this without getting into Vervecky's four P's with Peterson's meme of competence. Because again, the plumber is highly participatory, it's procedural, it's perspectival to a degree. And there's propositional in it, but that's sort of the world of the plumber. That's the world of expertise, of competence. And so in that way, there's sort of a nice place where Peterson's project and Vervecky's project can actually map on each other, even though I haven't heard Vervecky talk about Jordan and John. If you're listening to this, check out Jordan's conversation with Roger Scruton, where they go into this is a common theme in Jordan. And Jordan hasn't heard about the four P's, which is evident through this video. And if this video becomes the first of hopefully a longer collaboration, understanding John's four P's will be essential for understanding John's bigger project. We have to bring back that whole rich philosophical anthropologist. Why did they ultimately depend on your care? Well, that's a lot to swallow in, you know, 10 statements. I mean, I'm going to scuttle back to my power claim momentarily and then try to wrap my head around what you said. Okay. Well, sorry, I didn't mean to dump so much. No, no, well, no, not at all. And again, I mean, I've been listening to both of these guys for three years now. And I've probably listened to Jordan more than John has. And I know I've listened to John more than Jordan has. And so that's part of the reason I'm doing these commentaries, because I will never claim to fully grasp or exhaust either of the systems that these two men are presenting. They're simply too massive. But to the degree that I know them, I can sort of take them and find, as JP Marceau always talks about, bridges between them, which I think will help both of them collaborate and map. And I think as was true in 2015 when they spoke and before then, I think there is benefit to collaboration between them. It might have been the proper answer. The proper answer is often that the question isn't sophisticated enough. But it sort of throws the questioner because he's operating from within the space where that's the germane issue. So my claim was that the culture war right now is being fought over the claim that the fundamental animating tendency of Western civilization is the desire to exercise and the exercising of arbitrary power. And that would basically make, again, that's sort of Augustinian anthropology on steroids. It's too grim a perspective on the human heart. And Peterson is basically saying, no, we are capable of more than that. And the evidence for Western society not being simply motivated by, let's use one of the seven deadly sins, avarice. Western civilization is not mere avarice. And John, I think there in his answer, says, we have sort of looked to power because at the end of our propositional way of life, a way of living, as we are longing to get back into the perspectival, the participatory, and the procedural, I think we could probably critique some of that with Illul. He's such a thoroughgoing existentialist, though. And in that way, Illul is so deeply embedded in modernity that there really is some irony in his anarchism. Anyway, but I think it's a potent observation that John is making about within the three P ways of knowing, technology is training us to be avaricious. And so from there, the critique comes. And it is true that once we can't, and Peterson makes this makes this comment often. Once we can do something, we often do do that thing. And I believe that to be fundamentally wrong. Yes. And so I phrased it as an adversarial hypothesis as a satanic hypothesis, essentially from a symbolic perspective, that the accusation is that the West is possessed by this satanic demand for power, and that's its characteristic spirit. And I don't believe that I believe that its characteristic spirit is phylia Sophia, fundamentally, and that that is a contamination which occurs repeatedly, which would be phylia. Like you, Nikkeia. I think if we're using your language properly, or perhaps we're slandering phylia, Nikkeia, I mean, because I think part of the claim that you're making is that there's a positive aspect to phylia, there is an idea that's being damned as the mere arbitrary expression of power. Well, I do think that's something like, like, series like suits are getting at right, because the you have these characters in that drama, who are motivated primarily by phylia, so phylia, and Ikea, but you see phylia Sophia emerge between them. And that's what makes them tolerable as characters. And but both those things seem to be interrelated, one leads to the other. And that seems to be related to your wrestling argument in some sense, and maybe to mine. Yes. So okay, so you think that this so is your claim, let me get this right, at least in part that, please, first of all, I want to know what you think of my claim about this central argument. What you're doing is saying that's a sideshow on a much deeper, that's a sideshow of a much deeper problem. And I think, again, Peterson is correctly tracking here. And he's and it's not an easy thing to track, given. I mean, Peterson is a famous, you know, rabbit trailer. And and the Damien Walker commentary brings that out. But Peterson is tracking here. I mean, that's quite the bloody claim, John, it's not easy for me to process. But that's sure. Yeah, well, so I'm having some trouble with that. But do you think that that invalidates my claim? Or? Or does it just render it irrelevant? No, it doesn't render this discussion. Okay, so let can do is it okay if we deal with that and then and then move on? Sure. I mean, I guess what? Okay, am I misreading early Derrida and Foucault by attributing to them the claim that that that it is power that they identify as the central spirit? And am I wrong in saying that that's just a modified Marxist claim? It's a transformation of the idea of the class struggle into into the domain of the sheer power struggle for power? I think you could make a claim that Foucault sees the deep interpenetrate of the earlier Foucault, maybe even the middle Foucault see? Part of my, you know, I think it's, well, it's, it's definitely the work of academics to look at roots here. But there's also just the common. There's there's the common logic of the swallowing of an assumption. And I think it's the swallowing of that sort of hyper Augustinian pessimistic anthropology that says all people are simply avaricious. But once you make that claim, you're going to have to get stuck with something like all white people are avaricious and people of color aren't. And once you once you start down that road, you undo exactly what Christianity achieved in the Roman Empire that John articulated so beautifully that agapic love makes persons out of women and slaves and children, which, you know, the apostle Paul said in Christ, there is no slave nor free, no Jew, no Gentile, nor male nor female. What did Paul mean by that? And I think Paul meant exactly what John was saying. Now, back to Foucault and Derrida. He's a deep interpenetration between power and knowledge. For Derrida, I do not think the differance really is a good translation is well translated by the term power. Differance is much closer to, you know, what I would call relevance realization, the idea that the relevance of our claim can't be bound. I mean, somebody within classical cognitive science, computational science, Jerry Fodor makes a similar argument that the relevance of a proposition can't be captured within the syntax or semantics of the proposition. I mean, that's the main thing that Derrida is on about. So- That's a consequence of what we're bringing to the table, because the relevance is the interpenetration of the semantic and the syntactic with the unique. Well, and it's also the pragmatics that goes beyond it, because, I mean, you know, this is the central claim of pragmatics that I always have to convey way more than I can say, because I have to rely on you, you know, picking out all the possible of all the possible implications, the ones that are relevant out of all the possible- Right, which means I have to know you, which means I have to embody whatever it is that I'm speaking. Now back to where he was before. I want to get back to my claim that the character traits are at the bottom of this. Right? If you can't- Go ahead, man. Right? If you can't, if you can't, if you don't, if we can't actually conform at the level of our character, we can't- Right, so that's trust. Yeah. And so when you trust, you trust what's honest. Yeah. You trust what's honest. So you trust the logos. Right. And what you do- Because that's honesty driven by love. Right. But I don't think- And so if I trust you, that's what I trust. So my sense of that, my sense, I want to go back to something. I asked you to define love and I'm going to define it on my terms now. Please. And that is the best in me serving the best in you. And I think that's the deepest pleasure. That's the deepest and most lasting pleasure. And it is the most fundamental, fundamental motivation. It's the inexhaustible source. Because if I can do that, whenever I do that, I feel that I'm being properly. And there's nothing better than that. And you can extend that to- And what Jordan just said there is a mouthful. And now that I've sort of slowing this conversation down, painstakingly going through it. Now, again, when these two are having this conversation, they're in sort of a dialogos flow state and they're tracking it when this is part of the weakness of this technology. When we listen to it, or washing the dishes, or driving the car, this is a tremendously complex conversation. But the claim that Peterson made right there is, in fact, that love is the center. And again, to bring in Tom Holland, where is this not Christian? And where did Jordan get this from? He didn't get it from the Greeks. This comes out of Christianity. You can extend that to- And there's nothing better than that. And you can extend that to the world, to situations, places. Well, I think that's what you're supposed to do by accepting the proposition that God is love. I mean, it's God is love and God is logos. Those are both there. So then the question, to some degree, is the rank order of the two. And I would say God is truth within love. And that's the animating spirit of mankind. And that's a way different claim than the one the atheists are going after, by the way. Think about it, everyone. Is truth in the service of love not the best animating spirit of mankind when it isn't pursuing an aberration? We can all ask ourselves that question. Now Peterson's in preacher mode. Sounds like some of the guys in my Bible study. I think that's a- Although they don't use words like this. A good question to ask. Thank you, John. What I mean is I think it re- I think it reorients us to the fact- We can put that on a t-shirt. And it's interesting that the Rando's commentators thought that maybe this is just kind of an inside joke between them. Might have come up in the pre-recording conversation. Might be something that predates this video. Again, and me, having listened to the Rando's conversation, having listened to the Damon Walker conversation, now what I- This is a great example of Vervecky's, the Antigagui, I come out of the cave, I watch this conversation, I watch the commentary, I go back to this conversation back and forth and back and forth. I not only grow in my knowledge of this conversation, but because these two men have wisdom and knowledge of the world, I grow in the knowledge of the world. And we grow together in this. Is truth and the service of love a good question? I guess I see them as more- I see them as more interpenetrating. I want to make a stronger relationship between them than just a relationship of service. I mean this- How about our men? This is why I like the term realization, that love is a way of affording realization. And the deepest knowing we have of reality is in realization. That's what I- If I had to- Okay, so it seems to me- Okay, so I'll make an appendage to my claim. The reality that is most justifiable is brought about by the action of truth in the service of love. Yeah, but I guess what I'm saying is I see truth- I think you're using it, and I've heard you use true as something beyond a correspondence between the semantic content of a proposition reality. I've heard you talk about- Yes. Right, right? And we even use that when we use the phrase true love. Yes, it seems to incorporate some of those other dimensions that you've been talking about. Exactly, exactly. Okay, well great, Matt. So- So the arrow is true, and this is mapping onto the three Ps, not just the correspondence and the physical world of some semantic reality in a word. Fill me in. Well, that's what I'm trying to get at. I'm trying to get at that power is a way of- when your shot is true, your skill has been effective, and you're going to hit the mark. But presence is also a way in which things are true to form, right? And then the participatory knowing is when we're- the deepest sense of true, which is related to trust and being betrothed to the world in an important way. So if you'll allow me to expand what you mean by true to cover all of those dimensions- Betrothed to the world in that you extend the same courtesy to the world that you described extending to your partner. Exactly. I think the answer to nihilism isn't some propositional answer. This is what I get from Nishatani. Yeah, right. It's to relearn, and I mean this deeply, in the Buddhist sense of Sati, to remember what it is to fall in love with reality, to fall in love with being. And if that's what you're saying is the- You think that's what Sam Harris is striving for in his spirituality? Well, it's not a throwaway answer. It's like, what's he up to exactly? I mean, isn't he on a Sophia? That's interesting. I mean, Peterson is task switching very quickly in this, and interesting that Sam Harris comes up at this point. I find Sophia adventure. I think everybody is- How can I put this? Everybody lives from the non-propositional kinds of knowing emphasized by Plato, and that's what all of the scholastic research is pointing to now. That Socrates was trying to point people to the non-propositional knowing, the procedural, the perspectival, the participatory. I think we all have to live from that, given a lot of things I've said and a lot of things we've said. Maybe you could expound on those a bit more for us and clarify a bit more. So you said the answer to nihilism. That isn't exactly a comment on my comment that the culture war is about a claim that the drive to power is at the core of Western being. I think that's an equally nihilistic claim. That's my point. The claim- The claim is nihilistic or my claim about that is nihilistic or both? The claim that power is a fundamental reality is an attempt to assuage the wounding of nihilism, but it is fundamentally mistaken in its endeavor. It is constituted the wrong way. It's like framing a problem the wrong way so that you do not get the insight needed to get to the solution of the problem. So I think of it as a fundamental mis-framing. That's what I'm trying to say. Okay, okay. That's why I'm hesitant to say either yes or no to it because- Right, I get it. Well, I believe that it is mis-framed because I don't think it would be taking us in such a pathological direction, the whole argument, if it wasn't mis-framed. And so part of what I'm trying to- and for me, this dovetails with the increasing crescendo within 4e cognitive science about embodiment and embedded and extended and enacted cognition is- Right, you see this as a subset argument of one of those elements. Yes, yes. But like I said, I'm really having a hard time. I know what you mean, but- and I suppose what you're trying to do with everything you do is to expound upon this, but I certainly want you to expound upon this. Let's go into those three modes of alternate cognition a little bit more deeply. Okay, so I've got someone coming to church, got to replace some outlets because the GFI that the fridge is plugged into shouldn't be plugged into a- fridge shouldn't be plugged into a GFI. These are the kind of things that you deal with as a pastor. And one of our members is an electrician, so he's meeting me here after work and we're going to look into it. Anyway, so that's enough for now. Now we're going to get into, again, more directly the 4Ps, but this was a good session. And again, the more I get into this video, the more of the- let's let me say it this way- the more of the logos I see in this video, I mean that in a few different ways, and the more value I see in this video, and so the more value I feel there is in walking through it slowly. Now again, I am doing this on camera, making content for YouTube, but this is also, in a sense, you're holding me accountable. And so I take valuable precious time to do this, and I am growing from it, I am learning from it, and when I do that, I want to keep doing it. So thank you for your time and attention. Like and subscribe, leave a comment. Your comments are very helpful.