https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=ZZHaEohHq5E

 Uh, not just George W. Bush, but I mean, this is Trump. I mean, this is Trump's game, right? Like you, you don't have to listen to the long rambling speeches that he gives or even follow his Twitter X feed. It's more trying to China, China, trade deals, border, like, yeah. Well, like just these keywords that he just drops and drops and drops, right. And does it really matter what words happen in between? And I think he knows that too. Yeah. Um, yeah. And, and in fact, the media, which hates him, aids in a bet. Oh yeah. Oh yeah. Oh yeah. I was astounded. It's like these people, they hate Trump. So what do they do? They keep talking about them. They keep sound biting him. It's like, you fools, you fools. You don't know that you have made this man. You have made this man. Yeah. Yeah. There was a, an, uh, Aaron Renz, um, dropped a little email by a guy named John, I think it was John seal S E L. He wrote a little piece on Trump and I thought it was really interesting. He talked about how, um, he, he didn't reference Ian McGill Christ exactly, but he was kind of in that same area of saying, we have one part of our brain that looks at specific facts and deals with facts, and then you have the other part of your brain that deals with the bigger picture, the narrative, like how does it all fit together? And he says, so Trump is not a fax person. He's a, a big narrative person. And so he is constantly setting the narrative. And, and when you try to attack narrative with facts, well, he's already prejudice, prejudice you against, uh, against that. Like, you know, he's a fake news. Like you can't, I mean, he had, he said, cause you have to fight narrative with narrative. And I think when, and that's why he wins, I think, because those who run up against him, whether they're like in the primaries or whether they're in the democratic party, they don't, they're not giving a compelling narrative of a better America and what he's saying. And, and so you can attack his facts and yeah, he committed, maybe he's allegedly committed all kinds of crimes. And I mean, you can, but nobody cares about that because he's still, like, he's defining reality in a way that seems to make more sense to the people who follow them than others. And there was a, um, I'm curious kind of what you think about this, but there's this guy who's a RCA guy who, uh, is a reporter and his name always slips my mind. But, but he made this provocative claim that the mega church prepared evangelical Christians for Trump. And, and, and he said the mega church and I read that there was an article that, that he wrote about that. Yeah. Yeah. I read it. I read it. Yeah. And he talked about like, I mean, this is going to get, I mean, there's going to be a lot of crazy comments on this video, probably, but, but he talked about how like the mega church pastor it's in some cases is not necessarily your most or morally upright guy. And I mean, and we've seen referencing Mark Driscoll earlier. And I mean, that guy, even before his fall, he could, like he'd get on the radio in Seattle and he'd go after the LGBT community every chance he got. I mean, he was rude and obnoxious sometimes to reporters. Like, I mean, and he, but that like, what that, so this guy's argument was if your pastor can get away with this kind of language and sometimes, in some cases, kind of behavior as we know is that parts of the mega church movement has become unraveled, you're prepared now to look past these moral failings when you're looking for a political leader. That was an interesting argument, but that's also a rabbit trail. We should get back to. Oh, it's, it's, it's, it's a helpful reminder. It's also the case that your, I mean, so Mark Driscoll, we can use Mark Driscoll in this because, and this is going to be the same for Trump. Those same failings will be the seeds of his demise. And they currently are. I mean, he's got how many things against him, how many things against him, how many Mark Driscoll was basically taken out by himself that you. And this is, and what that, what, what I think you, you painted there is also true of churches. So, you know, one of the, and you watch, you, you watch enough of, you, you see enough of this little corner to know, you know, some of the key points that you don't, but Sam, the, the, the biblical universalist, you know, definitely one of the sharpest guys in the corner. He and Luke, you know, Luke, another guy who used to, used to go to Piper's church in Minneapolis. These guys have also noted that when, you know, when they were in the church, they were in the church. And they were, they were, they were, they were, they were, they were, they also noted that when, when churches. When churches take advantage of people's loyalty and abuse them, that always, those, that those bills always come due. Because you can, you know, it's one thing as long as Washington, as long as these things don't necessarily impact my life too much, you know, you might, there might be rumors about the pastor that he's kind of a flirt and, you know, he's, he's, yeah, you know, he's got us, he's kind of close to some of these women in the church, but if he stops, starts sleeping with your mom or starts trying to seduce your sister, stuff's going to get real very quick. And one of the things that, that Sam and Luke, I think both of whom are, you know, very complex stories that require a fair amount of processing, but I'm sort of giving them just to sort of pointing to that when churches betray trust, the trust of, the trust of its, its loyal people. And I think it's this part of what happened in, has been, had been happening in the Christian Reformed Church too, in terms of, in terms of certain people of high status who, who simply, you know, for 50 years, the church would always sort of, conservatives would complain about some things, but, and then of course, when 2022 happened, a lot of people were just in shock. I wasn't shocked at all. I'd, I'd been watching, I'd been watching this thing develop and saying, you cannot treat the rest of the denomination like you've been treating them. You've, you, you cannot simply dismiss conservatives as idiots and fools. That's, you're going to pay a price for that. And when you, when you betray loyalty and trust, there's a, there's a cumulative cost that happens in this. And of course, you know, the, the, the next election in the United States is going to be an election about Donald Trump. Now, if the Democrats could actually put somebody in as their candidate, who could, who people would think about, and some other terms than not Trump. I mean, and the way it's getting with Biden, it's like, you got elected as not Trump and the older he gets, the more he's not Trump instead of something that he is. But the Democrats don't seem to care. Their entire plan for winning the election is not Donald Trump. And so, but this happens in churches all the time. You're right about that person's insight that. Mega churches have understood the dynamic that you point to with respect to Trump. Because mega churches have for the most part been non-denominational, which means, yeah, we got a little list of, you know, certain creedal elements you're not going to get rid of, like the Trinity. Um, so they're going to have a very basic, broad, evangelical, Bible believing statement of faith on their website. But they understand that like Trump, as long as the, as long as the lead pastor on stage in a staged way, projects a certain sensibility that hits a certain cultural group, mega churches don't really take over an ecosystem the way we've seen other traditions do over long periods of time. Mega churches don't really take over an ecosystem. They just hit a certain sensibility for a certain population well enough that. You know, all those other confessional things. We don't worry about that because here, the pastor and especially the music project the sensibility and give people a vibe and a sense and an emotion. I mean, the mega church has always to a degree understood what radio stations figured out music radio stations a long time ago, that this is actually the way to appeal to a group of people. And now I say this, having talked to James Wellman, who he's been on the channel, he wrote a really good book, high on God, where he, as sort of a. Post-Christian mainliner who very much had a mainline sensibilities about peace, justice, racial reconciliation. He looked at the mega churches and said, these guys actually serve the poor, do racial reconciliation and do many of these things a lot better than the mainline. So this is an enormously complex thing, but your point here about Donald Trump and the connection with mega church pastors really makes a lot of sense. And it puts the Christian reform church as sort of a nerdy. You know, we, we just, the Christian reform church in the, in the eighties, when you were in seminary or before you were in seminary and you're in college, the Christian reform church saw this happening, saw its own demographic thing going and thought, we got to get on this mainline, we got to get in this. Not mainline. Some wanted to do the mainline. We got to get on this mega church bandwagon and what they, and what I discovered watching the Christian reform church try to do this, we didn't have a stomach for it. Yeah. We just couldn't, we just couldn't, we just couldn't be enough like Donald Trump or the skinny jeans mega church pastor. We did something in us was like, I'd so love to be that kind of successful, but my conscience won't allow me not, not to say anything about those mega churches. It's just not who we are. Yeah. Yeah. I, I think it's interesting to scratch that a little bit because I had a similar sense that, you know, I've always been part of small churches and, and that means everybody knows you and everybody has to carry their weight. Like, you know, we, we have one paid employee here, me, and we have a custodian that we hire to help out and keep things clean and we have a secretary who we hired for a few hours a week to make sure that kind of work gets done. But, but everything else, I mean, it's done by volunteers. It's done by people who know each other. It's done by grandparents who are babysitting their own grandchildren in the babysit. It's like, it's, um, and, and a lot of Christian formation takes place because of that, like, you know, it's one thing to learn from a good sermon or be edified by the music or whatever. It's something else to now I got a room of three and four year olds and we've got to talk about, Oh, what's the story this week, Potiphar's wife that would, that would happen to my wife a while ago. The story of Joseph and Potiphar's wife. But, you know, like when you're in a small church, like you have to, you have to take your faith and you have to figure out how am I going to live it out? I mean, not that that doesn't happen in a mega church, but, but I think, I think it's different when, when it's smaller, when everybody knows everybody, when, um, you know, you're, you're thrust into a position of leadership and having never held one before because you said yes. And the other guy said, no, like, um, and then, then here you are and we're going to try to figure this out together. Uh, yeah. I mean, kind of these big questions of why am I CRC? I don't know if anybody else had to have me. Uh, but they couldn't kick me out because I was always part of them. Right. Right. They know I mean, it's, uh, it's always, but I.