https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=C39klAbtXWc

 Hi, this is Paul. I spent yesterday working on a big video, What is a Christian? I haven't recorded anything yet, I was just working on the PowerPoint. It's a big, big project. I'll have to see if it ever bears fruit. But it very much flows out of the little off-the-cuff video I did, Who's a Better Christian, Jordan Peterson or John Vervecky and some of the off-the-cuff comments that came out. There's sort of a YouTube as Twitter with when you entitle something. I've got to check the sound levels. Okay, sound levels seem okay. So the conversation that Nick and John Vervecky had for the Q&A last Friday was absolutely tremendous. I was so gratified by that. And we've got some other guests coming up at Bridges of Meaning for some of these. I've got some vacation coming and so I won't be around. And so we've got some other pinch hitters coming up and hopefully they'll hit better than I do. So looking forward to some of those. I was so, so happy with the conversation with John and Nick just did an unbelievable job. One of the things that my conversations with John have been prompting me is to think about this word theism. I don't remember if it was Nate or someone else recently in a conversation basically said, well, you know, that word theism isn't really very old. And I thought there's all these things out there that you just live in this world with this word theism and you don't think anything of the word or how it's used. And theism sort of just becomes, you know, a Christian word. If you're a Christian, you're a theist, etc, etc. And it got me thinking, well, what about that word? And so then you just throw it into Google and origin theism Greek, Thaos. Yeah, God, I know that one English ism. That's where the word comes from. Slate 17th century. Ooh, that's really suspicious and cruise over to the Wikipedia page, which was decent. The term theism derives from the Greek theos or theoi, meaning God or gods. The term theism was first used by Ralph Cudworth. And I thought, I've never heard of this guy. I'm not a philosopher. My background in philosophy is not that good. Ralph Cudworth, 1617 to 1680. This is 1688. Now, that's a real those are that's a really suspicious time period. That's basically 100 years after the Protestant Reformation. Now we're getting into the 17th century. And a lot of things get really interesting and sort of wonky in the 17th century, including Calvinism to a degree. And so what's going on philosophically? What's going on under the surface at that point? In Cudworth's definition, there were strictly they they are strictly and properly called theists who affirm that a perfectly conscious understanding being a being a mind and this gets into this conversation that, you know, when Vervecki comes up and says, is God a being? And this gets into my conversation with Brett Sockold. God is not inside the system. And this gets into the question of sacraments, because of course, Sockold was writing was writing transubstantiation. This gets into all of these philosophical assumptions and not just as philosophical assumptions, they're these picture thinking assumptions about the world. And then these language systems that somehow intersect with these these pictures in our mind. And this gets into the cognitive science and the exeptation and all of the ways that you think about C.S. Lewis writing in his book, Miracles, about what he thinks London is. And so, well, that just sort of drove me in further because I'm a digger. So that, of course, sent me to the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. English philosopher Ralph Cudworth, 1618 to 1688, defies classification within customary categories of the history of philosophy. Well, that's interesting. At the time when mainstream philosophers announced their modernity by breaking with the past, Cudworth is a figure of continuity, steeped in ancient philosophy, yet abreast in contemporary philosophy and science. He shared his anti scholastic agenda with self styled modernizers like Bacon, Hobbes and Descartes, with whose philosophy he engaged, but framed his most original ideas by recourse to antiquity. Cudworth is usually regarded as a Cambridge Platonist, though he himself would not have recognized the label. Although he is normally classified as a rationalist, it has become increasingly apparent that this designation is based on too limited a view of his philosophical writings. And it sounds like basically his philosophical writings are. When I read this, I felt a degree of camaraderie with the dude as someone who puts out way too many videos for any reasonably important person to watch it. I do not mean to insult my audience, mind you, because my videos are things you listen to as you go to bed or you wash the dishes. My videos are not the subject of academic inquiry, and I am totally good with that. In fact, I'm happy about that because my videos are me talking to you about things I'm thinking about you about and you enjoying it. And I get calls from people sometimes who watch 20 or 30 percent of my videos, and that's totally cool because who could watch them all? And as some of you have, and again, I applaud you for that and I celebrate you. And there are other voluminous video makers like friends of mine like Bern and like Karen, and I don't watch all their videos, even Peugeot. I miss bunches of Peugeot's videos and Peterson's. Anyway, it sounds like this dude was basically doing this to his audience with his works, which he never finished. They're all written posthumously and hardly anybody's ever read them. And I went to Amazon. You can find hard copies of them for 30, 40 bucks a thing, but I thought, I'm not going to buy it because I'm not going to read them. I have to find them on the internet somewhere. Here's Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy should at least give me a place to start anyway. Cutworth's written output was substantial, but much of it was never published. And his philosophical system is incomplete. Man after my own heart. Broadly, his philosophy combines Platonist ethics and metaphysics with an atomist natural philosophy. Well, that's interesting. He is chiefly remembered for his epistemological nativism and his ethical idealism, distinctive elements of his philosophy include his theory of consciousness and unconsciousness, his conception of free will as a power of self-determination and his causal hypothesis of what he calls the plastic power of nature. The immense humanist learning, which fills his published writings has tended to obscure his achievements as a philosopher in post-humanist times. That's Renaissance humanist or early modern, let's say, but it did not prevent him from having a considerable legacy in 18th and 19th century philosophy. And you scroll down and you begin to realize that part of what this guy did was basically take a lot of this stuff and put English words on it. Hence something like theism. You take the Greek word and you put the English ism on and here we have this term and it's a being. And so suddenly triggers God number one, God number two, metadivine realm, all of these things that I tend to think about. Cutworth's legacy of bulky and incomplete writings testifies to his comprehensive knowledge of both ancient and contemporary philosophy. He subscribed to the Renaissance view of philosophy as philosophia perinus, perennial philosophy, which presupposes a single timeless core of philosophical truth, which is the shared goal of both ancient and modern philosophical inquiry. Heir to the Renaissance humanist recovery of almost the entire corpus of ancient philosophy known today is recourse to antique learning, especially to the philosophy of Plato and Platinus, another known suspect in our little corner of the universe, but also stoicism. In many ways, a typical humanist move to ground authority in the tried and tested philosophy of ancient philosophers, Aspilin and Sellers, another known suspect. However, he turned to ancient philosophy, especially Greek philosophy, as a fund of preschool, elastic philosophical ideas and a source of a new conceptual vocabulary. Vocabulary is what we're looking at as one of the first to write philosophy entirely in English. He coined many new terms, many of them adapted from Greek, like theism, although that doesn't get a mention here. Some have not stood the test of time, while others, Cartesian, self-determinism, conscious-consciousness. Why haven't we heard of this guy? Our common currency in English philosophy as to this today. At the same time, his philosophy was deeply influenced by contemporary philosophy, especially Cartesianism. He had high regard for Descartes as an acute philosopher, and his philosophy registers the impact of Descartes in multifarious ways. He admired Cartesianism as a system of philosophy contains physics with metaphysics, which posited both corporeal and incorporeal substance. He accepted clear and distinct perception as the criterion for epistemological certainty and their Cartesian account of sense perception. Sensation for Cudworth as for Descartes is a passion of the soul, at best a confused perception. He also accepted clear and distinct perception as the criterion for epistemological certainty, as for Descartes is a passion of the soul, at best a confused perception. He embraced both the idea of consciousness and the idea of God as a fully perfect self-existent being, and adopted Descartes' conception of body as inert extension. However, he was highly critical of Descartes on many counts. He denied that mechanical rules of impact were sufficient to explain natural causality, and criticized Descartes' repudiation of final causes. He critiqued Descartes' proof of the existence of God from his idea as circular and his voluntarist conception of God as conducive to skepticism. He rejects Descartes' machine model of animals, and denied that conscious cogitation exhausted the properties of immaterial substance. So from Richard, we have, you briefly mentioned with Jordan Peterson why you select the term non-theist, and it having to do with dismantling assumptions baked into the theist-atheist dichotomy. As many have said, your most recent conversation with Rafe Kelly was a nice follow-up to Peterson, largely because you dive into those assumptions quite deeply. Can you succinctly lay out the frame that modernism and postmodernism is trapped into, and explain how that relates to atheism, theism, and non-theism? I actually have a slight follow-up question to this, which would be, how do you separate out non-theism from something like apophatic theology? I'll answer the first question first, although I want to indicate right from the beginning. I think the second question is deeply pertinent, and I think it is pretty much almost entailed by any answer I give to the first question. So thank you for putting them together like that. That's helpful to me, because that way I can look forward. So what is shared about modernism and postmodernism is, that's a hard topic, but the shared presuppositions are largely those of modernity. I think it's correct and important to see postmodernism as a culminating critique of modernity, when I mean the ideological worldview framework that was given to us in the Enlightenment in the 16th, 17th, 18th centuries, basically by the three R's, the Renaissance, the Reformation, the Scientific Revolution. And so what modernity is, is an affirmation of both the necessity and sufficiency of a bunch of claims. Primarily, these claims are claims of this kind of set of ideas. I'm trying to not use jargon as much as I possibly can, but one set of ideas is the idea of that truth is accessible by the application of a method, not through a rational method, not through the personal transformation of the knower. So the knower, if you compare that now, he offers a dichotomy. One might say, ask, are those the only two items on the menu? But he's offering this dichotomy, which is right. I'm not quibbling with what he's saying here, but wanted to put that in there. Personal transformation of the knower. So the knower, if you compare, let's say, you know, Augustine to Descartes, and that's a fair comparison, because they share a lot of similar arguments, as many people pointed out today. I don't go back to what he just said there about the personal transformation of the knower, because that obviously is a piece of what his conversation was with Peterson. But when we, another, one of the elements that we've been looking at quite often is sort of the view from the inside versus the view from the outside. Back to C.S. Lewis's reflections from a tool shed, where when you're seeing through the light, it's one thing, when you're looking at the light from outside of it, it's another. And we've looked at this inside outside perspective quite a bit lately. When you're in love, you have access to a certain kind of knowledge and knowing that you don't have access to when you're not in love. You know, love has its own reasons, we say things like that, because there are, there's all these different ways of knowing. If you're inside of a family, you see things and you know things inside that family, and there's a certain kind of knowledge that you have. And these gets into his other three R's. Strawn is warning me about too tightly gripping these other three R's as opposed to the other. And I think John is right in that the three and the one are in fact, it's not just one and three, all four of them are tightly intertwined and they're all working together in different ways. But for example, being in love is a being in love is a flow state. And I remember, I can't speak for everyone, but I remember, you know, probably, you know, you have crushes and stuff when you have a kid, but the first time you fall in love, and it's reciprocated and you, you go into this thing that you've never done before. I mean, it's a flow state. It's it takes you over. And there's a reason that ancients talked in, you know, described this as a very spiritual thing because the spirit, Cupid comes up and possesses you and you become a different person, this transformation. So again, John's talking about these transformations. Now, obviously the enlightenment majors in, okay, we're going to, this transcendent, this monarchical vision, this view from nowhere, we're going to take yourself out of this and we're going to, as sort of a therapist sitting with a, let's say doing family therapy or something and having an objective view of the marriage. What is this objective view? Well, this is a view quite intentionally from outside. If you compare, let's say, you know, Augustine to Descartes, and that's a fair comparison, because they had, they share a lot of similar arguments. I'm going to have to look into that because I've never, I've never looked at those two. I don't know Descartes. Gosh, the problem with this is I, I sit and I learn from these people, but I don't know Descartes. I don't know Descartes. I don't know Descartes. I don't know Descartes. I don't know Descartes. I don't know Descartes. I don't know Descartes. I don't know Descartes. I don't know Descartes. Gosh, I've never heard of this, this, this Cudworth fella, you know, I don't have enough time to read all this stuff. I don't even have enough time to listen to all these videos, but here we are. That's meaning people pointed out to Descartes in this time. So it's a fair comparison, but if you, if you compare them, right. You see that Augustine is basically arguing individuals have to go through this fundamental transformation and only after they do that will certain truths be disclosed to them. At least that's how I interpret Augustine. And you know, so I'm a pastor so I spend a lot more time reading the Bible than I do reading philosophy and you know again obviously Augustine is getting this from somewhere like the Bible. Well as Descartes says no no you don't have to go through any transformation. All you need to do is use this method and he's very very confident in this method. This method will give you access to all truths. All the truths of the universe, all the truths of God, all the truths of humanity. And it's a very powerful confidence. That confidence is born out of another presupposition assumption of post modernism that becomes a presupposition in post modernity which is a deeply entrenched nominalism. Nominalism is the idea. I'm trying not to use too much. And again you know nominalism has been a baddie around you know guys like Rod Dreer and you know people who you know there's a lot of people been complaining about nominalism for a while now. Too much so. But nominalism is the idea coming from Dons Scottus and Ockham. I talked about this a bit in my series and this is where Jonathan is more radical than people realize. Jonathan Trajot. Nominalism claims basically there are no real patterns. Like there are no real patterns. The patterns are only patterns in our mind. Our mind is what links things together and makes the patterns. All that's out there are raw absurd individuals. Absurd in the very technical sense of absurd. Like they have ultimately in themselves they have no categorical meaning. See the beauty of interrupting has you know I shouldn't you know complain about Jordan Peterson interrupting John Vervecky when I just do it again and again and again in my videos. But you know what occurs to me and to what degree is this is what he just laid out in terms of Descartes and nominalism. To what degree are these things indispensable to the totalizing of the scientific method that we have seen over the last say the culmination of modernity. There are no universals all that kind of stuff. And see once you think that then you put in this very weird position where all that the patterns are just in your mind and then you just have to get them to rationally go here with each other. The mind somehow the patterns are real in your mind and the mind knows them directly but there's no patterns in the world and the mind doesn't know them and so a powerful dualism opens up between the mind and the world. You're gonna get Descartes and Kant coming out of all of that. Now what happens in the Enlightenment is the idea of awake and it's a really weird thing that comes through Galileo. Galileo brings some Platonism in a weird way to address the nominalism. I think his instinct is right I think ultimately Platonism is what you need to address nominalism. But what Galileo says is math is the language of the universe. So for everything else we have nominalism but math actually finds the real patterns. And people have to appreciate that special privilege because the people in the Enlightenment thought they had a response to the nominalism which was that math seemed to track the new emerging empirical science, experimental science, and the new astronomy. And so it was like aha but there is a language of the universe that's what Galileo called it and that's math. And that's why you've got the prioritization of math and then everything tries to imitate math. So we get the idea of knowledge as a formal system, right, a formal logical mathematical system. So a purely structural as the post-modernist will later say because they also call themselves post-structuralist. It's purely formal structure and all we're going for is logical coherence. And then that brings the third thing which is reason is nothing but logic. Reason is nothing but logic. Now if you've listened to 50 hours of awakening from the meaning crisis this all is fairly easy to follow and this makes I think awakening from the meaning crisis easier to follow too because he nicely succinctly kind of brings these things together. And if you've watched awakening from the meaning crisis many of these pieces were in it. So all of those three actually fit together very very profoundly if you think about it. Now we're in just to track it now we're in like Kripke, Hilbert, the formalists, pre-Girdle basically. Yep and also you can even see that in people like Levi Strauss in anthropology where you have structuralism within anthropology and you're trying to understand culture as a purely formal system or what's going to be crucial for a lot of the postmodernists is you have Sasur and linguistic who sees language as a purely formal system. That's why he constantly uses the analogy of chess to explain language because chess is a prototypically formal system. What do I mean by a formal system? The chess pieces don't have any meaning in relation to the world. They only have a meaning that I assigned to them within the game and that's only a meaning of how they function with respect to each other. It's a purely formal, purely self-contained, possessing no intrinsic meaning and that I only give it as I play with it and manipulate it and use it. Now the conversation that dropped yesterday was Peterson with Lawrence Krauss and I'm looking forward to hearing that. I only began it because I don't have hours in a day just to do this thing. But the clip that showed up on Twitter was all about a section where they get talking about meaning so this is gonna be interesting. And you see what a notion of language and culture and reason and knowledge you get from this. Right. Okay so that's modernity right and there's more to it but that though and what postmodernism does is it basically comes and said and basically it's bound to it because what it does is it critiques it. So let's start let's start let's go the other way. So is language a formal system? The deep answer is no. The deep answer is no. This is why the problem of getting real meaning into AI, like this is the Chinese room problem and a whole bunch of other problems for those of you who know philosophy, the problem of getting meaning not for us as we use it like a chess piece, the computer, but meaning that would be meaning for the computer even if all of us disappear. And that move right there is such an interesting one because and we're so adept if we're watching ourself make this move that he just made. Imagine I'm the computer. That's an interesting move because we can do it or we think we can do it and we all seem to have the same ideas as we do it. I'm not I'm not I'm tracking with him I'm agreeing with him I'm not critiquing him at all in there but but just that little move that we make. What a strange creature we are. Imagine I'm that computer because what do I know is that computer and we sort of know that because we of course are the maker of the computer and when we do things with the computer we're surprised what the computer doesn't know. Between the DR and Sacramento I spent a little bit of time needed a needed a little job to make some money and so I was helping out with a with a place in Grand Rapids that they were trying to get all of their therapists to keep their notes on computer and that the organization at that point in the in the 90s was trying to scale up and get people on computer and I knew PCs and so I did a little did a little training work for them. I was because I could both speak computer and I could speak therapist and human and so I would try to get these therapists to learn how to use Windows and Word and and you know it was it was amazing you know get this document into the computer and you know push pieces of paper onto well there's a hole maybe I stick it in that hole and it's not the way it's gonna go but again you don't know what you know until you watch someone who doesn't know it so we're bizarre creatures. Trying to get back to philosophy. The problem of getting meaning not for us as we use it like a chess piece the computer but meaning that would be meaning for the computer even if all of us disappeared. And when we're talking about meaning at that point what kind of thing are we talking about? And this is where this is where so Lawrence Krauss and that little tidbit from from Twitter you know basically says no we can engineer our own meaning and it's like I'm not sure that that's what meaning is and it's where Peterson sort of contests him on it because you know the whole business about well we're in some ways as human beings the the big fight between let's say Christians are going to use that word because I'm not gonna use theists because that's not germane to I'm trying to use some relevance realization between a Christian narrative and and people who are skeptical about the Christian narrative let's say is a big part of this is that that Christians believe that immense amounts of our meaning derives from the ways that the actions in this one silo will impact actions in let's say the life to come. And and that seems analogous to us and the computer the computer has no meaning this language has no meaning inside itself because the computer it seems to have meaning we need to be able to cross into other worlds as it were or cross over boundaries and and sort of begin to assimilate one world into the next. Trying to get that into has proved to be a tremendous problem so I want to make it clear that this argument isn't just coming out of the post-monorist but what they basically said is right so Derrida his central notion of difference right right he basically he assumes that Sosor is right about sort of syntax and semantics and then says but notice every every term has its meaning not just in terms of a structure but I'm always moving from one term to another that's the deferring and then what I'm noting is the difference between them the contrast so you combine deferring and differing to get different and what he's what he says I think completely correctly is that can't be captured in the formal structure because every time I try to capture it with the formal structure I'm just replicating the problem and that's why you can't get any you can't sort of get outside of this problem. Now for me I think that's an important point to make now here's what I'm gonna say and I think I could even make some textual arguments about this given his debate with John Soule and others but I'll just make it out here in good faith and hopefully it'll be received in good faith. I think the problem we came to in the computational theory of mind that I've just alluded to became the problem of relevance and people within the computational framework like Jerry Fodor said you can't account for it and he is a defender of the computational theory he said but what the things it can't do is tell you how genuine development transformational development occurs because you can't infer a weaker law a stronger logic from a weaker logic and you can't get relevance into your computational logical mathematical formal system and I think that's totally right that's the whole project the problem of relevance realization so I see there are the there does difference and my relevance realization I'm not claiming they're identical but man could they have a very good conversation with each other they converge on a lot of things. Now and then if you move up next to the privileging right the idea of you know that normalism is the case well you have this weird version of that you have again that we there's no transcendent signified right you can't there's nothing really beyond or outside the play of symbols which is nominalism but but then what they do is like they they make a jet they they do the same thing they want a privilege but a certain kind of sign play as somehow getting us to reality and this is where many people make critiques and so what you get is well somehow there's the language of ethics or though and this is from Lebanon's ultimately through Derrida but also I don't I don't want to do too much closer but also you get the privileging of moral discourse somehow it's math isn't the language of reality morality is the language of reality but that doesn't work with the with all of the problems that you can't sort of deduce right so what kind of knowledge is it well it's no kind of knowledge and you get this weird you know you get these weird things where you I can fulfill your you're showing the deep interconnections between knowledge sort of the formal system idea and power that's what can't be captured in the formal system and how they're interdependent with each other but somehow we can critique this and right and we can but because what because of justice or oppression or you know the abuse of power but we're so somehow these are privileged real patterns and this is the this is this weird thing so it basically I see it is post-modernism is like modernism committed to nominalism with the escape clause because if you go pure normalism you get pure dualism pure skepticism pure solipsism but the escape cause is it math it's morality but not a morality grounded anything it's just like math is supposed to be a priori that we just know that these things are wrong and these things are good and that's really interesting this this this a priori moral system which of course someone like Tom Holland comes in and says well it did come from somewhere it came from Christianity and you know that it's interesting this book I referenced often by sociologist Christian Smith who in his book soul search to get a series of books where he he basically is is interviewing American teenagers and asking them about their religious and moral and and for them again it's just self-evident and that self-evidentialism then you know combines with or or maybe maybe it's post-modernity man manifesting itself through this self-evidentialism and of course this ties in with with other American philosophical and religious traditions to to yield kind of what we have here I thought this was I mean this first part of the video was just astoundingly good and he was saying these things like this a lot of this stuff makes a lot of sense right so morality born purely from critique seemingly yes like it can't it can't get underneath itself right it's it can't get underneath itself and can't ultimately situate its normativity within its own practice so you practice this on behalf of a justice or freedom from oppression that can't be properly situated within your deconstruction or your archaeology of knowledge there it on from code right so notice how they are back so when you have an assumption between two positions that are opposed that's a presupposition and we've got we're seeing presuppositions here about about you know logic knowledge reality meaning and you also have the the pre-sub the shared assumption that I don't have to undergo any deep personal transformation in order to get access to these moral truths right I just have a method I do this sort of deconstructive method and then from the epitome of my guilt or something I then I then get access to the real patterns of justice and power and oppression so what I would want to say if you agree that those three public that the idea of deep truths without deep transformation should be questioned because that's a shared presupposition the presupposition of normalism with the only one one privileged way of getting through should be abandoned should be abandoned that's what I tried to do with a lot of them trying to bring back Platonism and trying to show the other kinds of knowing is no no a deep challenge of that normalist presupposition and then finally a deep challenge of the presupposition that reason is logic and instead open up the notion of reason link it back to transformation and in the notion of wisdom so that for me is what I'm trying to do in so I take postmodernism very seriously now just for our listeners this is a question about non theism so we're gonna get there but you might have forgotten but we are gonna get there because I take modernity seriously and then I try wow this sounds really hubristic what I'm trying to do please remember that verb is I'm trying to get out there shared presuppositions and challenge the shared presuppositions so I'll let you respond that before I go on to the second part which is linking it to the theism and non theism and then the third part would be to address the supplementary question right I mean I thought that was a wonderful layout of how that development took place what just I guess the one thing that kept popping up in my mind is how it seems like we end up in these kind of Gordellian loops even within modernism are we still stuck in this Gordellian loop and I think that's important because I think a lot of people have a romanticism about modernism as not being in that loop as being no a lot of people in the comments were wondering what's that what what's what's Nick saying that they're talking this this it sounds like Gordellian but it's Godel Godelian loop so if you look at Godel's and this came up with quite a few times in the comment section Godel's incompleteness theorem again this from this from Wikipedia the first incompleteness theorem any consistent formal system and again they were talking about formal systems like a chess which is sort of in self-contained it needs nothing beyond itself that's the idea of it any consistent formal system F within which a certain amount of elementary arithmetic arithmetic can be carried out is incomplete in other words there are statements of the language of F which can neither be proved nor disproved in F and you go a little bit later and where's the highlighted portion come on come on the first incompleteness theorem shows that Godel's sentence G of an appropriate formal theory F is unprovable in F because when interpreted as a statement about arithmetic this unprovability is exactly what the sentence indirectly asserts Godel's sentence is in fact true for this reason the sentence GF is often said to be true but unprovable however and a little bit further relationship with the liar paradox Godel specifically cites Richard's paradox and the liar paradox as semantic analogies of his syntax and syntactical incompleteness result from the introductory section of on formal undecidable propositions in principia mathematica and related systems the liar paradox is the sentence the sentence is false an analysis of the liar sentence shows that it cannot be true for then as it asserts it is false nor can it be false for then it is true if Godel's sentence G for a system F makes a similar assertion to the liar sentence but with truth replaced with pri-probability G says G is not provable in the system F the analysis of the truth and provability of G is a formalized version of the analysis of the truth of the liar sentence I'm not sure I understand all of this but this is I believe what they're talking about wonderful layout of how that development took place what just I guess the one thing that kept popping up in my mind is how it seems like we end up in these kind of Gordelian loops even within modernism are we still stuck in this Gordelian loop and I think that's important because I think a lot of people have a romanticism about modernism as not being in that loop as being where we broke and that's such an interesting statement by Nix romanticism about modernism well what is romanticism what does he mean by romanticism there well romanticism is sort of this emotion of familiarity this this sort of nostalgia and if we grew up in this thing we sort of became accustomed to it and you know we see this in our pets you have the dog who if you want your dog to be crate trained get that dog as a puppy and make sure he always sleeps in the crate I remember again get your cards out Dominican Republic I remember in the Dominican Republic once my son who was just a little fella he was just a toddler and he was running around and always rode in his car seat unlike every other little boy in the Dominican Republic not every other little boy the missionaries kids were in car seats but you know kids were just in the back of pickup trucks and flying around in cars just like I was when I was a kid but I remember once I hadn't buckled my son into his car seat yet and I put the car and reversed it back out of the driveway and he just kind of he scrambled into that car seat ASAP to lock himself in and I thought of course the only way I mean for him to ride in a car but not be belted constrained into this car seat is a little bit of terror and and so Nick saying that yeah people have now sort of accustomed themselves to the the spirit of modernity that now there's a romanticism about it and there's a there's a there's an elevation of it there's a worship of it ...free as not being in that loop as being where we broke free from that loop oh and so I think it's important I really love how you tied modernism and postmodernism as basically suffering from the same problem just switching the area in which it functions and on the other end I find it really interesting how you placed postmodernism's kind of pattern recognition in the realm of particularly as we watch postmodernism move ever deeper into the culture and its practice and how it has started creating seemingly these types of pseudo religions that have and it's interesting right because it's you can see the desire for transformation within those pseudo religions but it's so bound in technique if you will that it can't actually transform itself so the right what's now now also right there his relationship between technique and transformation so in in this video that I'm working on we'll see if it's ever born about one of the about what is Christianity there's something in terms of the the Enlightenment critique of religion which is based in Protestantism because deep in the Protestant reformers was a critique of certain kinds of ritual and practice and a certain formalism that you know when when Luther critiques the Roman Catholic Church and this is where I I remember listening I never made a video about it but I remember first listening to awakening from the meaning crisis and listening to John talk about Luther and again I'm no Luther scholar but I certainly have read Luther and Luther is a very common object of study in terms of if you're a Protestant clergy and so I'm not sure certainly nominalism has something to do as a lot to do with the Protestant Reformation but I'm not sure Luther is quite the baddie with respect to nominalism as John asserts but you know a lot of what the the Protestant Reformation looks at is in many ways working from the Hebrew prophets of critiquing the critiquing the religiosity of the people and finding it shallow and this this gets sort of to the heart of this the heart of this ongoing critique that that Tom Holland really develops in his work and you watch it you watch him continue to come back to it and again it begins in the Hebrew prophets and Jesus reinforces it and it comes out again in the Protestant Reformation it can look like a cynicism sometimes it's definitely a critique for when the Hebrew prophets let's say Jeremiah for example the people are saying things like God will not allow the Babylonians to conquer Jerusalem because we have the temple and Jeremiah says you're gonna play chicken with God don't play chicken with God you're going to lose and you know this this this move of critiquing a certain formalism you know it was the sense of well I'll smuggle the wafer I'll smuggle the wafer out of church I'll smuggle the euphor the Eucharist out of church and give it to my cow and and so on one hand you've got the Roman Catholics elevating and promoting the Eucharist miracles while this is exactly the point that the Protestants are making all of their making all of their hay and and that that move is deeply embedded in the Enlightenment critique of religion and and really sets up this this dynamic this externality that that that John is laying out here which really seeds the the scientific revolution and gets us going it's it's in some ways again the the one-eyed vision of let's take all of this stuff out and see it through one eye and we can gain a power that way and in fact they do and it's a very significant power but but you have to open the other eye to actually live which of course sets up the meaning crisis so the final state of the of the white male is to just endlessly be cycling in his own critique of himself right it doesn't actually get well and this is perhaps interesting when it comes to theism and non theism in the sense that there's a distinct lack of a telos of what that transformation is now now before we get into any telos I mean so again part of part of the critique of theism especially if we look at Cudworth a being and this is exactly where John's gonna go and again this is exactly where I remember talking to maybe I'll still have to work on this see if I can Brett Brett Sockold is a busy man and so you know he can't always be available for for videos but I I remember talking to him and thinking boy I'd love to see him and for Vickie talk about these ideas and I still haven't read Nishitani but but all of these ideas of so okay so let's say you know in my work here following even a Jewish scholar like like Kaufman so you know what if what if my critique of theism is well theism is is that again that's timing is suspicious theism is late stage deism where it's merely God number two and no God number one and again I became aware of God number one and God number two went watching Peterson's talk with Brett Weinstein with Brett Weinstein and Sam Harris because towards the end of that first one in Vancouver they have still haven't gotten around to God but everybody wants to talk about God well what do you mean well then Jordan Peterson reads out his list of how he understands God and again I could recognize that God from reading reading reformational reading 16th century reformational pastors because those descriptions of God were just basically carried over from the medieval period and then again connecting that with Brett Sockold's realization that Luther in some ways was was trying to get back to Aristotle but didn't recognize that the shifts underneath the philosophy made Aquinas unreachable and so his consubstantiation is an attempt at you know achieving what Aquinas understood as transubstantiation and what Calvin understood as real presence but then of course Zwingli completely undercuts it with a symbol but this symbol is in that way simply sort of trapped in a nominalist system so this this of course makes you know my conversations with Vervecky very interesting you know given his particular history with Christianity which he talked about here quite a bit again too so there's a lot of interesting stuff going on underneath and and so again I I don't I'm suspicious of whether of whether Luther is the nominalist baddie that he is often portrayed as being or if Luther in some ways is trying to get at what he saw what he feared had been lost by the rampant corruption in the church that at this point almost nobody denies that there were elements of the Roman church in Luther's time and in Luther's locale because locale is important in this and then of course Luther after Luther Luther sort of sets up the rise of Germany and that will lead to all sorts of philosophy and culture that will come out of Germany you know Luther does sort of set up modernity and Germany in the 20th century 19th century beginning of the 20th century before the calamitous two world wars you know will become the epitome of a modern state it's just all so complex to try to boil down into the sentences that we are left to wield and we we've spoken about this before but it seems dangerous right we don't want to create a telos that is static but it seems like we still need a teleological vision that perhaps describes what a optimal state of evolution is or dynamicness an optimal dynamicness as opposed to a perfect static yeah I think that's right I'm torn out Nick was so good wasn't he I think we're going to that new point which is a really juicy one sorry still going to and no no no so I'm gonna ask you to remember that point and remind me about it because I want to first I mean because you know we're approaching into the theism non theism and so right by the way I like that this is flowing dialogically I appreciate that so thank you I really appreciate that it helps me so I think the thing about theism and non theism sorry that sorry let's do first the theism atheism I'm going to try and make a parallel move right and the parallel move is a move of what are the shared presuppositions because I think it's fair to say and you know many atheists actually explicitly say this that atheism isn't a substantial position it is merely the negation of theism and therefore it's going to be very much analogous how postmodernism isn't something that has a substantial independent content but it's parasitic on modernism so you'll hear atheists make this point again and again and again but it's it's really hard to live with because then suddenly they have to it you can't do it because God is if you're going to strip God out of the system he's just in too deep postmodernism ever succeeded it would disappear because it's raison d'etre would disappear and and this is the point that Peugeot makes in his parasitic storytelling video that that that's so much of the postmodern attempts at art are are parasitic off the modernity right same thing with atheism and I suppose many atheists that that's sort of their utopic vision so what are the what are the assumptions that are shared by both sides with one side affirming and the other side negating and locked together well one in this I mean this is going to get us into a debate at some point and I welcome it by the way Paul and JP and I are going to do this and I welcome this to be but I'm going to put it aside because I'm going to be responsible to the debate but maybe I don't have time to do that completely right here which is debate around what do we actually mean by the incident you know and again here's another way which Jonathan Peugeot so Jonathan Peugeot was way more radical than people realize I was asked about this and I thought I'd answer it because he's rejecting nominalism at a profound level he thinks there are real patterns everywhere as far as I can tell right and they have a life of their own they have an independent existence to which we have to respond see again when he says stuff like that well what's triggered in me well I'm a Dutch Calvinist well what does that mean it means I was if there's anything that the Christian Reformed Church contributed it is the rigorous worship of the Heidelberg catechism and and and when he says this I mean there's in many ways you know why I could recognize God in Jordan Peterson's articulation to Sam Harris and what I labeled eventually God number one or let's call it the Arenic God is at any moment if if God were to withdraw his hand the universe would evaporate you know stuff like that in our tradition and you know you might think well that's just Vanderklein no it's a Christian Reformed people who were catechized seriously before the dropping of catechesis in the 80s and 90s know this this is you know and so when I listen to John talk about this and think about Jonathan's patterns and think about what natural theology was for the early deists they were they were exploring God when they were measuring gravity now think about that I mean that language sounds so strange today they were seeking because God was in the patterns now now you've got God number one and God number two and and so then when you get to Cudworth's you know a being you know you should stop and say hey wait a minute think about Brett Sockold God is not something in the system and yes Luke panentheism is a little different that has its own framing in another way the system is dependent upon God in him we live and move and have our being the whole earth is full of his glory the arenic God but God in Christianity in many ways and this again from Kaufman in Judaism the arena has an agency of its own as it always does and that was the observation made by Christine Hayes in that lecture from from Yale that I've referenced many times. There are real patterns everywhere as far as I can tell right and they have a life of their own they have an independent existence to which we have to respond that makes it much more radical than most of modern Christianity because modern Christianity especially Luther. Luther is explicitly and deeply influenced by nominalism deeply deeply right and this has been insinuated into Protestantism I would say. I agree with that that it's insinuated into Protestantism I agree with that and and and Protestantism is profoundly impacted by nominalism but I suspect it's coming in in the 17th century and not so much in the 16th century because I because I was raised with the Heideberg catechism I could still taste Protestantism before the 17th century and it's in the 17th century that a lot of this really gets going and I think it's for that reason that in the 17th century philosophers are starting to name things in this way. I welcome Paul's response on this and it has become there it was pervasive of Christianity through the counter-reformation etc. And he's right in terms of the counter-reformation so Luther and again I've been reading this book reformations I mean the Roman Catholic Church has to respond to this I'll just show you the book I picked up I'm so excited to get into it that now I know some of you are gonna say no Vanderclay not another book you don't even have chance to read all the books you talk about so Dalvin Clay not Vanderclay Van Clay professor of mine at Calvin it was Calvin Kalvage then now it's Calvin University whose politics many of you would hate the professor that led me to the rally to protest Ronald Reagan at the Gerald R. Ford Museum and I'm gonna get in trouble with a lot of you for this and then I remember I remember we had this sign Reagan lies are out Nicaragua we're talking about the that was before you know the whole thing the whole contra thing blew up because I traveled to Nicaragua that year and toured the revolution and you know if you ever have questions about that I'll tell you some of those stories but from Calvin to the to the Civil Constitution 1560 to 1791 you know when I've been talking about the French Revolution I made the I made the comment that you know Germany and the Netherlands and Hungary and and Switzerland had Protestant Reformation and Protestant churches the Reformation tried to get going in France but it was squashed out when the Huguenots were were kicked out to what degree because they didn't have Protestant churches did the French Revolution happen now I recently there was on a listserv that he and I both participate in and so I finally had a chance to ask him that question because he brought up his book and he was quoting from his book and he basically said you know my my my idea was a thesis and he that's that a thesis that he very much addresses and engages in this book so you know John's point here about the Counter-Reformation is I think correct I mean these these ideas okay what are these these ideas these spiritual ideas flowed through the world and had to be addressed one way or another and they were and you know nominalism nominalism came to the fore and found religious expression in Protestant and Catholic and and so again John wants to go back to a Platonism but but I have deep questions as to to what degree nominalism is built into the science that you know he's a scientist and so I mean this is this is this is hard stuff and I just started reading the first few pages of this and I'm terribly excited about it but you know some of you will say no Paul my wife used to call me distraction Jackson because you know are you gonna read propaganda you're gonna read you know the religious roots of the French Revolution well allures French right good enough yes no not as it is Protestantism I would say and I welcome Paul's response on this and it is become pervasive of Christianity through the Counter-Reformation etc Eastern Orthodoxy not as much because it's still tied to you know Platonism so that's one way in which Jonathan's more radical Jonathan's more radical in that he thinks he said it explicitly publicly so this is fair that you know there's a real possibility that Christianity is going to die and be resurrected in to a form that we cannot see that man and of course Chesterton has basically said the same thing and I think that that is a historical pattern and in fact the pattern would be broken if Christianity weren't resurrected but but each time I mean Christianity has this way of I've talked about this in my sermons I mean its relationship with culture is so nuanced and complex it finds shape and in lots of different cultures makes him a radical Christian in the way Kierkegaard was a radical Christian because he sees the death right and so we made a very different Peugeot and Kierkegaard are quite different he's seeing the death of all of our current understandings of theism there's a position out there called an atheism which is what you get after you pass from theism into atheism and then back into something beyond both of them and I see that as a species of non theism and so by the way that's from Mishitani non theism is not anathemaism is I forget who you originally put there's a book I think it's the anthologies carry I may be missed I may be misremembered so I apologize if I've miscited there's actually a book called an athelism which is it's an anthology I believe I haven't I haven't had a chance to read it but anyways so he's got the same disease I've got there's a word for it too I forget what it is too busy buying books to remember the word about buying books that you haven't read yet then publishers send me books it's like oh gosh what are you doing to me and I want to point out that you know Paul Tillich one of the great great Protestant theologians of the 20th century you know in several places in one place and Jonathan Peugeot would say there are no good Christian theologians in the 20th century it's certainly not Protestant specifically even titles this way that he is ultimate concern and that was his definition of faith is for the God beyond the God of theism because only the God beyond the God of theism will can rescue us from the meaning crisis because he was worried about the meeting crisis and so so I'm not this is not some strange so was Peugeot well he's talked before about Tillich and this is just getting interesting it's getting into it's always been interesting but it's even getting more interesting it keeps getting interesting okay so back to it now that I would argue just to throw a tiny bit in I would argue that's attempted to be put very deeply within the Christian tradition in one of the Ten Commandments being do not form an idol unto God right and in many ways the God of theism thou shalt not make a graven image of the Lord thy God thou shalt not bow down to it and worship it cry the Lord I'm a and you know again I've you know how on earth have I changed over these last three years you know why so so I think about those commandments and how they I gotta keep my on the time here I gotta pick up my daughter what's behind that commandment why did the Jews come up with it and again I think to many degree in many ways an image once you imagine something and instantiate it in clone now I'll show myself a deeply Protestant person here and you know people ask me why don't you go Orthodox well quite frankly part of it is if I go into an Orthodox Church and I see the pictures like a little nervous they want those are icons they're not images like my heart is an idol maker and you're kind of enticing me because once once you instantiate God now you say yeah but Colossians Jesus is the icon of the invisible God yes but Jesus is not something I make with my own hands and Jesus in terms of his witness is something that continues to break the image I have of Jesus in my mind when I read the scriptures openly and honestly and I continue to do the work in theology Jesus there's a suchness and a moreness about him that Jesus keeps leading me into some is very easy to form an idol of very much so and you're exactly right about that one of the deep abiding concerns of Tillich because of his was its resistance to Nazism he's the first non-jewish academic to be persecuted by the Nazis and unlike Heidegger he resisted the Nazis because precisely because and I think like and due to like his deep critique of idolatry if that's how he properly I think correctly understood Nazis and you know I remember listening to awakening for the meaning crisis and thinking often when he was talking about Luther he was talking about Calvin and if I mean part of what makes the Protestant I mean these movements are so broad and there's so many elements to them I mean part of what makes the Protestant reformed Protestant reformed the Protestant reformation so powerful is its deep critique of idolatry now I would argue that in some of its iconoclasm it's strayed and abused as iconoclasms will tend to do but I I am not ready to fill up the sanctuary of living stones with a lot of statues to get in trouble with the Christian form Church if I did to the degree that there's any that's possible to get in trouble with the Christian form Church anymore but because this this question about you know and someone might say hey Vanderkley but I see your PowerPoints you get you use you use plenty of Renaissance pictures of Jesus and and and stories and and there are some further to the right of me and the conservative reformed camp that would that would criticize that's you that use and fair enough I don't always do it with an easy conscience my conscience is not so uneasy that I stopped it stops me from doing it because there's a because with with Jesus there's a line you walk where on one hand on one hand in our in our Christian life we have to continually be reminded that we cannot instantiate God in our images or in our minds or in many aspects and on the other hand in order to in order to relate to him we must in some way and I think that's exactly where Christ comes in okay so again get mystics doing the same thing you get you know Eckhart for example making it deep and important distinction between God and the Godhead right so enough sort of trying to normalize this and show this this isn't sort of some new strange thing this is something that has been thought about a lot okay so let's take it off there what are the shared presuppositions that were challenging and one of them is the idea and this is goes to a high degree the ontotheological critique the idea that being or the ground of being is a kind of being so a standard definition for example in classical theism maybe I'll label that that way because I understand that theism is itself in negotiation right now or what it was like is God is the supreme being the supreme being so that and then again that's theism from the middle of the 17th century late 17th century what you try to do in theism is you try to amass evidence and argument for the existence of the supreme being what I often called a super thing in the sky and then Esther pushed back in one of my comments about you know he keeps the question the thing is God isn't a super thing in the sky the sky is in God well are you a pantheist no panentheism I've I've got real questions about that conceptualization of it but that's why God isn't a thing in this now God can come to us from the sky and and and this is why I think we ought to be gracious with one another and patient with one another because this is hard okay and and when Jesus you know okay so I've got on one hand I've got vervekey on the other hand I've got Sam and Sam are our biblical Unitarian in our estuary and and Sam who's read a lot more a lot more about the Trinity than I did because he grew up in in a church who couldn't help but always be focused on the Trinity because it's the one fighting point they had with the whole rest of the church you know they're like that they're like the guy who like that gosh I better watch my illustrations because those are always we get the preacher into trouble and then right in atheism you try to amass evidence and argument against it and what's problematic about that and it's shown in that history I just talked about is God can't be a being that doesn't ultimately make any sense see this is where that gets really difficult because and I would I would switch off of using the being word again because I think we're that word is getting difficult because you've got Jordan Peterson using being and sort of a Heideggerian sense just sort of out there a being a thing we're wrestling with language here and and of course I had a little bit of a conversation with Nate and Luke would really have liked the conversation I had with Nate in in terms of one of the estuary host support group meetings that I participated in and more is going to be coming out with that with respect to that but no God is God is person oh this is hard because it's a category mistake what we want is the ground of beings or capital B that which makes any and all beings possible if God is a being then he is just in the set of all beings even if he's the biggest being of all there's God plus all the beings and this is exactly what Brett Sockold exactly the conversation had with Brett Sockold and you know this is this is why trans substantiation the point that John is just making here right now that's that's that's and that whole has to be accounted for so you have to do something very radical to break out of it and I would argue that that's exactly the radicalness that the mystics are constantly calling people to right it's a kind of say ultimately you can't think of God as being now that's problematic and let me try to show you why I'm not trying to be offensive here I really do I hope you believe I really I'm very deeply respectful of people who have committed their lives to a religious framework I hold that in very high regard but for example I noticed how tricky this gets well but God is a person but all the persons I know are beings right right there are their limited entities in fact that's one of their defining properties if you sort of dissolve into an ocean I can't really find you as a person anymore right you have to be a good thing you have to be an individual that's why I can I have to treat you specifically and personally what we mean personally we means often we don't just mean I don't want to be reflective but part of what we mean is specifically individually I don't treat you as just humanity I treat you as Nip right so when we think of God as a person but God can't be a thing what is it we're thinking and well and then we try to say thing well God's more like a person than anything else and you see Thomas Aquinas doing this but he's even more not like a person than he's like a person because he's so transcendent for me but again whenever we say a person we're thinking of Nick or or John or Paul or Jonathan or Jordan or and and this is where you know again where I go back to where I go back to the spirit of finesse and the time because my daughter's gonna this is where we also get into these persons who are he that I don't want to insult the angelic doctor but for me that's a bit of a dodge for me it's like well what you're basically saying is it's sort of useful but the only justifications are very pragmatic right so that's one of the shared I think I would yeah I think I would actually push back on this by I think using your own move which is to say I I think that so long as we keep that within the realm of the propositional it absolutely is a dodge but I think that suspending those definitions right almost like this this constant throwing between the hemispheres of the APA apophatic and you know yeah yeah what's the river or what's the other part of apophatic I'm sorry okay got it got it yes it enables transformation if done within a proper I agree I agree and you know sort of thought to follow how does this play out with people and how is this played out with people forever and and how then was this seen as religious then in a secular frame when when humanity cried out to the to God number one the the the agentic God and the what is the only way that a response could be heard but to to personalize it that let's let's think about let's think about Uncle Sam the the the United States government is definitely an Aaronic force in the United States and there are many agencies within that arena that and in fact we call them agencies that that that express the will of the arena that is that is Uncle Sam and the the only way we can relate to it is in fact as is in fact personally as as a mode of a mode of relationship and whereas we can often sort of step back and that's a that the saber mode as opposed to the conocer mode is a very useful thing we only relate to it from within and in fact whenever we relate to something personally we create a mode within the light in order to respond and to engage with it and and I think part of the difficulty so so then again the question is well well what is God what are we talking about when we use that word and you know it may be a dodge and you know maybe John and I will talk about this Christianity and other religions have almost always said this is this is something that we cannot we cannot finally capture mentally and and our our attempts to capture it are always insufficient and in fact are offensive to it that's that's the whole idea behind idolatry it's the whole idea behind you shall not make it graven image because you cannot capture me with anything that you do you can't even capture me with your mind but then we would say but in order for me to know you I need to I need to have some kind of capture of you and I think when you have Moses asking to see God's face that that's that's what Moses is trying to do Moses is saying I if if I am going to if I am going to sacrifice my life to you not not in terms of one act with a knife but day by day in terms of obedience I have to know how to relate to you and if I'm going to relate to you I there has to be a person because that's that's the only mode we have I think about CS Lewis's till we have faces and and the question there is not can you see the face of God it's it's it's what do we need in order that the problem the problem with seeing the face of God is not that God has no face it's that our face is insufficient to see God so you know I love this conversation and and John is again John is such a good faiths conversation partner in this that I you know he's that I just can't I just how did I get so fortunate to be able to play in these games right now it's really delightful and and you know Nick too what a what a what a wonderful what a wonderful conversation partner Nick is I've got a number of conversations with him early on we haven't talked for a long time he's such a he's such a sweet guy so I think that the question then becomes are we trying to make an assertion or are we trying to come into right relationship to like the ground again which is a pin to sort of what telling us talking about right and I think the entire when I think about Christianity and you know my own tradition the entire point of it is to come into right relationship with that which that whose face we cannot see and and again the difficulty that we have is I'd love to get rid of the word that because we are we are objectifying you know in a certain way even using language always puts us on the frontier of idolatry but the consistent point and at least my theological tradition is God accommodates himself to us because he knows how we are can we get ultimate concern for what is ultimate and what is ultimate is not a thing but notice what we did we sort of bash the the the affirmation and negation against each other the theism and the atheism and then we transcended it into something that was beyond the second presupposition which is that yes right that the proper relationship to God is a relationship of belief right and that's shared by both the theist and the atheist but notice what yeah and that that's you know his point here is very well right and this is long been an issue and this is part of what I'm getting into the what is a Christian video and that that that has been consistently worked on from both Protestant and Catholic sources that mere belief is insufficient in fact I would go all the way to the book of the book of James where James says oh you believe in God good for you so do the devil's I mean and so this has been a also another long conversation within Christianity and notice how that starts to overlap with the shared presuppositions of modernity because this is not this doesn't require a profound like transformation in order to have this reality close to you all you have to do is get the proper set of beliefs and assemble them into a coherent manner for yourself and then affirm them and that what the theist does is affirm them and the atheist right denies them and then the move you just made is exactly the move that the non theist wants to do the non theist wants to say no no I want to get outside of so am I a non theist daughter calling of limiting this to belief as the primary way of doing this and I want to think again notice how we're now touching the same language as before I want to say that there are multiple channels and there are multiple real patterns in order to get into right relations for reality I need those multiple channels and those multiple like real patterns in order to get the best possible I don't know frame lens by which to try and see what is ultimate what is ultimately real and sees and if you would take that sentence and just substitute God for reality you sort of have a religious person and John's not anti religious of course and you could even say Christ now and he says so one of the some of the edges that John and I keep bumping into with each other will of course be pluralism and and this will come up in this in this conversation so that's the second piece of position and how it links in then what go ahead if you wanted to say something that I don't want to just keep talking I'm almost curious at that point if if figures like some of the early church fathers then would be classified as non theistic so they're right yeah yeah I would I I mean I think I gave you quotes from Eckhart and at our points back to my needs this Dianesis the Areopaga and I think Dianesis I mean he's clearly neoplatonic in a profound way and neoplatonism and Platonism are properly understood as non theistic and Pearson has made a very good argument Pearson is the polygamy at the University of Toronto and I know all of the important work in the world right now is being done there's an anachronism at work here because I mean you can read Plato and Plato will talk about the gods and God the God singular I mean I looked it up I mean I was you know when I was going back over Plato's Republic when I wanted to read some of it in Greek because I was reading Dallas Willard and Dallas Willard was connecting Jesus with Plato's Republic and so I was on jury duty and it's like I can bring my tablet and I can read Plato's Republic in Greek and then I bump into God singular and Plato was like wait a minute okay but when we say does that make him theists theism theist well that theist is a construction of Greek plus English in the latter part of the 17th century and so what are we talking about here and you know Nick just said well are some of the church fathers non-theists so he has made a very good argument that you know Aristotle is actually a Platonist a deep deep Platonist and so when Aquinas brings in Aristotle he's bringing in another form of non-theism he does amazing things to try and get the the question of course is whether we can use this word theism with Aquinas or Aristotle or Plato when the word itself is to what degree is the word mired in the 17th century stuff is so hard whether or not that still works is a debatable question so I think you can see I have to modify it though because how can I speak about this respectfully the I mean the defining feature of course of the Christians even the early church fathers is the loyalty to Jesus right Jesus of Nazareth and to see him as the what would become the second person of the Trinity and so there's definitely aspects also of theism what you see in fact I think again footnote on the anachronism in these people is this real tension between theism and non-theism and what I see is I see the Is Jonathan Peugeot turning us all into church fathers? Theism. I think in these people is this real tension between theism and non-theism and what I see is I see the mystics emphasizing the non-theism and the theologians emphasizing the theism if you want me to answer the historical question so the non-theist also does something else the non-theist offers a meta argument an example is John Hitt he's actually a Christian theologian but the he makes a very good argument the meta argument is this why is the debate between the theist and the atheist irresolvable? It's a good question. Here's his answer because the universe is spiritually ambiguous the universe does not the universe presents enough evidence for both sides that we can't ever resolve it so the problem for me well back to the question of what the theist and the atheist are fighting over is generally speaking and this is a point that I've made often and so you've heard me make it is it are they fighting over the super thing in the sky and does in fact you've got the no true Scotsman thing running around behind us but does is in fact Christianity a debate about is there isn't there a super thing in the sky is is the God of Christianity and again the Hothos in the Greek often with the we we seldom put the definite article in front of God but yeah it was okay but what does that what does that mean then well that means I think that we're bound into a particular problem which is we're trying to make a similarity judgment we're trying to make a judgment about how similar processes we see in the cosmos are to the mind of the human being we're making a similar a similarity because similarities like you and I can just really disagree about whether two things are similar or not because I'll ask you are an apple and an orange similar and you may say yeah they're both fruits and I'll say but what is orange and the other is red and one has this thick peel and one is a thin peel right and before and the point is this is a deep point it's made by Nelson Goodman which is there is no logical way of assigning similarity because any two objects share an indefinitely large number of properties and fail to share so there is no there is no way in which we can get every argument we do is based on similarities or dissimilarities that's logically resolve this we can't we can't say look this is what and so we don't we don't logically resolve it we relationally resolve it I finally my judgment of the similarity trumps your judgment of the non-similar right you Yes, yes and so for me right what that means is they're right there they're they're trying to decide between the theist and the atheist is exactly the wrong thing to do because they're both here's it here it is they're both presupposing that this is an issue that is decidable that way if we just get the right arguments and evidence it will be decided and the point that non-theist make is no no it's an undecidable issue now what that means and what I see people doing and I respect this by the way I respect this I think this is existentially worthy people will make pragmatic arguments they'll say well for me if I you know if I take the stance towards ultimate reality is personal I get access to that transformation and a connectedness to reality that I can't get if I think about it in personal and I think that's part of Paul Paul's finesse argument the spirit of finesse right that if you or the argument he asked me to critique what I asked people to believe is I get arguments exactly the other way where people say no no if I think about it personally I get disconnected and cut off but if I think of it not in personally because that's more like the atheists if I think of it transpersonally like the way the mystics do then I get an access that I know normally don't get sorry I gotta take this hello no worries yeah just please leave it in the lobby or the entrance while he's taking that call and I think I think he's I think he's exactly right I'm a little and and I find that with Christian deconstruction all the time one of the one of the main reasons I see people deconstructing is disappointment with God what does that mean they related to God personally and some bad thing and I don't I don't mean to say that they're because I've spoken with people who've had very bad things happen to them things that were you know very bad things happen this is where obviously the conversation about the problem of evil comes in very bad things happen and so does your it's pragmatic argument does your personal relating to that which cannot be grasped by our capacities does it work is it when we say is it reasonable does it work does it is and and I think in many ways the Christian answer is you got something better and and so transpersonally I think in fact the what we're trying to relate to is akin to you know Peugeot likes using Santa Claus I like using uncle Sam a conversation about principalities and powers we are in fact relating it transpersonally now of course now it's easy to say the mystics and to sort of lump them together and surely you can but now we're sort of back into the you know relating let's say a Christian mystic is an apple and a non-Christian mystic is an orange well what what's the relationship what's the similarity or dissimilarity to them well they have an experience of oneness one but but that we're sort of trapped in the language game because to what degree are we doing the same so and to me much of this conversation gets into okay all the way back to the Hebrew prophets that the deep insight that they had that I think John Walton has shown distinguished them for from the from the priests of many of the surrounding lands was that the the priests in Egypt and John Walton has shown this I've quoted this a number of times the priests in Egypt the priests in Babylon the key was to you know feed the gods go through you know do service to the gods bring the sacrifices to the gods and it was a very transactional relationship and and the Hebrew the Hebrew scribes and prophets and you know broke that transactionality in a very fundamental way that interestingly enough outlived the transactionality of the others now have careful in there because the transactionality remains especially in folk layers of Christianity and I don't think the transactionality is actually ever done away with completely or there's not enough friction in the system to have it work but I don't know if anything I've just said is intelligible to you but and and this is sort of where it comes down let's say with with let's know so what's the difference between John Vervache and I are our moral systems incredibly different no not much and and I think that's that's born witness to when his wife says you're the most Christian person I know and she's an atheist and he's a non-theist and and well what do you mean by that what she's saying he's he has he's an exceeding he excels at Christian virtues of loving his neighbor as itself and I see this I mean this is his deep respect and what he does and of course I don't I don't live with him I don't see him up close he doesn't confess his sins to me does he have sins I'm sure he does I certainly do I'm a minister I'm a Protestant minister I'm not a Catholic priest but people do confess their sins to me and because in Protestantism it's not that we are against confession we confess them one to another it doesn't have to be brought to a priest the priesthood of all believers Luther so so what is the difference between myself and John Faker well some of these beliefs and fair enough and I would say that I certainly he and I have a lot a great deal of agreement about the critique of that propositional system and I would argue that that critique is deeply embedded in much of Christianity that he might not be aware of because he's he's just not in the midst of the church with Protestant critiques of easy easy beliefism as it would be called and all these things so and so definite critique of a lot of this propositionalism that that my confessionalism of my Dutch Calvinism is deeply steeped into but I think often critiqued and deconstructed in pastors and preachers and sermons all the time and so you know would I say that John Vervecky is my is my moral inferior no and I'd say I wouldn't be surprised at all if he's my moral superior and that to me doesn't undo my Christianity in fact some of the strangeness of it is that how could he be my moral superior if we're basically within sort of the same moral system Allah Tom Holland so then where are the differences and what do they mean and and I think this then gets into a lot of what we call Christian deconstruction which is Paul goes to church and prays to his God personally and uses his name and you know even though we don't have an altar and we don't say do what perhaps some more sacramental elements do we sing praises we focus attention I mean in many ways Protestantism is already highly deconstructed and and and it's an abstraction from some of the physicality of some of the more sacramental traditions which is I think part of the reason why they are they have become so so many people are interested in them so so where do John and I differ and well there are definitely places that we bump into and we'll talk about them and a lot of them will be again propositional and and propositional for him as they are for me is there a God yes or no I just used a God the indefinite article maybe that's the best article to use with God because of his unknowability and again that that is a that is a hallmark doctrine and anybody who is trained in informal Protestantism I mean that's one of the first things that you learn is is we are too small to capture God in our minds and that is set into us by the commandment you shall not make a graven image of the Lord your God so you know all of this stuff is very much at play there's a package we deliver no worries so do you see the point and so you know Paul's argument is you bring in the spirit of finesse and for Paul that's bound up with the very sophisticated finesse we have to develop towards persons and that gives us access but what the what the nontheist will say is yes really good however I practice Taoism I practice Tai Chi you know what Tai Chi is it's the philosophy of finesse and flow and it right and it sees the ultimate impersonal is the Tao so there's a way of cultivating that finesse that is also possible in an impersonal or at least transpersonal perhaps a better word so what and by moving by moving into pragmatism you actually once you make that move you lose your ability to navigate between the personal and the impersonal as having a higher article priority because you're caught in the weird epistemological metaphysical problem because if you move to pragmatism you're justifying it in terms of how it works for you that's that's James's final thing right but what you want to claim is no no it has an independent existence which means it has to exist precisely by how it doesn't just work for you I mean that's that's what it is for something to real it's and and I think that's it's as like it's exactly at that moment that sort of the the Hebrew prophets transcend say they're Babylonian and Egyptian counterparts and the the strangeness of the idea that the God of Israel allowed his own temple to be destroyed and Israel who should be the people on top of the heap because their God is the God on top of the heap their God critiques them and and so you see all of this set up in many ways I think at least in the West by the story of Israel now in the East so again I would just want to name pluralism I mean that's one of the issues at play here so so the pragmatism actually undermines any kind of ontological claim in a deep book that's one of the that's one of the deep problems of pragmatism itself something I want to talk to Jordan Peterson about it's own book absolutely that would be wonderful yeah yeah there was the postmodern modernism the theism non-theism and then the discussion about the apophatic cataphonic I tried to bring those all in that was absolutely wonderful and I could probably talk to you about this all day but out of respect for the the questions I am tasked with reading I think that was as full an answer as we can hope for right that was just tremendous and I look forward to continuing this conversation because because it gets into again as a you know what one of the one of the one of the lovely things about John is that he is a practitioner too he's not just an academic and again in the modern Academy you stand outside the light and talk about it and John plays and you know he plays as he talks and and I too am a practitioner and so I find this I deeply engaging and very encouraging and maybe maybe John one maybe am I a non-theist has he has he pushed me here but but how would we know because I will continue to I'll continue to do what I'll continue to relate to my God personally and I will continue to exhort others to do so and you know this point that he makes okay so you know the crux of the problem of evil is well you called on your God and it didn't work well that's sort of the problem of the destruction of the temple and it's the problem of the crucifixion I mean it's the death of pragmatism happens on the cross this is so much fun this is so much fun so I just I'm deeply appreciative of you know earlier I would I may be disrespected my audience too harshly because you know I'm deeply appreciative of you all thank you for your time and attention why now steal from John Vervecky we're pastors or thieves I keep telling you Peterson calls us liars or more thieves than liars we steal all the time but I'm deeply appreciative of John's work and attention that he's given to this little channel and deeply appreciative of Nick and and what Nick did I should end this here and take the screenshot maybe use it for the use it for the I should take screenshot with me in it so let me do that now I can stop recording