https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=keDAdAEYUH8

 I wanted to say something about John's presentation. I loved it, but I'm John's friend. But I think it's important in churches to hear stories like John's, and I think it's helpful for church people to hear it, and I think it's helpful for people who don't go to church to hear it, to have an understanding of one of the things that I as a pastor have always seen is that the church from the outside looks very different from the church from the inside. And one of the things I've always been impressed with of John's story of church here is how, even though churches ostensibly have these doctrinal propositional walls, which I think are important, what goes on in terms of the people inside is a lot more complex, and it almost always is. So when I look at, you know, I was talking to Nate Heil over there, who is known. Sam isn't here tonight, and Sam, of course, is a Unitarian trying to live in a Trinitarian world, and Nate is a Universalist trying to live in more, you know, Anglican worlds. There's a lot of diversity going on in church now, and part of what you talked about in terms of loss of a center orientation means the rise of a lot of autodidacts are forcing churches to try to probably rebalance the four Ps a little better, but we're not quite sure where all this is going. And for me, like, somebody on the bus, he prefers to stay anonymous, but we were on the bus and he was like, what if we were all in the same church, all of us on the bus who played paintball? And I thought, well, we couldn't even manage communion, buddy. So but here we are in this space, here we are having these conversations. And so when I when I think about John's story, and when I think about your point of the new orientation, and I think about this gathering and what our conversations are doing, I think in a small way, that is what we are pursuing. We are amidst the all of the history that we have, either of conflict or community, we are trying to reorient. And I think that's as Seville had named it, this little corner is about we are working on orientation. And it's a big deal. And if I can just echo that a little bit, because John, the truth be told, what I was trying to do after your presentation, we in estuary, we struggle with with giving a name to what's happening. We don't know what these mysterious processes are that that make it so that people come together and find a shared voice, find the spirit in the room, keep coming back for more of the same. What is that about? We're not serving communion there. We're not, you know, we're not serving sandwiches even. I mean, Marv brings cookies to our meetup all the time. But so so there is a thing happening in an estuary context. And it is apparently it's a lot bigger than what's happening here in my church, because all these estuary leaders are all able to gather other groups of people and have meaningful conversation. Well, that is the shorthand way of saying something is happening. But I am pretty sure that if you were to think about it, you would have some other words for what is actually happening in these circles. And we're kind of, frankly, I am kind of eager to know what you see and what what meaning you attribute to it and how you explain it from your point of view in language that perhaps we haven't quite attained to yet. You know, what what is actually going on in an estuary group? So that's kind of I mean, in a way, I think that there might be some similarity to your circling. But it's not the same. There's something going on there. Yeah, and dialectic into dialogos is not circling either. It's another thing. Right. So I want to be I keep why do you do why do you do this double thing dialectic? Because I always want to make a distinction between a practice like dialectic or circling or empathy circling or estuary and dialogos, which is a process that you can participate in. But if you think you can make the logos, you've misunderstood it and won't experience it. So that's why I always do. And I think so I think there are there there are families of practices that get people in the logos. So I think my answer would be that what's going on is something like your mic is not doing a lot. Same thing again. Yeah, just started cutting out and some feedback. Technology is the god that lives. Yeah. So I think that's the answer to that. So what I think is going on is dialogos. And then my answer to you is is an answer where like you clarify things by contrast. Right. Is what's in dialogos above and beyond dialog because and so I think there's a lot and I've been I'm going to release it. I did someone after Socrates and release a video just on that topic. Why? Why? And then I get other people like why don't you just say dialog because it's not dialog. Right. It's something very different. And so the answer would be the ways in which I think dialogos is different from dialog. But we also recognize clearly that there is something happening in the room in the space that is more than just the dialog among the people. Well that's exactly a feature of dialogos. Yeah. But I mean can you enunciate a little bit about what we're actually experiencing that we don't even know about? Sure. Because we really want to know. We want to know what's going on in our estuaries. Okay. Well I will give you my best theoretical reflections on that. And I don't think they're complete or exhaustive by any means. I'm very much a participant in this and trying to understand it. So I'm not just trying to understand it outside from as a scientist. I participated in one of your meetings. I'm trying to do a lot of participant observation on a lot of these. And I want to say something very carefully. Each one has something unique about it. Right. And I'm not really I'm not disrespecting that uniqueness but as a scientist I'm trying to find what's shared. Okay. So just but for me and this is why I use the word logos. What shows up in these is you get a flow state between people in which they are able to start to get emergent ideas, emergent reflections, emergent awareness. It's not just ideas that they couldn't get to on their own. Right. And then that starts to feed back and it enhances how they're picking up on each other. And then those two things start to come together and it takes on a life of its own. It takes on a life of its own and it starts leading everybody right into first an initial sense of connectedness inter-personally and then what often emerges is people get a sense of the we space or the logos and there's not just interpersonal intimacy. There's we like there's like what you and I have been talking about with spirit. Right. The geist shows up. I'll use a German word because it sounds less religiously overtoned. And then what also is and none of that is possible in dialogue because dialogue when I when it's two people say they're in dialogue it doesn't connote any of these things I'm talking about. And then there's a third move in which people and it's again it's not a ladder it's not like you leave the other two behind they're nested. There's the interpersonal intimacy and then there's the intimacy with the logos or the geist of the logos and then there's intimacy through that because there's a sense of getting into not communication but communion like this connectedness intelligibility affording thing and people get a sense that they're now communing with the way in which intelligibility itself appears and what it's appearing from. And very often people from non religious sometimes even anti religious backgrounds will start to use religious and spiritual language spontaneously to talk about the way those three are vibrating for them vibrating between and all of that's happening what's happening inside you is something and I hope this doesn't weird some people out something very analogous to what's going on in when you when the brain is on psychedelics. So when the brain is on psychedelics what happens are usual pathways of connection are being shut down especially the default mode that's very egocentric right and parts of the brain that normally aren't talking to each other start talking to each other very powerfully and so okay I've done mushrooms and done things like that I've been I've done psychedelics yes shocking long time ago and so I make it because I want to make up I'm not I want to make not only a functional argument I want to make a phenomenological argument and one of the things that struck me and it's because of him we were doing I was doing circling with Taylor and a bunch of other people and it got to that place and it felt exactly like that it felt and here's the hypothesis because I'm internalizing all of you very rapidly and I'm sort of giving and it's and all that multi-perspectival and the fact that we're all decentering off of the default mode network I'm areas of my brain are being forced to talk to each other that normally don't talk to each other and the brain is picking up on that and going whatever you're doing do more of this because like because it's getting that this new inter intra connection is improving all of the interconnections and that's what the brain is looking for and so I've told you what I think is happening outside between and also what I think is happening within thank you very coherent and I appreciate it it will give all of us a little bit of a sense when we do our our mysterious weird estuary stuff what it what may actually be happening and that it has some credibility in in in in cognitive science it does and and and so that we're not just a cult or freaking out there are people who warn their their their relatives and their friends well you come to this conference but are you sure you are not falling into some kind of a cult this I've heard people say that in this room or out the paintball the problem with the the accusation of being an occult is like the accusation of being boring there's no defense because right there because we do not have any established criteria we throw this term pejoratively around and I'm not I'm not authorizing cults but we throw the term around and there's no defense because there is nothing there's no conceptual clarity behind the accusation there's just a pejorative projection so if you say no no no it's not a cult because you know we're not sending money to anybody late at night well that's not what I mean like there's a nebulous definition so I my advice to you is unless the police or the people in your group are worried about you being a cult don't worry about it don't worry about it no I agree I agree thank you for clarifying that this is fun question or otherwise can you comment on the connection between altar and tomb and how this might relate both to letting go and dying before you die who's a question directed to everyone I think you should start I should start between the altar and tomb okay so what are the things to understand that happened in the Christian tradition which is very particular and most people don't understand or don't see is that in the in the Jewish tradition the holy of holies is in the west and so you can understand it like right the influence of the east or the sunlight or the sunrise or we know the glory of God coming up in the east lands in the west so the holy of holies is like a receptacle it's a right it's the seat it's the it's the seat that receives the glory of God and outside of the so you have the right so you have the seat that receives the glory of God and then out in the eastern part you've got the altar where you burn the sacrifice and you send it up so you think about it like a trade I know it sounds horrible for for for religious people but you take your stuff your potential and then you give it up to God and then God comes down and then your congregation becomes the body of God right not the body of God but becomes the the the it creates the body of Israel let's say it that way okay so that's the thing that happens that's the that's the the the thing that happens in the Jewish temple now one of the things that have in Christianity the weird the weird thing that happens is that the sacrifice and the holy place get collapsed into one thing and that's the mystery of the cross that's what I was trying to explain this I can't explain it but I was trying to point you this this morning that in some ways the surprise that we discover in the incarnation is that like that that which is the sacrifice is the place where the world actually comes together and that's the that's the mystery and so what happens in Christianity is that it gets flipped it takes a while before it happens the early churches in Rome are still western facing by the way so if you go to some of the early like churches around the time of Constantine and just a little bit after Theodosius that they're still facing west so the altar is in the west and then at some point it flips and we put the holy place in the east where the altar is and so the holy place it becomes the altar the holy place all of it gets joined together so and that's based on the vision in Revelation so often you hear people say why are we still doing this old stuff you know from the Old Testament why do we still have these forms that's not what that's not what's informing the traditional liturgy it's Revelation it's the eschatological vision which is informing because in the eschatological vision it's the lamb that's the center and all the angels everything is turning around the lamb that's sacrificed so that's why the mysterious aspect of the holy of holies in Christianity is that it is both the altar and the holy seat it's all of that collapsed together but it does have to do with the mystery of self sacrifice so there is a relationship between the altar and the tomb it's not the only relationship but there is that's why in traditional churches there's a relic under the tomb under the altar that's actually what makes an altar conscious consecrated is that there's a relic of a person who died a piece of a dead person underneath the altar and it's a ritualization of what mystery that Christianity revealed about the nature of reality and so some of the things that I talked about this morning you know it's hard because you can't talk about everything you just have to kind of find a line and explain it but it's a very very deep part of what Christianity brings together and it's ritually embodied in the way that the altar and the tomb and all of these symbols all of these symbols all of this symbolism from the Old Testament and Revelation gets collapsed into the Christian hierarchy so hope that helps to understand. So if you look into it's called cognitive archaeology what's interesting and John Allen talks about this in his book you start when you start seeing home you start seeing the first burials and burial and home are often overlapping places and he hypothesizes that the burial is initially understood as the extension of home to these people who are no longer physically present and that what burial is doing is helping people deal with the grief of having been homed with the individual in a powerful way. So it sounds like there maybe there's maybe that condensation that you're talking about also is tapping into something very primordial because there's a deep connection there. Because something happens in the Christian tradition also which is very strange which is that in the Old Testament and in many other cultures the dead people go outside someone dies take them out of the camp you bury them outside of the camp. The Christians try to do that but they can't they can't they can't do it people want to bury their dead next to the church and so even though at first the hierarchy start tries to stop it they can't stop it people bring when people die they like dig a hole next to the church put the put their dead next to the church and then the tradition of the church cemetery comes from that but that's a very odd thing a lot of other traditional societies would never have anything like that you know where you don't gather the dead together near the holy place you bring you toss them you bring them outside the city you find a place outside but it has to do with that mystery about death and home this image that I tried to bring up this morning how Christ's tomb is described as the burial chamber how when Christ dies at the same moment that he's dying he's going into the Holy of Holies right through the veil is ripped he's collapsing those those spaces it's all collapsing in the in that moment so the symbolism of Christianity is deeply embedded in that that relationship I've got a question for John I took good notes I thought your talk was great scientific worldview is a worldview where we don't belong and if we don't belong in it it's not doing attunement for us when we have worldview attunement we get affordance and a living continuity it strikes me as interesting and I've talked about this a lot in previous videos this idea of when I when I use dead reckoning it's it's a sense it's a communal sense we have of sort of like the pollsters do with politics right track wrong track I mean it's the it's the lowest resolution thing possible and it it strikes me that part of what part of what's going on with this attunement and affordance is that you know a big piece of orientation what we're trying to do is through I think symbols and rituals which seem to be you know like you said even though we have ritual drift we have a sense in which it's sort of a dead reckoning attempt to navigate because time and especially I think since the we've had these massive technological changes over the last two three hundred years which on one point we have a sense of improvement in life we're generally speaking living a little older eating a little better I mean there's a tremendously it's a tremendously complex question but it seems through all of this through the symbolism through the ritual and now then the interesting role that science and its wedding to technology have given us it's I'd like to hear more about this relationship between science and let's say dead reckoning of betterment or loss because I think what we tend to see as a society you know obviously lately AI big anxiety is it warranted is it not warranted I mean this is going to be a major conversation at least for the next little while but all of us together are sort of looking at ritual and symbol as these are key for sort of our collective navigation and science plays a weird part of this because just as you said we're not a part of it by design and I think this is a really good question and so my typical answer to this takes about two hours and I've given it in a couple of talks let me try my best here so what I mean by we don't belong it's there's a there's one way I talk about that is we don't have a scientific explanation of how we generate scientific explanations that's a scientific issue but let me move it on to an ontological issue which is what I've been focusing on more recently so the scientific world view which is not to be acquainted with science right has generally pushed towards a flat ontology which is inverted neoplatonism it thought it was nominalism but it's actually inverted neoplatonism where the only the bottom level is real and everything above it is progressive illusion as you get farther and farther away from the bottom so the problem you get with that is why do you what what on what basis do you make the claims about the bottom level I make it on the basis of science but science doesn't exist at the bottom level and the scientists don't exist at the bottom level if that level of human beings generating theory and argument and making measurements is illusory then it doesn't actually give you any truth about the bottom level so you need this level to be as real and there's mathematical proofs and if you want more on this argument I've given two talks recently on levels of intelligibility and and this is why I think late neoplatonism that has reality is simultaneously emerging up and emanating down and it is and is not flat is central now to the degree to which we and to the degree to which we don't pick up on this reorientation of our ontology is the degree to which the vertical dimension that the rituals and symbols are trying to call us to will necessarily fall on deaf ears because if there is no way in which our world view can respectably accommodate authorize legitimate the vertical dimension what is it these symbols are doing they're just part of an upper level illusion and whatever they're pointing to is itself there's nothing there there's no real call so I think this is what I meant by like when I talk about a world view reattunement I mean we have the world view has to change and we have to change and we have to get it back and yes we need we need the dead reckoning from the rituals and the symbols but if you don't have a conformity theory if you don't you need an you need you need an ontologically deep notion of strong transcendence in which transcendence is not just psychological improvement but a disclosure of being and a new capacity for knowing that is not possible at a lower level right and so we have to get we have to get that back and it requires our understanding that those truths are only available through transformation transcendence and but that the ritual symbol side has to have a conform something it conforms to in reality that makes because it's not it's just a metaphor it's just a metaphor and it's you're not there's no there's no strong transcendence there there's only a weak transcendence of well it's sort of psychologically cleaner for me or it's more effective or I can communicate better and blah blah blah blah blah but if you want to say no no no right there is a level of there's ontological disclosure and there's a new kind of knowing that is really being afforded by the ritual and the symbol and you want to I think both of you want to say that then the worldview also has to change so we and the worldview have to change so a real conformity theory is possible so that the vertical is real again. So I'm wondering one of the one of the things that I've noticed in terms of scientism especially is one of the ways to break people's or to it's weird one of the ways to get back the necessity for this is to point out to what extent science has been used as a cover for a kind of skewed religious and symbolic world and that's been happening for several centuries like social Darwinism is a great example where it's like this no this isn't this isn't a philosophy right this is science or this is just science you know the Marxist had a very similar approach where they said no no this isn't ideas this isn't a philosophy it's just science but if we can unpack the way in which those what they said was science was actually just a form of religious participation that looks a lot more like what we're describing around the campfire you can help people see the necessity for that that connection to happen I think a lot of the things that happened during COVID were look like that they would tell us exactly they said exactly that they said follow the science what the hell does that mean follow what what what are we following follow the science what are we following no we're not you can't follow science and so it was a cover for for virtues and values and attunement ways to attune and and so whether it's effective or not we created all these weird ritual ways to check on each other to make sure we're all on the same in the same world we're all kind of participating in the story but it was all used with this this like strange cover of telling us this is just science we're not we're not we're not and so this is this is in ways what I've been I've been saying all along is I don't think the symbolic world ever went away I think it's still there it's all there it's actually just still been happening and even while we were becoming kind of alienated by scientism it's still there and happening all the time and that that it's not like the step into reconnecting people to it you know like I said it's as close as a family meal it's as it's as close to them as helping them understand why they like watching a basketball game you know it's like there's things that are so close to us that can that can click you back into at least maybe not philosophically for most people but at least existentially to a kind of attunement to what it is that I why do I do the things I do and why do I care and why would it make sense to participate in in rituals and in a you know and in a in a communal way of being does that make sense I think so let me let me let me try and see how what you said I think connects to what I said you're basically so what we're waking up to in Porticox I is we care about contradictions other than propositional contradictions and they're just as important and in fact a lot of philosophers have been arguing that especially in the pragmatic tradition that performative contradiction is a deeper and worse contradiction than propositional contradiction right so performative here's a classic example of a performative contradiction I am fast asleep right now I can't be in order for that statement to be true I have to be in a state in which I can't make the statement that's a performative contradiction right and I think there has been an ongoing performative contradiction around the flat ontology which is no no but look look but really basic stuff if I want to measure something I need an end this is Smith's argument I need an entity at a level above the level I'm measuring obviously right and this is an or or and if you go all the way down net blocks you get down to pure possibility and then where does actuality come from or you get the idea that as you go deeper down everything becomes indistinguishable but info information in the technical sense is based on difference there's all of this performative contradiction and I think things like scientism were a way of trying to like you know Levi-Strauss and you've got the contradiction you you try this thing that sort of masks the contradiction so I think I think a lot of this was masking performative contradiction with the kind of stuff you're talking about and I think what you what you're talking about when you're trying to wake these people up is you're trying to give them a clear instance of a performative contradiction that then if but you have to do it right because they can compartmentalize because human beings are made like Eichmann Eichmann human beings can compartmentalize in extremely powerful ways so you've got to wake them up to a performative contradiction in this that wakes them up to the whole system of performative contradictions yeah some people it seems like it's you know and you've seen those conversations some conversations that I've had where it's just impossible right someone standing you know them with that I that I find is very smart and intelligent telling you you know science is the highest value and just think like you can't say that like you're invoking hierarchy a religious image into your description of science and it's like you could say that and then it's like look no no no but you just say did you generate no no you do this did you generate that proposition scientifically and the answer if they're honest is no I didn't and if they're in there dishonest they'll try in some finagle and it's clear that they can't make that there's no scientific process that would lead to that conclusion yeah because like what would you I ran an experiment on science and against all the other things that was the that was the clear independent variable that best explained there but like it like it doesn't make any sense I want to tweak a little bit your answer to me because I think when I when I talk about dead reckoning it's not use of symbols in a sense so in many ways part of what happened in the enlightenment and I completely agree with you that a lot of other values were getting smuggled through but the performative contradictions were used in powerful ways by people like Voltaire to sort of take a look at the symbolic world and say no not really part of the problem was there were other things going on and when I look at I mean obviously part of how I got into this whole thing was what has gone what has been called deconstruction base leave people leaving the faith people generally leave the Christian faith because they bump into a performative contradiction and the dissonance is overwhelming and there needs to be a shift of symbols and identity and off they go part of what we're seeing now and I think COVID has been a big push for this is in a sense the unmasking by performative contradiction of a lot of the stuff that you two both have been talking about that we haven't we've we've adopted a new symbolic world where science is the big symbol and it's passed out all over the place and those are arising and what people have bumped into are many deeper levels of ritual and symbol that in many ways were relegated as incidental or arbitrary and now are beginning to emerge as oh in my dead reckoning I'm beginning to notice that for a generation or two many of the rituals and symbols we have been given up have now fully been lost to us and other things that very much feed into my dead reckoning of wellness are now beginning to slip divorce many of the things that you list in your symptomology of the meaning crisis and we begin to notice that oh we threw away these things too hastily but the performative contradiction done by the Enlightenment cannot be undone so where does that leave us now and I actually think that this conversation and a lot of the conversations we've been participating in are a reassessment of both so science is being recalibrated it's not going away and we're not sort of pushing away technology completely and now there's a new appreciation of oh maybe we multi-generationally have discarded these things too quickly how do we once again have them become deeply formative not just for me but for further generations yeah it's almost like we have this project of integrating science and spirituality yep on that note how do people with a diversity of ideas or experiences participate in a single spiritual home or is that not possible how do people with what a diversity of ideas and experiences participate in a single spiritual home but that doesn't it doesn't seem like there's any other way for that for that like that that's the same for a family it's the same for any group of people that come together with a single purpose that they all have their own idiosyncrasies and you know that's what in some ways what communion is or what agapic love offers is the possibility of doing exactly that of having a way to be together that doesn't abolish my my particularity and so and i think that you know that that's in some ways one of the things that ritualization offers whether it's ritualization of brushing your teeth or ritualization of a family meal or ritualization of a of a of a you know of communion in a church that it offers the possibility of multiple idiosyncratic things joining together into into one kind of in some ways how can i say this putting together that which we have in common and then and but then without without abolishing that which we don't have in common there's a limit to that obviously right it's like there's obviously it's a it's a it's a dance you know and and it's true that you know there are some things which would make you break out of communion as much as your family meal as in a as in a church but that's i think that's that's actually what they're for right when you talked about the idea of the campfire or people going out and coming back that's exactly what's going on there because the person is picking berries and the person that's hunting the the the animal are not having at all the same experience or having completely different experiences but because they they know that they have this place of communion where they're going to come together and share their multiplicity then that that diversity actually has value and it was also the case that they had starvation at their door that held them together and part of what happens in modernity and the affluence it has provided us is those containing pressures when they're off now suddenly there needs to be a new level of discipline and ritual that contains without the threat and also the massive pluralization that globalization provided but it's it's i think it's existential suffering which will lead this change it won't be it won't be maybe it will at some point be starving but at least for now it is existential suffering and i think that's what we saw during covid and that's why a lot of our churches all of a sudden got filled up after covid of young people is because that's what it was they they realized that i might not be physically starving but i'm dying i need to i need to come together with others or else i'm not going to make it through this so but there are different ways i think of finding that commonality in that you can all go to the same place where there is already a superimposed ritual structure and liturgy or you can create a space where you look for the mechanisms and the activities and the styles of being that promote mutual respect and tolerance and acceptance of one another and especially when you're thinking about a family to i mean i'm thinking about how how super important it is to be able for a period of time in the course of the day or the week to put screens away to shut off the televisions put your phones away and i mean i love your image of gathering around the table i mean that's a that's a very powerful image for me but i mean can you make that a universal rule or can you make that a a kind of a guiding principle for how to restore some kind of connectedness in a family where people are so dispersed or so pulled in different directions by whatever their outside engagement or involvement would be you mean the screen i mean i don't think you have to make i mean the idea that we have to have common attention it that's better than a rule about screens it's it's it's about what the positive aspect like if we're sitting at a table together then we need to be attending to each other if we're not then it breaks communion so whether it's a screen or whether it's anything else yeah it's we need common attention i'd like to bring in a different aspect of home we haven't really talked about yet and i'm curious how all of you would approach this but there's two aspects that i've haven't seen us touch one is what do you do about the other groups of people who have homes that threaten your home we've all kind of talked about how do you have your own home base how do you create that community what does that look like but what about the fact that there's people that come against you from the outside that it tends to be a place where there's divergence among people and that becomes an issue and what about when you have your own group and there's predators within your group and how would we maybe think about how we handle those two elements of a spiritual home the enemy within you john's john's point today so john often talks about stealing the culture i inverted neo-platinism that that's really good i'm really going to think about that i think that's a really helpful insight for me to understand some of this long story of modernity but when i think about how christians who developed a practice of in some groups non-violence and how when christians in fact were did not have much power within the larger roman world this this culture as as niche construction um and and creating a movable reigns i mean that's when you talk about stealing the culture that's what they did now in many ways this gets very symbolic cultures are only formed usually at the cost of blood and then the question is whose blood and in many ways christians stole the culture through their own blood which of course followed their master who made the move to steal the culture with his own blood and it's a again part of what i want to continue to make people think now is because i think we have really come to we've really compressed our the the rep we're looking at the now we talked about that in in the room a little bit before in the green room we need to be thinking massively multi-generational now and see ourselves only as one small segment of much larger identities and we do that and we've done that in war nationalism in many ways was a modern representation of that but um i think these are the hard questions and traditionally christians have one in culture with blood but it was often their blood and that's a that's a very difficult thing for human beings to deal with um no i i think that that this is is a tricky it's tricky to talk about this obviously because it has a lot of implications but there's a sense in which the sense in which there is the possibility of self-sacrifice and defending your your group that's a real thing and i think that honestly often that has to be has to be honored that is people that have that have given their lives to defend their countries from outside invaders that's something that's happened all through history i think that that's that actually can be an honorable way but it's tricky because you know guessing the intentions of people and and you know because we're dealing with political real political power and we're dealing with violence it's difficult to discern sometimes the intentions of of people who get involved in that or you know civilizations that get involved in that but if we think of it fractally right that's how i do it all the time i always i try when someone asks a big question like that like can you fight off people that attack your country i bring it all the way down to my level and i ask myself do i fight off people that try to attack my family and the answer is yes of course i do right i do it at a small level i'm not necessarily fighting people off with guns or whatever but there is a sense in which there is there are sometimes a need to to reject the parasites or reject the people that that are trying to take over something or trying to take all the energy away from something and that is absolutely necessary in groups right and if you run a business obviously you have to do that if there's someone in the business that is taking the energy and the money from the business and funneling it towards something else you have to eject that person and and it's a tricky thing and it's difficult because it like i said it involves all kinds of intentions but i think at least in principle it's something that has that sometimes has to happen yeah this this this um the enemies within and the enemies without kind of thing um um so we have we have ways of motivating each other um and that's what it comes down to and we have basically persuasion deception and violence those are sort of the three categories by which we can get human beings to do things we want them to do it was the platonic socratic proposal socratic platonic proposal that we could increase the reach of persuasion and we could significantly mitigate deception and that has to be within self-deception and without at the same time or it doesn't work but it was it was always understood it's very clear in a platonic corpus that no matter how much we expand the persuasion and reduce the deception there will still be people that will take recourse and violence and this of course is shows up in the death of socrates and the death of jesus um and i think it's myopic to think that there is a resolution to that problem um because what would you do think about it what i'll do is i'll force you to be rational like wait that's undermining the very thing so rationality very broadly construed right has to do by its very nature make possible violence because i would have to resort to violence in order to try and make everybody rational and that would be a profound formative performative contradiction so if the if the if the intent behind the question is how can i get rid of this problem the answer is you can't you can't you you're in a trade-off relationship now that doesn't mean there isn't practical things that can be done so the wolf in sheep's clothing kind of thing i'm really and i'm working with taylor and other people in the vicki foundation because as far as i can still reasonably tell i really want to do this virtuously and i don't want to i don't want i've seen i've seen fame and or at least influence or whatever it is right and wealth and status and attention and i can see what it's doing and trying to figure out best practices they're not algorithmic because you can't eradicate deception we can't eradicate violence but the best practices so um and you know and i'm not doing this to no one paying attention to other how other institutions have wrestled with these problems the perennial problems because we can't make them go away but we still have to do something about them um and i'm trying i'm trying to find with the help of a lot of good people ways in which the virtuosity doesn't blind me to virtue and um there's a there's a lot of design things you can do you you like set up the foundation to try and get an arm's length distance and have this other entity other than john vervecky it's funny because i'll be talking about the revaki foundation like it's like right and and and just a bunch of other things we've put into like we've it's a dead reckoning thing we've tried to pay attention to some of the failures that we've seen in the past and think can we put in all of this ultimately depends on people's character right one of the great failure and kafka really made us real is we thought we could bureaucratize this we can't it always depends on people's character but the idea is can we put in place practices and governing principles so that people of good character will stay in good character and are making it the case that this is pursued both virtuously and with virtuosity um and so and then i'm working with other communities we we talk in the respond network we talk a lot about the problem of gurification like how people become gurus and why this becomes extremely problematic and what can we do here that will make it less less likely that we'll end up there um so i'm i i have i i have sort of an answer therefore to the enemy within the enemy without is this is the this is the larger and therefore grandiose and i i accept that criticism but the larger project of trying to not physically but culturally re rebuild the silk road so that we have the courtyard of dialogos rather than the courtroom of debate we had all these religions and cultures that had a lingua franca right that allowed them to work with each other trade with each other they're not just trade stuff trade ideas in deep and profound ways and this is a reality and it joined profoundly different places together the east and the west and it worked it really worked um now it doesn't mean that there wasn't warfare or anything like that i'm not saying that but it showed that it was possible for people to craft together a lingua philosophica if you'll allow me that allowed for real mutual reduction in an antagonistic relationship and a realization of a possibility of a genuine like i say a genuine courtyard of dialogos and so i mean the the next series is going to be about that project and about what would it look like if we tried i'm i'm not going to try and rebuild the silk road that's ridiculous but could we do something like that it has worked so saying it's impossible to just false it has worked and what and i plan to try and sort of travel along key points in the silk road and talk about key people there i'll probably get sick that's part of the journey hopefully right because i want to i want to i want to make it attractively possible that that we could get something like the silk road again and that would be a way of not removing because we can't but at least ameliorating the issue of the enemy enemy without if we can find the through line between we reduce the without i agree with jonathan and i made it i keep saying it these are parental we can't remove this because the attempt to it's like what's happening in in in sort of bad versions of the left right where you get into this performative contradiction in which you undermine procedural justice because you're so fanatical about about substantive justice we can't eradicate violence and deception because to do so would be to be a performative contradiction of rationality so we can't get rid of them but i think there are ways within and without that we can significantly ameliorate them i'm not claiming to have any definitive word on this all i'm saying is i have made a deep commitment to try and find the best i can within and without and to share it as best i can well thank you everyone