https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=G1cGhq3FW4Y

 Start on this point to make sure, recognize that Ben K has a question. But like you said, Paul, if it's okay, I'll go with mine first. Okay, your volume's a little low, so you're gonna have to speak up. Okay. Yeah, I'm in a tough spot, so I'll try. Can you hear me okay? Yep, I hear you fine. Okay. Got this big preamble and then a short question afterwards. So, I watched your video yesterday on racism and really appreciate it. Help me. So, my church is currently starting a small group book study. It's co-written by a lead pastor and a church planter in the West End church denomination. It's called Multi-Ethnic Conversations. And the intent by our leadership to have this small group to shift our local church into one that engages in actively transforming itself into a more multi-ethnic church. Yep. And just getting started in all this, I detect a tinkering in myself that I don't fully understand. Maybe it means that I'm racist by certain definitions, or maybe I'm a contrarian or maybe both, and certainly a lot more bad stuff. But there is something in me that says I'm fine with our church being multi-ethnic, if that's who ends up showing up and becoming a part of the church and finding meaning and life here. It's great if that happens, if that happens. But to intentionally say we don't look multi-ethnic enough and the multi-ethnic church is biblical and right and we are lacking, so we need to intentionally do things to change that, it just feels off to me in some way. Yeah. I don't think I have a concern that making multi-ethnicity a focus of the church, or I'm sorry, I think I have a concern that making multi-ethnicity a focus of the church could shift into becoming the focus of the church, and the potential prospect of making it, or putting it at the top of the hierarchy troubles me. Yep. All that said, my actual question is, so in your view, Paul, what was the Christian impetus, and is the Christian impetus for intentionally making your local church a multi-ethnic one, like the one that your dad started and you grew up in, I guess is kind of what the church you're leading right now is like. And is there anything explicitly non-Christian or particularly maybe Christ command violating about a church that is intentionally pushing itself about a church that is intentionally pushing itself to be more ethnically diverse? That's an excellent question. Like I said in the video, I've lived this stuff my whole life and I've seen it from lots of different aspects. I think a deep part of the motivation in the 60s and 70s for the formation of what I often call racial reconciliation churches, which is what my father's church was, which is what this church was, was recognizing the deep wounds that racism caused in American history. Part of what's so difficult to me to talk about many of these things is that, you know, when Jim Wallace calls racism America's original sin, he's got a real point. What has helped me over the last few years has been a greater recognition of from Jordan Peterson and Jonathan Peugeot of hierarchies and how they work. One of the, that the, something like anti-racism can very quickly become an idle. Well, what is an idle? An idle is a thing that is improperly placed on the, on a hierarchy. An idle is something that is a good thing elevated to an ultimate thing. There is a danger. It's, I see this as a very important point. It's, I see this in many different areas right now. And I don't know that balance is necessarily the right word to talk about these things. But there is a danger of taking an important remedial effort and making it a reason for being. Okay? And it is, one of the best articulations of this that you'll appreciate, Jeff, is C.S. Lewis's comment about equality. Equality is good medicine and bad food. And in a sense, those words really capture the way that something can become an idle. So given, given the, given what our cult, what American, the American zeitgeist was working through after the Second World War in terms of coming to terms with the forms of racism in the North and the South in the United States, it stands to reason that these racial reconciliation churches were, were a vital element for the overall body of Christ to learn things. That being said, there was always an aspect in which the, the desire of churches to become multi-ethnic can have its own deformity. Because in a sense, what you're telling people is, we want you to come to this church so that you can do something for us. Well, that in and of itself isn't a bad thing. But, you know, I'm, I'm preaching this Sunday and working through the core of the Sermon on the Mount, which is Jesus' commentary on, you know, the three, four, the three core expressions of Jewish piety, which were giving alms to the poor, prayer, and fasting. And in each of those three, Jesus levels the warning, and we've talked about this in past question and answer sessions, Jesus levels the warning, be careful not to do this before men. Well, what does he mean by before men or before other people? Well, the heart of that, because just earlier in the, in the Sermon on the Mount, he said, you know, your salt has to be salty, you are a city on the hill, you are the light of the world. Well, obviously, there's an aspect of demonstration in those, and now it seems like the next chapter, Jesus is saying, don't do this in front of people. So motivation is important. The church, part of the, the goal of the church is to represent to the world what the kingdom of heaven should look like. The difficulty we have, and this is where figuring out how hierarchies work, is that in any form of human expression, or any form of human embodiment, hierarchies will be manifest. And there are times and places to address these hierarchies and to work within them. And to work within them. You know, the video I did about whether or not it's city mayors and police and National Guard troops should bow, should kneel to protesters, bow with protesters. So Benjamin Boyce, given his story, seems, you know, fairly reactive to this. My, my take on this is that there are times and places, and the whys figure out when and how. Because what we say in our country is that these, the, the mayor or the governor or the president is a public servant. Servants bow. And I think again, Jonathan Pujo in his video about the protests really got a lot of this right. Because we have to figure out when and where. So I think it is a, I think it is a fine goal for churches to say, we want to be the kind of place where race is not an obstacle. I think that's absolutely appropriate. Churches, however, are embedded within very thick cultures. One of the, you know, I joke sometimes about what a bad pastor I am because my church is so small. And then there's some truth to that. But some of it is a joke and some of it is sort of a little bit of a troll. Because what Living Stones, Living Stones, and this is almost always true of strengths and liabilities. Living Stones strength is its diversity and Living Stones liability is its diversity. If you go to a mega church, one of the things that they have managed to do is modulate their expression sort of like a radio station. And they have grown in excellence and perfection in music, in style, in message. And the whole mega church movement was all about, you know, getting things on very high resolution in a very narrow, in a very narrow spectrum. And so they're able to grow along those lines. And if you look at the, if you look at the beginning of the church growth movement, it was basically saying, birds of a feather flock together. And so we are going to target this specific, this specific cultural group and try to expand the kingdom of God in this area. Now, there's been a lot of critique of that. Again, I don't think in and of itself it's a bad thing. The difficulty that we face our hierarchies and those dynamics. So for a congregation to say, we're going to put, we're going to put race way up at the top of our, at the, towards the top of our hierarchy is not necessarily a bad thing. I think it's helpful if the church recognizes that other things will suffer because of that, because in your limited instantiation, you are bound by the limitations of human time and space. And so if you're going to prioritize racial diversity, there are other elements of the kingdom that you are basically pushing down the hierarchy. And you can't help but do that. Now, key to this is understanding why. And I, you know, I really, when I first listened to, probably when I second listened to Jordan Peterson's first thing on the biblical series and some of his other things where he, he talked about the fact that in our government, you know, the God is not the king or the God is not the president. And we have this instantiated. No man is above the law. We put the law at the top of the hierarchy. The law is immaterial. There's a reason in Christianity why God, why the third commandment says you may not represent God with anything within the creation. That is utter and absolute revelation and genius because what it shows is that you can take any good thing. You can make reconciliation between the sexes the thing about your church. You can make racial reconciliation the thing about your church. We can say that it should be the case that in no church will race be an obstacle for participation in the kingdom of God or the kingdom of heaven. And that's an absolutely right thing for every church to do. However, because of how we are culturally as human beings, churches will express the, the locality, the contextuality, where they are in the broader flow of church history. And I don't think churches should be embarrassed by that. So when, when Martin, when Dr. King said Dr. King said 11 a.m. is the most segregated hour in America, there was a prophetic critique of, and when he said that, you know, as they were dealing with Jim Crow and the legacy of Jim Crow, that was a very important and prophetic statement. In another way, that kind of non-diversity is also inevitable and not necessarily sinful. And this is why this is so difficult. And, and one of the things that I was noting is that Benjamin Boyce keeps saying in his, Benjamin Boyce keeps saying in his, in his podcast, in his conversations, you know, the god of, you know, depending on what term we're using, the god of critical theory is a very, is a, is a, is a very jealous god. And that's right, because what's happening right now is that these certain issues are overheating everything and they're getting, they're getting out of balance. And so we, people, we as human beings always overreach, we always have sins of commission and omission, and we never get it right. So as we go through things, we'll have to figure out how to get it right. And something as stable and as important as a real human community, there will be, always be element of protest within it that hopefully will help us continue to up the resolution, refine the calibration, and, and get better at expressing what God's kingdom should be in the here and the now that we are called to be faithful within. So that would, that would be my answer to that question. Thanks, Paul. Then I can ask your question for you unless you wanted. Is it all right if I ask a question? I have a, I have a bit of a follow up to that. Okay. The, our CRC denomination has recently sort of excommunicated kinism, and what you said sounds really similar to sort of the arguments against that. I was wondering if, like, do you think there's going to be an excommunication of woke-ism at some point in the future once things have calmed down or? I actually, a couple of years ago, I thought about writing an overture to address some of these things. I'm glad I didn't then because I've learned a lot since then. I think it was right for the denomination to denounce kinism, and I think it would be right for the denomination to, I mean, if we're going to use these words to declare critical race theory a heresy because of a variety of the elements of it that I have talked about before. Now, here's the difficulty. I have, I think we can learn a lot about, I think we can learn a lot about the sinful manifestations of racism through observations that critical theory has elevated. I've learned some things, and I've become aware of some things. There are other elements, and every heresy has, every truly powerful heresy has elements of truth in it, and so what the church wants to do is, again, continue to refine, get to higher resolution, recalibrate, and pull these things up to the top, and in a sense, a lot of that is happening now, and as is so often the case, the only way we do this is when we have a conflict, and so we have to learn how to have productive conflicts and not bloody conflicts, and how we can then, as we go through time, make our conflicts more and more profitable. Bern Power sent me a video that he had done recently starting, he had a video about dark ages, which I found a very interesting video because he made the observation, piggybacking on a scholar, that what a dark age is, and for those of you who play civilization, you can have some fun with that, what a dark age is is a loss of memory. And I think America has always been a rather amnesiac culture. Some, again, some cultures are too fixed on their history, other cultures are too amnesiac, American culture is too amnesiac, generally speaking, and so when I'm looking at what's going on right now, part of the bitter harvest we are receiving right now is a legacy of the intended reforms in education that have been pushed through in the last 10, 15, 20 years. When someone graduates from college now, they don't have much in terms of western civilization, they have been, you know, it's sort of the sin of, you know, I'll not critique the sins of Orthodox and Roman Catholics, I'll critique the sins of my own denomination. You know, we only tell a partial story of our own cherished history and we tend to magnify our own sins in the process, and I think that's a lot of what's happening with the younger generation. They don't know anything about Plato or Aristotle or even American history, and that's part of the reason in my videos I continually encourage people to read history, find good biographies of Frederick Douglass and Malcolm X and Martin Luther King Jr. and read slave diaries. Now, all history has historicism within it, and the more history you read, you have to deal with the fact that all history is in a sense a use of the past for propaganda for today. That's an element of all history telling, but hopefully the more history we know, the better we can not repeat the same old conflicts, but have conflicts which actually heighten the resolution we look at the world with and work on what we're doing. So my conversation with Dan that I just posted today, you know, Dan and I have particular views of things that are certainly have aspects of our whiteness in them, have aspects of the time that we grew up and so on and so forth, but there's a real history back there that should be interacted with, and I hopefully will have room to engage with kinism and also engage with the heresies of critical race theory and find a way for us to continue to work on race while we're also working on relations between the sexes, while we're also working on, you know, how many different other things the church has to embody in its mission. So does that answer your question? Did I lose everyone? I didn't actually hear the first bit because my Discord glitched out, but I'll just assume that it did. I did record it so you can go back and look at it, so I listened to it. So okay, good. I have to step away from the mic, Paul. Thank you very much. Does anybody in the voice chat have a question for Paul? Okay, I have one question I can ask from the typed up chat. I have a question that may or may not be able, it's from Spartan theology. I have a question and may or may not be able to join the call. I have been talking with an atheist who's pretty interested in Christian theology and they are interested in Christian theology and they are looking into Jesus and Paul's connection to the essence. Do you have any thoughts on this? I looked up what that word was and it's a sect of, it's a sect of Jewish sect between the second temple period that flourished. Oh, the essence. Okay, good. Yeah. New Testament scholarship. Paul's connections to the essence. I know, I haven't read or studied this at all. There's a lot of, so the essence were a, so I've often talked about the first century culture war and when you've got a culture around something, the menu options about that thing are not hard to predict. So the part of the main issue is the Roman occupation, increased impact of Hellenism in Jewish life and Jewish culture. One approach to that is accommodate and so the puppet state, the puppet, you know, fan, high monarchy of the Herod's was part of that. So they accommodate to the Roman way of life and they accommodate to Hellenistic culture. One way to respond or react to Hellenism and the Roman occupation would be as the zealots, which is the only good Roman soldier is a dead Roman soldier and so you try to knife them and kill them. So there's an item on the menu. Another option was the Pharisaical option, which would be cultural symbolic resistance and so when I first started sort of reading the Bible for myself, I began to get frustrated with the Gospels because there's all this talk about, well, what you can and can't do on the Sabbath and what's their obsession with this? Well, this was a way, the sinners and prostitutes and tax collectors, this was a way of the Pharisees resisting the cultural intrusion of Hellenism in their culture and in their communities. So they picked on symbolic things. That was sort of like back when Disney decided to afford health medical benefits to same-sex couples and a whole bunch of evangelicals said, we're going to boycott Disney. Okay, there were probably a lot of good reasons to boycott Disney before that, but that was their, they chose a symbolic way to address something they couldn't do politically or militarily and that's why the Pharisees, this difference we have between politics and religion, it's helpful to try and figure out how those things interact. Essenes were the preppers. Essenes were groups that said, Essenes were the purists. You know, any participation in urban or in lifestyle in towns or cities occupied by the Romans is, you know, Essenes would say Jewish silence is violence, okay? And so they headed out to the caves and they prayed and they fasted and they wrote, they copied scriptures and I mean they did all of this stuff and they basically were in the caves waiting for the Lord to finally make good on his promise and not only clear out the, clear out the Romans and Herod and the aristocracy who were going along with the Roman way, but even the wishy-washy Pharisees who were trying to resist, but you know, they weren't as pure or as serious as the Essenes. They were out in the desert staying completely pure and uncontaminated. Now you can find these, so when you read the New Testament, you read the Gospels, you can find these strains and one of the things that Jesus, what's so interesting about Jesus' disciples was that there's reason to believe Jesus had all of this, so it just answered a question about racial diversity, that Jesus in his hand-picked 12 chosen disciples picked elements from the culture war. So you had a tax collector and you know, there's a huge amount of what was Judas, what was his beef, why did he sell Jesus out? Some Judas Iscariot, some connect that to the Zealots and so you've got a tax collector who is the poster child for someone, for a collaborator, an enemy collaborator and then you have a guy who's, you know, put if that's what Judas Iscariot was, a guy who's going around and wants to knife Romans and it could be that my pet hypothesis, and it's just conjecture, is that part of what was behind Judas' betrayal of Jesus was he was just fed up. Jesus was soft on Rome in the eyes of many. Now when you look at the description of John the Baptist, he seems more like an Essene, he's out in the desert, but of course our picture of these groups is very, very low resolution and just from what we know of human nature, there had to be layers within layers and factions within factions of these groups and Monty Python gets at this a little bit with Life of Brian, you know, and you had all these little groups that didn't get along together because they're putting something at the top of the hierarchy that, you know, you collect taxes for the Romans, you know, there's no worse person than someone who does that, on and on and on and on. Now Paul, my assumption of Paul is that he's much closer to the party of the Pharisees, partly because Paul is a diaspora Jew, now Paul is a diaspora Jew, and so Paul is well acquainted with life in the diaspora Roman Empire, and so it's interesting though, some of the psychological and sociological interplays between different groups on this score, because it's how does a Jewish household living in a place like Tarsus in the Roman Empire, how do they respond, how do they maintain their Jewish identity in the midst of a deeply Hellenistic world? Well, why is it that Hasidic Jews live in New York City? Well, and how do they maintain themselves? Sometimes when you're close to something like that, you're more reactive to it, and so in some ways all of those basic menu options get played out in different ways in different places, and so it's very interesting in the book of Acts where the conflict arises between the widows who are from the region of Jerusalem and the Galilee and Judea, and the widows that settled there from the diaspora, because one of the things that we know about, if you read the Gospels you can see that people are always coming, Judea was a fairly poor place, and the temple was a big source of income, which is part of the reason that the money changers and everything was a big deal, and so people who were highly religious, highly Jewish, when they got older they would want to settle back into Jerusalem so they could be close to the temple and not always have to do all that traveling, so in Jerusalem apparently, and in the area of Jerusalem, there were widows who were from the region and widows who had resettled from the diaspora Jewish community in the Roman Empire, and the Jewish community, some scholars think, was possibly 10 percent of the Roman Empire, so it was a significant minority. Now, the conflict that is talked about in Act 6 seems to be between the diaspora Jews, many of whom have Greek names, and the local Jews, and so the resolution to that conflict was the naming of the deacons, and the deacons were to care for the diaspora widows, and then when that conflict, which probably was present in the overall Jewish community at the time, when that conflict kind of explodes and there's a crackdown on Christians, the only group that seems to get cracked down on are the diaspora Christian Jews living in Jerusalem, because the deacons flee Jerusalem, but the apostles stay put. Well, what does that say? The apostles were from the Galilee and Judean elements of the population, and the conflict wasn't happening with them, and so then we see the peak of that with the stoning of Stephen. Stephen is a diaspora Jew. Saul, Paul is a diaspora Jew, and so I don't know anything about this movement to tie Paul to the Essenes. There could be a dynamic there. It could be that Paul was particularly allergic to Hellenistic influence as someone who knew it very, very well, and so I can guess, you know, as I listen to this and talk this through, I can sort of see a connection in that the common element is a religious reactivity to Hellenism, of which locally, at least in Judea, the Essenes expressed that. Paul could have expressed that in different ways as a Hellenistic Jew, and that could be his changing of his name from Saul to Paul could be an expression of that too, because identifying with the Hebrew version of his name, which is Saul, while living in Tarshish, could have made him something more like analogous to the Hasidic community living in the heart of one of the most secular places in North American culture, and in a sense, you can, your witness and your reactivity can be expressed most starkly in the epicenter of your enemy, so that's a whack at that question, and again, I should probably just shut up and say I don't know, but maybe there was something in the answer that some of you could find helpful. That's good, thank you. Does anybody else have a question from the voice chat? I might have one. Cool, please go ahead. So I've been thinking about the Calvinism and also, so connecting it with sort of predictability, there seems to be, I don't know, I know very little, but there seems to be like some, what do you call it, predestination of some kind? Yes. Yeah, so does that view of Calvinism marry itself well with sort of Sam Harris predictability of behavior and of the world? I think there are some analogies. If you read Calvin himself in the 16th century, Calvin pretty much just copies Augustine in terms of trying to figure out what, you know, how to interpret passages and Ephesians and other places and Romans about, you know, what this idea of what is God's role in, what is God's role in the drama we see being expressed? In the 17th century, when the canons of Dort were written, you can very much see an intensification along the lines of agency and that gets expressed in the canons of Dort. Now, I don't think it's coincidental that at the same time deism is really coming to the fore and broadly speaking, Western Christendom is really wrestling with the, I would say, the God number one type questions of to what degree, so a pre-deism Christian would look at the reliability of nature and say that's God's faithfulness. After deism, we tended to see impersonal mechanism. That's a subtle psychological shift. Calvinism, I think, in some ways tries to account for that and that's part of the reason some of those issues got ratcheted up the hierarchy. And so in some ways, and when I made a video about Sam Harris, some people said, boy, you know, your Sam Harris' determinism and Calvinist determinism seem to sort of be, there's a resonance between those two and I think that's a fair observation. And I think it's an observation that comes out of the area of philosophical wrestling that they're doing with these questions. You know, recently, not too long ago, Tim Keller had a conversation on YouTube with, I don't remember who the guy was, I've got it on my blog in a bunch of different places. And he was asked about, because the one thing that always shoots to the top of the hierarchy with Calvinism is divine election. You know, we have all these jokes. We have all these in-house jokes about these kinds of things. What does a person in the Christian Forum Church say after they fall down a flight of stairs? Phew, glad I got that over with. You know, we have all these in-house jokes about these kinds of things. And some of what those jokes express is a mellowing or a reappropriating of those issues on the hierarchy. And again, I think using hierarchies to try to process various truths is really helpful. And I think this is a function of our consciousness because our consciousness is very, very limited and we can't handle many things at a time. That's why we can't multitask. And so this is why we get hierarchies wrong. And communities which are scaling up of us, principalities as it were, are doing the same thing. So yeah, some of the strengths of Calvinism are some of the strengths of Sam Harris, ironically. And some of the weaknesses. That's a good answer. Thank you very much. Yeah. So I have a question from Ben. And it's a little bit long. I can give you the question, because I'm a little bit concerned about this. And I think that's a good answer. I have a question from Ben. And it's a little bit long. I can give you the quick question first. And if you need me to elaborate, I can try to read the other two explanations of natural evangelism. Does that sound okay? Yep. I'm looking at them too. But why don't you read the quick question and what I'm going to do is cut and paste these into the show notes so people can find them. Hey, Paul. This is Ben here. I can maybe try and summarize it a little better. Maybe ask it. Just hopped out of work real quick. So yeah, I guess maybe just to give a quick context for why I'm thinking about this. So my wife and I recently had an interaction with another couple. Christians. Got together for dinner. Lovely people. Had us over. Started doing Bible studies with them. And just kind of out of the blue, we started kind of seeing some yellow flags with just the community. And wound up finding out the denomination had some cult ties. If you look online, which is like the practices of how they do stuff in here. Found out they targeted people that were churched. And it was kind of one of these baptismal regeneration type groups. But we felt kind of blindsided because they were kind of, we felt like they were kind of sneaking. To them what their evangelism message was, which was that you need to be baptized. For the forgiveness of your sins and that if you don't, you're going to hell basically. I think all that to say, you know, being a part of the crew in college, I think there's a big push in some of these, especially campus ministries. To evangelize in a way that puts relationships first with the intention of bringing the gospel message in later. And being on the opposite side of receiving it and realizing just how people can be blindsided by that type of methodology. I was just curious what your thoughts are on that. You know, being a little too overly sensitive with that group. Or if there's any just evangelism practices that you think have been kind of more hurtful. You're seeing promoted in churches and maybe some good ways or good things to consider when we try to do this weird thing of evangelism. This actually has a lot to do with my channel. So this morning I was listening to a conversation. I had Rafe Kelly. I posted a video with Rafe Kelly this week. And I just finished a recent conversation that he had done with John Verbeke. John Verbeke is a non-theist. John Verbeke is in some ways, you know, he left Christianity. The Christianity was raised in. Rafe Kelly has a different story. I was, you know, when I went into the conversation with Rafe Kelly, I didn't, I had no idea what we were going to talk about. Because what do I know about parkour? And part of the reason I am very, one of the few disciplines I tried to have in my conversations is to, let's begin with a person's story. Because I have built into me certain reactivities to people. They're built into the principalities I participate in. They're built into me by my story. I mean in many ways this is the heart of the racism video that I made this week too. Those reactivities are there for good reasons, but they can be counterproductive to evangelism. As I said earlier here, thinking, using hierarchies as a tool to try to understand the interplay of competing and legitimate truths is helpful. So what is evangelism? You know, the Christian church has for a long time struggled with who's in and who's out. And you even see that in, you see it directly in the story of the unauthorized exorcist in the gospels. Where the disciples find a guy casting out demons in Jesus' name and want to enforce their intellectual property. And Jesus says leave them alone. You see it in the New Testament with all of the conflict. People always say, well we want our church to be like the New Testament church. And I kind of roll my eyes because how closely have you read that New Testament? It was rife with conflict. And why is it that it seemed everywhere the Apostle Paul went a riot broke out? They spent so much time in prison. It just flooded with conflict. You know, the Tom Holland's Dominion really opened my eyes. I mean it kind of helped fit things together for me that people who identify as Christian are in some ways less Christian than they think. And people who don't identify as Christian are in some ways more Christian than they realize. And we're all in there on that spectrum. And so one of the things that I learned from Tim Keller, so in the second half of the aughts, I spent a lot of time listening to Tim Keller's sermons. And one of the things I appreciated about Keller was his take on preaching. Because part of what happened, again history is helpful here, when you look at Methodism, and you look at many of the sub-traditions that we have, that have come over from Europe, from Christendom, from really the height of Christendom in the early modern and modern period. What most of these groups do is say, well the Catholics aren't real Christians. Well the Orthodox, they certainly aren't real Christians. But the truly hated people are the United Reform Church, or the Orthodox Christian Reform Church, or the Protestant Reform Church. Because we in the Christian Reform Church arrived at the deepest truth, and they broke away. And of course the United Reform Church would say, the Christian Reform Church lost their way and broke away, and lost the path, and so we are preserving the truth. What Evangelicalism tries to do is moderate that reactivity, and in a sense say, in a broader way, well it's about the Bible. So a Bible believing church. But then they play those games in other ways. So what Tim Keller really taught me is what preaching is for, is for Evangelism. But even though I was baptized as an infant, and even though there has never been a period of my life where, except now during COVID in a strange way, there has never been a period of my life where I have not participated in the disciplines and rituals of the church. I need to be Evangelized regularly by the Gospel. Because I'm on a spectrum. And again, I've got some other ideas about spectrum thinking versus antithetical thinking, and I think there's a place for both. Becky Pippert, again in the 1970s out of the salt shaker, in the 70s it was called Friendship Evangelism, and now we're putting new words on it. These are all different ways of modulating this. And when you're meeting with a group of people and you're feeling your spidey senses tingle, and you're hearing something that it's proper to maybe decide whether or not this group is right for you, or to try and get a sense of who they are and where they're coming from, or where maybe their systems are a little out of whack, that's all very legitimate. Now, I get, having a YouTube channel has been an exercise in concerning my friends and family. And just about, I didn't appreciate what a boundary water starting a YouTube channel would be, because some people for whom anti-racism is very high on the hierarchy, well why aren't I marching in lockstep with them? And other people for whom bright-line Christianity is of great importance, well Paul is spending time with, I'd eat and drink with him, except I've never seen him in person, Paul is spending time with John Vervecky and the likes of Jordan Peterson, and I was really excited after my conversation with Rafe Kelly, because I see potential for evangelism, and now I just scared a whole bunch of the non-Christians. So, you know, all of our sensitivities to these things are not in and of themselves bad, it's just data in some ways, and so, you know, I don't think it would shock John Vervecky or Rafe Kelly to hear me say, I would like to evangelize them, I would like them to identify as Christians, I would like them to, you know, I have a whole laundry list of agentic items for them and their lives. Hopefully we have enough of a relationship now where they will laugh, and where I could sit down with John Vervecky and he'd say, I think what you really need to do is some Tai Chi, and Rafe Kelly would say, I think you need to probably get in the gym and improve your diet and get in better shape and maybe do some more movement exercises, and that would round you out. And I'm high in openness, and so I'm not terribly reactive to those things, but to evangelize, I think, is to at whatever point people are at, to this is where there's bounded set and center set, and I think both of these things actually are part of the same spectrum, but this is where I'm very center set in my own missiology, that I, and people have noted this on my channel, and it's part of the reason a bunch of different people continue to follow my channel, even if they are anti-Christian to one degree or another, because I don't care where you're at, I take Paul's admonition in Ephesians 6 very seriously, we battle not against flesh and blood, so if you have flesh and blood on you, you are not my enemy, and I'm not going to make you so, and I am not in charge, this is where some of my Calvinism kicks in, it's not my place to colonize them and make them like me, even though I try, that's up to God, finally, but I will love them, and when I think about the best that I want for my friends, I want them to love Jesus, because I think Jesus is, I think Jesus is God, and so I want them to love Jesus, and I want them to live with him, and I want them to live with me, and that's what I want for my friends, and so that both makes me very exclusive, because that's how I feel about Jesus, but it also makes me very inclusive, because I'm not going to see this other person as an enemy, and I think, again, we see that in Jesus all the time, Jesus offended those who were in the first century culture war because he wasn't reactive enough to the contaminations of Hellenism, he was too open for some, and for others, just read the Sermon on the Mount, whoa, he's way too into purity, yep, he's far more into purity than I dare to be, and he's far more open than I dare to be, he's far more all of that, he's both, and that's part of his godness, that Jesus can actually manage that level, and I'm always cutting short on different layers of balance, so I don't know if that answers your question directly, but I hope it's helpful. Thank you. Thank you very much, Paul. We have a question in the chat. For those who are more new, if your mic is not working, you can put a question in the questions for TBK chat, and we'll try to get to it as soon as we can. Then, so we have Gomer Day, who has a question for you, he says, I've been listening to Jonathan Pujerl about angels, demons, and principalities, and I have a difficult time understanding what they are, and able to articulate to others about it. So what are angels, demons, and principalities, and is there a different explanation from the Orthodox Christian and the Protestant? Thank you for your time. I don't know if there's a different explanation from... I'm on this same journey, too, and so my second talk with Jonathan Pujerl, we talked about this stuff, and I was a little confused by him, but now in time, I think I've sort of figured out, and over the last year or so, my thinking about this has changed, not really changed, but deepened. And... When I first listened to Jonathan Pujerl, questions arose listening to him, asking, does he believe in the reality of the angelic and demonic world? And after listening to some more, I thought, yes, he does. But then, how to understand the kinds of things he was saying about it. And I was struggling with that. And... I've been thinking about this and working on this for a while now, and working on it, because I'm a pastor, I'm always trying to communicate. The idea... So I'm rummaging around in our present grab bag of terms and concepts that are broadly available to most of us and might be instructive. And this has come up a lot recently in my videos, this idea of school spirit. We... When we say school spirit, I think many of us know what we're talking about. And we can see right now how, how does that spirit impact us? Well, we kind of know some of it, and we don't know. And is it psychological? Yes. Is it sociological? Yes. And actually, there's a point in Rafe Kelly and John Vervecky's conversation where they go into this, because I can see they're working on the same thing. Now, as a conservative Christian, a small old orthodox Christian, I, because of my formation, am not allergic to things that modernists tag and react to as supernatural. I understand the distinction natural and supernatural. I think it has its place, but I think it's problematic in a number of ways. And we can notice the problem when... Is school spirit supernatural? The word spirit has not been driven from our language because we simply don't have another category for it. And what we want to be able to do, part of the problem with the church right now is that culturally, I think the church... Oh gosh, this is so hard to talk about because it's so much. Language and consciousness is so limiting. The church, those in church and outside of church increasingly don't have enough common language to really understand what each other are saying and doing. And school spirit is sort of a halfway place between them. So when the Apostle Paul, when Jesus comes and drives out demons, and he's talking about the devil, and he drives out demons, do I believe... And again, I think actually, I talked about this in previous question and answers, it's no problem repeating. When you look at the movie The Matrix, there's the mayor of Injun, and there's the key maker, and there's the architect, and there's the... She wasn't the prophet, she was the oracle. In the conceptualization of The Matrix, these were older programs that continued to hold sway over the current iteration of The Matrix that Neo was engaging in. I don't think that's a bad way to understand principalities and powers. In terms of Christian theology, they are not divine, they are created. So they're on that side of the line. In Christian theology, they are rebellious. In other words, they're not in alignment with the will of God. The fact that in the scriptures, these, especially angels, it's very interesting, we don't find demons in the Bible acting like angels. Angels show up in, you know, with manifesting themselves as beings. In the Old Testament, there's the seraphim with six wings. We don't get a lot of physical descriptions of them in the New Testament, except that often they look like young men, and they might be shining, something like that. And you have to understand that there's a doctrine of accommodation that God, that an angel would manifest in a way that was appropriate to the goal of communication at that moment. We don't see demons manifesting themselves. Now we have Jesus, we have Satan coming to Jesus, but there isn't any description as to what form Satan takes. We don't find demons showing up like in the Old Testament scripture, and I think that is significant because demons are rebellious spirits. Angels are obedient servants. But angels aren't made of the same creation stuff, we can use a simulation metaphor. Angels perhaps aren't on the same server we are, on the same game server we are. But God can send them into the program. And the Bible seems to say that there are far older programs at work amongst us. And demons, these rebellious spirits, often try to work through us. Another interesting book to read on this is C.S. Lewis's Screwtape Letters, where C.S. Lewis plays with these ideas. So angels and demons are spirits. I don't think it's difficult for us to understand how here's something kind of crazy that I've been thinking about lately, and again this is all speculative. And what I'm doing on these recorded sessions, these aren't firm, fixed, almost nothing I put on YouTube is firm, fixed thinking, I'm in process. But human beings create spirits. And those spirits continue to seem to live in a way that is immaterial. What is the definition of a ghost? The definition of a ghost seems to be a human created spirit that continues to dwell in an immaterial but yet not disconnected to a material realm. Ghosts are perhaps in some ways human spirits that are stuck. So one of the favorite places my wife and I like to take little weekend trips down to is the Del Coronado in San Diego. That's a haunted hotel. And if you search Del Coronado ghosts, there's some crazy stuff there. And when you stay there there's actually kind of a haunted tour you can go on. And Christians are always sort of, what do we do with this? What do we do with this? And I think all the prohibitions given to Christians from the Old and New Testament are absolutely important. Where this is not something we are to dabble in. And so practices that are dabbling in them, these things aren't to be played with because we don't understand them. But ghosts have been around, you know, and pretty much universal in human experience. How can we understand a ghost? A ghost is, I think in some ways, there was a time before McClatchy High School was there. Before McClatchy High School came into being, there was no such thing as C.K. McClatchy school spirit. Once C.K. McClatchy came into being, it was created by human beings. The naming, the architecture, the history, the landscape, the history of Sacramento, the history of the United States, the history of the United States, the pre-European colonization history, all of those things go into C.K. McClatchy spirit to one degree of intensity or another. Every student that has gone through C.K. McClatchy High School has impacted that school spiritually to one degree or another. Some students have impacted it tremendously, others not so much. Some principals tremendously. In a sense, there is a similar spirit of C.K. McClatchy High School that governs shapes, molds, but is also formed by human beings. And I think perhaps that's the right way to think about the spiritual world. And to think about angels and demons, these, again, I can use completely orthodox language to describe what I just said. That these are spirits created by God. Now, C.K. McClatchy High School, that school spirit is created by God. But see, now this is where we get into, this is where modernistic Christianity starts getting tripped up because its categories aren't terribly useful. And deism starts starting to horn in. But these are, and again, I think the Matrix movie has kind of an interesting way into this. These are old programs that still have a role, but are not disconnected from these things. So maybe, I don't know, you know, like my videos, I don't mind repeat questions because when they're formulated in a different time and space, I learn more. That's why I do this. I learn more as I give these answers, so this has been really good for me. So thank you. I hope that helps. Thank you, Paul. Do we have a question from the voice chat now? Well, do we have quite a few in the, no we don't. Okay, good, good. You're doing well. Sorry, Valerie. I should shut up and let you do your job. No, that's okay. That's all right. So, does anybody have a question from the voice chat? Ed, we don't have to go the whole two hours. Part of me in doing this is, you know, how much appetite is there for this? And it's helpful for me because for me this is another way to get feedback from my videos and one of the things that you learn as a minister is getting good feedback is really hard. We do have a question. Oh, go ahead. We do have a question, but it's kind of a difficult question. I've been wondering if I should ask it, Paul. Go for it. Let's go pre-COVID, all right? Okay. Let's say you were still, we were still in those days when COVID was just a vague rumor we heard something about China. You've said numerous times on your videos that, well, you're a pastor for a small dying church and I've wondered, like, could that be something that would make your church not be a small dying church? Is there anything that could be done or as far as you can tell, or is it just kind of a lost case? I don't think it's a lost case. Dying? I'm a Christian. Dead people come back from the grave. One of the things I'm working on right now is I see one of the things that my church needs to do right now is figure out what to do with what God has done through my YouTube channel. And so in the next few weeks I'll be creating a Living Stones app and I'm trying to find a giving vendor that I can use to help me that works internationally and part, I have always kept my church channel and my personal channel separate because I think that's important. And some people have wanted to support my personal channel and they've done that through Patreon or and other ways and I think that's totally appropriate and so I keep that separate. But the church YouTube channel has grown to about 900 subscribers which has been interesting and there was some interest on my adult Sunday school class and other sermons and I think that's appropriate too. And during COVID we've had more and more people participating in small group ministries on Zoom and online and that's been good. I don't want my online world to flood Living Stones or the local meetup because the locality aspect is different from the online aspect so in that sense I try to keep them under appreciate and respect the two different domains but also try and work on the interplay between them. Because the majority of my income comes from Living Stones and so I try to figure out how to not shortchange them with all the interest in me from the internet. But at the same time the internet ministry which I would call it is potentially beneficial to Living Stones so all the while I'm trying to figure out where do these two things meet in a healthy way. And so COVID actually is an opportunity for our church to begin to figure out how to do online on-site integration. And so this Sunday we're starting what I call our studio opening where we'll be streaming on Facebook Live, Living Stones Service and I did that before COVID. But Rick who some of you know from the Discord, Rick is working with me with OBS and a video camera and we're figuring out how to be able to stream more stuff from Living Stones. But I'm doing this carefully because if I open up a Bible study and five people show up locally and 75 show up online I have a problem. So because the local people then kind of get crowded out. So I'm trying to figure out how to do both and so I'd say when we have a Living Stones app those of you who wish to support and encourage the church that app will give you an opportunity to do so. But the church has been nothing but supportive of my work. And the local meetup, you know, and so the coolest thing for me has been not only is there the church but there's the local meetup and that has become its own thing. And so I'm also at the same time thinking how does the local meetup fit into this picture? And it already has because Joey and Rick and Tyler came along and started this Discord and for me this Discord has been amazing even though I'm not all that vocal on it all the time and I do more lurking and so on and so forth because I harvest a tremendous amount from you people. But I, it's okay to go slow with this stuff and the church isn't going to go bankrupt this year but I want to find ways of of growing all of this in as good a way as possible and a lot of what that means is taking our time because I keep telling now with the transition people are excited to quick do things I say let's not do everything today let's do a small thing and then let's learn from it and then we'll keep growing it incrementally and that's what I'm doing with these question and answers so. Thanks for the question Joe, go ahead. It also suggests to me that your church doesn't perceive itself as small and dying. No they don't, I talk about it that way because I think that helps contextualize it but our church does have we're going to lose some people through COVID some of our seniors that have been long term faithful givers who aren't going to be in church for months perhaps and some of whom might be looking for other local churches that are closer because they can't drive 30 minutes into church like they've been doing for the last 30 years and we're not churches are changing dramatically and this middle sized church which we kind of are we're a small church of 50 people pre-COVID who gather on Sunday who have a full time minister I'm really expensive my salary is like 70% of the church's budget because and the church doesn't have a problem with that because they want me doing this job and the church feels enormously validated by this church and this church by this online following and this church has always been extremely generous with my time they say Paul we support you, we pay you, you're our minister we have expectations on you for our care and for our local ministry here but we're this church is property not of us as individuals but of God's kingdom and so if our church can have a broader impact via the internet praise God let's support that that's our ministry and the church has been great with that so that's what we're doing thanks Paul gives me a better idea thank you Paul, Mike Skye here following on from that and what Joe was saying I think it's really interesting that the next question which I think someone else should ask is I think there's an interesting discussion to be had about how churches can react to COVID oh ok ok he doesn't want to say I'm going to read his question if that's alright for him he said the internet tends to create monopolies particularly for information based products do you worry that the future of moving sermons online and the fact that this would create competitive when it takes all the environment that would mostly replace local churches and pastors with mega churches that don't have the physical constraints and would optimize for a sort of entertainment platform value instead yes yes of course that is already that has been happening a long time in America so Richard Shuler Robert Shuler in Southern California Reformed Church of America planted the you know started with a drive through church once with every new with every new technology including the written word the printing press the recorded word, radio television we have seen these distortions of the church and we're going to see it again now I think however that God continues to use these things to God continues to use these things for his church and so yeah we're going to get a lot wrong but you know so on one hand Tim Keller who is a very popular preacher when I greatly respect you know would always didn't want to put his sermons online because he was afraid people wouldn't come to the local church that was a legitimate concern I'm very glad he put his sermons online because as a preacher I needed to hear his sermons and I'm always preaching Sunday morning Carlos asked in the Thursday in the Eastern Hemisphere question and answer I really have to do another one of those Carlos asked is there a new ecumenism and many people on this discord server they might go to a Roman Catholic or an orthodox service and they would get any sermon at those services in those traditions and now via YouTube they're getting teaching from Bishop Barron but also a Calvinist minister so yeah it's all part of the good and the bad mix that we're dealing with so I tend to think though that we'll have problems but we'll get through I think we've been doing that for 2000 years yeah a wise man once taught me that most of life consists of exchanging one set of problems for another the book of John Van Donk exactly okay I have two more questions can I follow sorry if you've got more questions I'm going to stop in a moment Arches has taken the opposite route in that we've gone what I call hyperlocal and really probably about half our congregation so far have been on the live stream in some way or other whether it be reading prayers or singing songs we have what we call phone trap families it's been good for keeping our cohesion as a local fellowship and gaining a few extra people but not enormous numbers maybe max from 10 new people but yeah it's been a different way to do that by actually making it like an old fashioned local newspaper you know where everyone's name gets in the newspaper once a year yep and I think that's cool and I think there's place for all of that and if we can keep learning from each other we can we can learn from the TV churches we can learn from the local only churches and I've I've I see churches you know Jesus says two or three are gathered I mean he goes down that low so and so it's that low and then you get to the book of Revelation and you have these visions of multitudes of people made from every tribe and tongue and language so that's that's the span of that's the span of Christ's kingdom cool thank you we have two more questions in the text chat I'm going to read Dave's question what is your view on salvation when considering what our role human effort may play in it or not specifically in regards to Ephesians 2 8 for it is by grace that you have been saved through faith and this is not from yourselves it is the gift of God though we recognize we can do nothing except by grace do you believe that through faith part involves some sort of human cooperation with God in the sense that faithfulness might be bound up with what faith is or is salvation not dependent on our cooperation in any way or perhaps there is even another way you understand faith and this is there perhaps a paradox that can't be fully understood here well this is this is that that very difficult question of trying to suss out talking about agency with respect to a god that is not a part of the system so pantheism says God is the system the most common the most common error recently with respect to God is that the idea is that God is truly one being within the system and again back to the third commandment where God says do not represent me with any element within the system to say that God is the system that well that's pantheism and what that does with agency that's the flaw of the movie Avatar where they're having this all this all this big pantheistic thing with the with the big blue people and their tree and all of this stuff and here these evil humans come and they're you know unobtainium and they're raping the planet and this guy gets into a simulation basically and becomes one of the the Avatar you know on and on and on the climax of the movie the the the writer violates pantheism because if God is simply the system then whatever happens happens there's no good bad right or wrong there just is and God is the system is I'm just going to use words of scripture because that's the safest way for me to talk about it you know in him with the Apostle Paul quotes a pagan quote in him we live and move and have our being so but but that then sets up the question okay what is not God well clearly in Christianity there are rebellious spirits there is rebellion and then how will God deal with that rebellion when it comes to the question of what we mean by this word salvation that's what we mean okay now if you're talking if I'm talking to an evangelical Protestant and I use that word salvation they will hear going to heaven when you die alright that is a reduction of that word salvation when you look at how that word salvation is used throughout the Bible well the when the sailors through Jonah into the water they were saved from the storm and so that word salvation is far bigger and broader and deeper than we appreciate then we come to the question of agency for it is by grace you have been saved through faith okay let's understand grace as God's loving generous disposition towards us saved let's not reduce that simply to hell escapism how then do we understand faith how then do we understand faith well let's think about meaning when we talk about meaning and again you know I'm going to use some verveky term it's transjective I might interface with it with a feeling Jordan Peterson says do what's meaningful not what's expedient Jordan Peterson is saying you've got a little gyroscope in your consciousness called meaning do what's meaningful now right now there's a lot of people spray painting stuff tearing down stuff yelling about stuff that feels enormously meaningful is there are there actions in alignment or in rebellion against what and with what that's a really complicated question I'm not going to put them on one side of an antithesis or another completely and again I think this is where Jonathan Peugeot's video about protest is so helpful protest is legitimate God comes and saves the children the children of Israel in Egypt because their cry went up that's what the book of Exodus says book of Exodus also says they didn't know his name that means that God opens unaddressed mail so God comes to them God comes to Moses and says okay Moses you've always had pretenses of being a would-be savior you're up to bat there Moses is like I've tried the saving business before and I don't think I want to go there again did Moses have any faith? no he didn't have faith in himself he didn't have much faith in God was Israel saved through faith? okay Moses went along God hardened Pharaoh's heart the children of Israel were motivated but inconsistently so what faith does role play? how can we have language that talks about the role God played in Moses' heart and Pharaoh's heart and the hearts of the people of Israel we're using we're doing the best we can with this language to try and map out models for what is happening and then responses to it like Calvinism or Arminianism are also models trying to get this mapping right trying to up the resolution so there have been times in my life when I have been faithless and that faithlessness is rightly called sin and that sin and my faithlessness have sent me down roads in my life of pain but I have seen again and again that God has used even my rebellion to turn it to my good Romans 8 all things must work together and we see God doing that again and again and again the question of agency and faith like meaning faith feels well I feel faith well that's good but does that feeling faith exhaust what we're talking about when we use the word faith no Christianity certain branches of it like Calvinism has long talked about faith as a gift and we see that in the Bible someone comes up to Jesus wanting a miracle wanting their child healed would Jesus be against healing a child Jesus doesn't rush in and say oh my gosh there's a child that's sick somewhere let me go and fix this Jesus doesn't act like that Jesus didn't know that there was a child sick well at any given point I think all of us know that there's always a child who is sick but Jesus uses the moment and the story and the specific interaction to achieve something if it's possible Jesus can you hear my child what does Jesus say anything's possible for those who believe you know and then you know give me faith I need faith and so obviously belief is a part of this equation when we ask questions like how does this work that's a legitimate question it's an honest question we should be a little careful with these questions because the part of me that wants to know how does this work in a sense wants to reenact original sin which is what at least one aspect of it it's saying to God I can establish my own thing I don't need you I can do better than you isn't that what happens in the garden there's suspicion God doesn't have our best interests at heart isn't that the cry of the the younger son of the prodigal son story I want your stuff and I don't want you meddling and even when the prodigal son repeats the Pharaoh's quote I'll go back to dad and I'll shine him up and because that would be at least an upgrade because he at least treats his workers humanely and so even and I know people hate it when I say this in the parable of the prodigal son even the turning that the younger and the far off field using Pharaoh's rebellious speech the father the father says I'll take it I'll take it is itself centered might it even be in some ways rebellious I'll work with that and so God is both more picky than we imagine he should be and more open than we think is responsible that was really well said thank you why don't we open it up for a question from the voice chat does anybody have a question for Paul I have one more question in the text chat so we can go to that one Indy says I have always had a problem with the overwhelming support of the death penalty by the Christian community am I mistaken that John A covers the way God views this after the new covenant as well as in many more red letter verses good question it's always important to recognize that our vision has been mediated by agentic beings who in the case of American media probably any media in the world have a political agenda the focus on the the idea that the support for the death penalty by Christians is overwhelming is I think overstated the mainline churches in the middle of the 20th century or they're called they weren't called mainline without a reason when you look at the the Presbyterian the PC USA Presbyterian Church of America the United Methodist Church the size the Episcopal Church used to be various Baptist denominations the Northern Baptist denominations these were enormous groups and people who identify as Christians in American society Democrats and Republicans about 50-50 pay attention how much on the news you hear about all of these Christians who think this and think that it's just not an accurate representation Christians have for a very long time had issues with the death penalty why? well a capital sentence was executed on the founder of that religion capital punishment has been around for as long as we've had human civilization now these questions like so many of the hot button politicized questions are dumbed down and made shallow for political purposes abortion is another great thing you know what the abortion fight is really about is legal collaboration of doctors you never hear it framed that way capital punishment is I think a similar issue where because of the because of the nature of certain of the elements of it I think it gets confused is it more humane for the state to take someone's life or to put them in a box for 50 years these are hard questions I was what was I watching last I was watching some TV and there's just a lot of there's just a lot of propaganda out there of people who their political enemies have been was it it was it was one of the usual suspects gays or abortion or something like that I could never be a Christian because Christians do this it's kind of like I could never go to church because they're full of sinful people you can find Christians across the political spectrum now it's and then again we have to factor in Tom Holland and to what degree are Americans that never go to church but their moral compass that they use to critique and call out Christianity is predominantly Christian in terms of its origin and in many ways alignment so when people say I could never be a Christian because I think life is sacred well there you go the founder of Christianity died was killed of a capital crime and is uniquely responsible for us understanding the category of human and that human life ought to be preserved and enemies ought to be loved so if you can't recognize the Christianity in your complaint you probably haven't read enough so that's that's kind of an answer I hope that's not I don't understand that dismissively at all it's just all of the all of the arguments that mitigate against capital punishment also come from Christianity so it's a very long-standing Christian conversation yeah I understand that and that's kind of why I hesitate to ask well many of the questions I do have because they are so nuanced and takes so long to flesh out so yeah I kind of apologize for that but that's okay you know it's it's interesting David Fuller just put out a video on the intellectual dark web and I thought there was a really good video and he talked about the IDW being a an internet protocol he got that from somebody else being an internet protocol where we're going to take the time to give more nuanced answers as opposed to what gets fed to us as cattle so it's a great question I want to we we might have one time for one more question from the voice chat um um would anybody like to ask Paul a question uh hello yes I was uh I was just wondering what's a good way of going about kind of training your faith muscles that the apostle Paul often writes about their faith life in the metaphor training for like the Olympic Games I was wondering how does how does someone actually go about trying to trying to work that into their life my answer to that is is so common so old so dull um but yeah I don't know a better answer go to church and start being the church why so my friend Warren Mills who um you know I met through this and was from Australia wrote this book about the golden rule and one of the things I really like about the book is that you you you build your faith muscles by trying to love and not just thinking about loving not just imagining loving not just assuming you know what love is but by trying to love and you know I always say that there's two lines the line there's two signs one that says wanting to be loved and wanting to love and there's a huge line behind wanting to be loved everybody you know Freddie Mercury find me he says find me somebody to love but what he's really wanting is to be loved because there's no shortage of people that want to be loved and so figure out how to love the people that you share an apartment with or home with and what the church is is a place to try to go and figure out how to love people and many of those people at church are difficult to love and they're sinners and they have flaws and problems and so try to start loving people the sermon this week has I'm dealing again with the sermon on the mount and it's interesting where Jesus says you know don't don't give money don't your left hand know what your right hand give money but don't let your left hand know what your right hand is doing pray but pray in secret you know the third thing fast and that's that's about dealing with our desires you know our appetites but fast and secret and so and I've been thinking actually a lot about this because I have the unfortunate situation where I am known to be a Christian because I'm a Christian minister it would be a really cool thing to not tell anybody that you're a Christian to go to church quietly and secretly to not necessarily secretly people will see you there to to do all of these things and draw no attention to yourself in terms of Jesus hierarchy that's at the that's that's what we ought to be doing but we as Christians are we want attention we want praise from the public we're insecure we're defensive they say yeah that's all those problems yeah go be with those people and try and love them and yeah that'll build your muscles have a difficult child be in a bad marriage have a contentious neighbor have a homeless person that is really annoying and won't leave you alone and try to figure out what love means that'll grow those faith muscles well said there is one more question if you want to tackle it or we could call it no we've got a few minutes yet so Alexander asks how does that do in secret jive with the spreading of the gospel yeah I got caught I got quite asked that question and I'm wrestling with that in the sermon and let me well I've got my sermon I've got a I've got the rough draft I'm recording video with this so that what's on the channel won't be to so so I start with even though you all can't see it'll be on the video I start with the sermon on the mount and the sermon on the mount begins with these really strange beatitudes because if you know if you look at the beatitudes in the Psalms and you read Jesus beatitudes it's like this is different you know a Psalm beatitude would be blessed are the righteous for God will bless them very karmic and Jesus says blessed are the poor in spirit for theirs is the kingdom of heaven what the poor in spirit you mean the people who get crushed the the the people who always pick the wrong church to go to the pastors that have dramatically unsuccessful ministries you know on and on and on blessed are the peacemakers for well what happens to peacemakers peacemakers get shot at by both sides for they will be called children of God no they're going to be called a pain in the neck and they're going to be driven out of town you know these are the strangest beatitudes he starts there and then he says then the next thing he says is highly participatory you are the salt of the earth if you lose your saltiness you have no use of course salt can't be unsalty chemically speaking you are a city on the hill city on the hill can't be hidden you are the light of the world it's of no use to put it under a bushel so you say this is total promotion and so Christians hear that it's like okay I'm going to be a city on the hill I'm going to be a light to the world well how am I going to do this well then he goes into Jesus and the law and it's very selective and he talks about murder and anger and adultery and lust and divorce and you read that and it's like well why divorce well divorce and I don't want to put guilt trips on anyone here because marriage is really hard and divorce sometimes is the better way but divorce is a failure and but again our God takes this is a this is a this is a God who crucifixion looked like the most dramatic failure a would-be rescuer of Israel could suffer but you know he's the king of the world so divorce what is what is what is with a divorce a divorce means that you can't get along with this one person productively for a long period of time and you know it's not entirely up to you it's you know potentially only 50% up to you and so anger and murder adultery lust divorce oath taking it's a very public thing and Jesus says don't be standing on the corner making oaths retaliation and then loving your enemy and then he ends that section with this incredible thing be perfect the way your father in heaven is perfect and we hear that we think okay I'm going to be I'm going to be morally pure okay yes please be morally pure but do so quietly and do so in a way that nobody else recognizes try that try that level of purity and and and but then he connects that perfection with God causing the sun to shine on the just and the unjust and God causing the rain to fall on the just and the unjust in other words God is generous with his enemies which is something that in the middle of a culture war both sides say that's not affordable but that's what God does since Jesus says okay here's the law well what does that mean these are the things you should be famous for you should be famous for not getting angry you should be famous for not even lusting you should be famous for not divorcing you should be famous for not being defensive you should be famous for not being retaliatory you should be famous for loving your enemies but when you do these things and then he goes to the next part and he says when you do these things don't let anybody know you're doing them and the truth is that when you do these things don't let anybody know you're doing them and the truth is this whole call out culture we have going right now it's all exhibiting anger there's something very non-Jesus about that now you might say well Jesus showed anger yes he did he showed anger in a variety of times and places but was the anger well it was in the clearing of the temple again this is what's so hard about Jesus is that he's so nuanced all the way down but don't be famous for your anger don't be famous for your lust don't be famous for divorce don't be famous for being defensive for retaliation like Lamech in the Old Testament don't be famous for loving your enemies and so when the Amish set up a scholarship fund for the children of the guy who murdered that schoolhouse schoolhouse full of Amish girls that's something to be famous for but the Amish didn't publicize it the press did and so well so then what should I do well he basically deals with the people around him well you should give your money away well why should I give my money away well then your money doesn't have power over you well if I give my money away and they name a university after me is that what you're looking for no just give it away and don't let anybody know oh but then I don't receive anything for it yeah that's right and fasting and when you fast when you're holding yourself back don't draw attention to it well I drive a Prius well I drive a 20 year old car well I yeah yeah yeah and he says yeah you got your reward congratulations there it is enjoy and the same with prayer and don't call attention to yourself because you know I was thinking about all of the stuff going on right now your father we we finally serve an audience of one and this is this is this is who we are to but but here's the crazy thing about again this audience of one this is God and so when we serve an audience of one we serve his kingdom those gifts done that way bear fruit we don't see but God does and in the apocalypse the final unveiling of everything the truth will be seen and the crazy generous people that we probably thought ill of and that's that's this whole reputational inversion and so in a sense I always play with the idea that maybe out there in public you should be you have to figure out how to do this without sinning but but don't have a reputation for a for being a godly person just just fly beneath the radar don't call attention to yourself and the thing is these ideas in past generations this was part of the Christian package and past generations give quietly give faithfully don't make a show of it and when I look at Living Stones Church part of the reason I esteem the people at this church so much is that is exactly who they've been and I you know they they give faithfully they give quietly they someone needs something they show up here's a little envelope under the door here your car broke down you don't have enough money here's a car don't tell anybody and the really crafty ones and again you can you can you can turn this into a counterproductive game too and I mean there's we have innumerable ways we defeat ourselves with respect to this stuff but and again like so much about Jesus we we we our hearts take these things and twist them and Jesus always seems contradictory but if you watch him and if you read it and if you meditate on it that's pretty simple do the right thing do it quietly don't draw attention to yourself that's really hard because we do it in order to gain status and Jesus says take the low chair be low status climb down the ladder because you know what there's just a few people up there at the top with sharp elbows vying for the top down at the bottom that's where everybody is why don't you give them a step up so good I think that about exhausts it unless you have a follow-up question Alexander it doesn't look like he had it okay so I have someone I had someone typing but then they stopped but that was really well said thank you very much Paul well thank you I have to start I've I had the problem that I've had I usually try I have too much stuff to post on my channel and that isn't always helpful but and so I've I've been recording these and collecting these now maybe again I think Shelley's observation that we should have some that aren't recorded or I think that's good too but I'm still just trying to figure all this stuff out so I'll post this on the channel and again always trying to figure this out my entire channel is a rough draft and you're all and again I am I am indebted to all of you for your attention and for what you've done in this discord server and I that's I you know when people come to this server I feel that it's just like I feel at church you know people come to my church maybe I don't have time to to see them or meet with them individually but they're in the they're in the arms of the body of Christ where they will be where they will be well cared for and and I don't want to give anybody I don't want to give anybody the wrong idea if you're an atheist and you're not a Christian and you still love the discord amen that's I wish the church were more like the discord in that way not my church but the church in general because I don't want there to be barriers so so thank you all and have a good rest of the whatever part of the day you have left thank you for your time Paul take care bye bye