https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=R4C1VkE0LR8

 So we're in business. All right, well, here's to another Discord talk, Q&A with Paul. And so I'll start off with the first question. This is from Topher. And a couple weeks ago, Paul, we briefly touched on the metaphor of the pastor as a gardener who at least partially has the multi-generational view of community health in focus. I was hoping you could expand on that and then also the question of how that is relevant to the emotional fuel of the protests and riots and the health that the pastor is hopefully attending to if it's not too, I guess, subjective in ways. What is the secret sauce? What is the soil, the water, sunlight, and seeds of a beautiful community? Wow, that's a big question. If you go to my Twitter or my blog, you'll see something to the effect of calling myself a word gardener of the age to come. Some of this language I get from Eugene Peterson. Some of this I get from the Genesis story of Adam and Eve in the garden as gardeners. Part of the reason I use a metaphor like this is in pastoral ministry, pastors don't make things grow. The plants grow because that's how God made them. There's an environment from which the plants grow. What pastors tend to do is garden. They tend the plants. Pastors are, it's obviously a shepherding metaphor, they tend the flock. But some of the same things happen with flocks too. The shepherd doesn't make the sheep grow. So that's where that comes from. Now, the protests. One of the things that I've been thinking about with these protests has been I've been comparing them to the history of protests, the history of the civil rights protests in the American South, which was the, it's important. We lose a lot of resolution with history. And so if you want to understand the complexity of the American Civil Rights Movement, there was a ton of conflict in what we clump into one thing, the Civil Rights Movement. There were varieties of competing voices that had different strategies. Two of the dominant figures of the time were Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. and Malcolm X. And so just for the sake of fame, it's helpful to compare and contrast those two visions of how social justice and racial reconciliation would be pursued. Dr. King was a pastor and he was the son of a pastor. And the church, the black church in the South, was the seedbed of that movement. Martin Luther King Jr. was a member of the Nation of Islam, which is an entirely different thing. It's important to recognize that both leaders were religious leaders. There were various streams that influenced Dr. King, including the movement to liberate India from colonial England. And it's helpful to remember some of the history right after World War II. There was a fair amount of unrest in India before the Second World War. Leaders like Gandhi during the Second World War sort of bided their time during that war. But when the war was ended, they began to move. And how could India be able to move? And how could Gandhi make change in India and free it from its colonial overlords in a sense and do so peacefully? Well, it was, you know, Gandhi's movement was successful, but there's a really good biography. It's a dual biography of Churchill and Gandhi. And it's worth reading because you see the difference between the two. And it's worth reading because you sort of see both sides of it. Part of Indian independence was also the fact that the two World Wars basically destroyed England as an empire, as a seagoing empire. And part of why the British Empire unraveled itself was just the changes in economics, changes in the world. They simply could no longer afford an empire, at least that style of empire. And so Gandhi's pushing and England's retreat were both part of what had happened there. Dr. King learned as he went. He was in his 20s when he sort of got roped into leading the Montgomery bus boycott. And so he was learning as he went and there were varying voices in the broader movement that were trying to influence Dr. King. He was obviously influenced by his seminary education and his doctoral education at Boston University. So there's a lot that goes into this. When I look at the protests today, Jack Jenkins has recently put out a book on the religious left and they are having a part to play now. But what we sort of see is something akin to a people movement fueled mostly by images and slogans now on social media. And their capacity to draw large numbers of people who are in a sense feeding off of a social religious imaginary to try to express themselves and voice very low resolution demands for the people. That's a very different thing than what you discover when you read histories of the movement to liberate India from the British Empire and the movement to change the, to get rid of the Jim Crow South legislation. One of the differences is who is tending that garden. Someone like Martin Luther King Jr. was a pastor and he became a movement leader very quickly, was not able to pastor a church because the movement grew too large. But there was pastoring that was going on. There were a lot of people who were going to be pastors and they were going to be doing a lot of things. And so, they were, they had self-identity into these churches. In a sense, what sort of happened in the American Civil Rights Movement is that the movement was not able to do that. It was a very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very general. This may be some of your piqued assumptions, you know what I mean? But remember, I talked about this earlier. I talked about this earlier. We'll carry on for another minute to think it through, what I mean? Let's talk about it for a few more seconds. All right. So, a couple things to remember. Look, if I say there's a sort of narrative or narrative to this work, I'm applying that as I experiment quickly at different places. on a first name basis and to a degree I'm doing some pastoring but when when someone called Job the pastor of the discord that was exactly right because Job spends a lot more time here than I do and he and Joey and others pastor this community so and they are gardening this community they don't make the discord grow but it grows because it's the kind of thing that they are tending and with the ways that people you know again I've been interested in the ways that other discord servers are different the ways that I see Job and and and others you know Shelley, Sherry, many of you who are really in leadership roles here even though you don't necessarily have titles I see how this discord is different from other discords it's because you're all gardening alright I could use some of these administrative powers that I'm not um probably don't have to have so so that maybe hopefully fleshes out the metaphor to to see what I mean by that both in terms of church but also in terms of the gardening that you all are doing and you're doing it both as gardeners and as the plants and pastors do that too. Is that is that helpful at all Andrew? yeah well Topher isn't here I think I like that answer okay so does anyone have any questions I think a lot of people here put in questions already in the channel but we'll just go open up for a few seconds alright there was one from Andrew K that I think you sort of responded to a bit but I was wondering if you could maybe I think it would be interesting for other people to sort of hear it. So Paul has told me about listening being probably the most useful way to convert others in a way. I was wondering that though all the listening you, Paul, do as a pastor are there times where you tell someone to do something is even, like is that even worded right? and so I guess his question is basically how have you sort of had to change in a way and also had to use that. Yeah. Here's here's a rule you learn as a parent don't make threats you can't follow up on and what church has become in North America are voluntary organizations and so what that means is that church discipline as it was practiced by pastors in the Dominican Republic as it was practiced by churches in North America before the Second World War is almost a non-entity when churches try to discipline someone well they'll be they'll be gone before you know any formal discipline can actually take place and so pastors have very limited means of control in terms of what people will tolerate from them. Now pastors, most pastors understand that and that has made pastors adopt a far less dictatorial and directive approach and pastors have sort of migrated to that quietly there are still churches out there that really like the direct approach but the church has to be able and willing to follow up on that. Now there have been times in my ministry when I have basically told someone to do something or there would be a consequence and most of the time I will only do it if I know I can guarantee the consequence but those times are rare. I think this is a huge weakness in the North American church because church discipline is a really helpful tool to help people face things they don't want to face but that's sort of the way that we're at right now because most of the time giving someone a direct command do this or or what and you'd better because once people figure out that you're your threats are empty well then then you're just then you just look silly but you know Jesus and his disciples there was a lot built into that disciple mechanism where if Jesus would tell his disciples to do something well they'd better do it or they're no longer a disciple. There's a great story in the Old Testament when David is thirsty and his men break through enemy lines to bring back a drink from a stream that David was pining for and it's a great story because it shows the devotion of David's men to him and then David feels humbled by their devotion because as a good leader he did not want his friends risking their life just so they could quench his thirst and what that taught David was be a little careful about what you say especially if your followers are really devoted to you so you know it's funny there was a situation once where we were renting to another congregation and that congregation in many ways it was a black congregation and again if you read the beginning of Dr. King's book when he came to his congregation one of the first things he did as a black pastor was you know make sure that the the governing board of the church was fully submitted to whatever vision he would give them that's tends to be the way a lot of black churches work that's not the tradition of the Dutch Reformed and being a Dutch Reformed pastor with a lot of African-Americans in my church were raised in black churches I'm always trying to encourage them to not just be the pastoral yes group but to tell me what they think but we were renting to an African-American church and this church was really taking advantage of a number of things and one of the members of my church who who is also a member of another black church she goes to that black church at an early hour and then our church later she was just fed up with me because I didn't enforce a line with these other people she says this would never have happened in a black church I said that's right and but my tack with this other pastor was tended to be more patient in the end they moved on they tried things but you know we had structured the relationship in certain ways that there were limits to what they could and couldn't do we never gave them keys to the building and so you know we would just say no to things but that's it's all a part of it's all a part of working relationships very nice I actually have a question and sort of I was thinking this sort of came up when I was going through a conversation with Jonathan Cajot and I was thinking do you think an increase in like the recognition of symbolism and deeper ideas has increased the need of traditional Christianity denominations and this movement towards some of the older churches Catholicism, Orthodoxy and and I think you've noticed and I think you notice this in the conversation when you were talking with Jonathan about this strange movement of some younger people I think also Mary Cohan has expressed this sort of expressed the phenomenon of you know people like why would people convert to Catholicism it's like this old church why would they do that and you know do you think maybe it's a recognition of the symbolism and I also was thinking about Tolkien and maybe some people noticing that I mean for me personally that was influencing me taking faith more seriously that's a good question is the is the rise of interest in the Orthodox and the Roman Catholic a function of symbolism or is the symbolism the interest in symbolism also an indicator of the same thing that is beneath the rise in these more sacramental churches I you know so I was looking at on YouTube it was serving me up some videos of I think it was this Bishop Fulton Sheen which in some ways was the Bishop Baron before Bishop Baron and you know he he gave his talks on stage with his vestments and you know the the crosses and I as a dyed in the wool lowish church Protestant look at that and think of Liberace and it's like I I I don't think I would ever do that sort of thing I think the I think the the desire for symbolism the desire for much more deeply liturgical and sacramental churches is a function of the the declining modernism and again you can see this in architecture what is modernist architecture what is modernist furniture I'm people people are hungering to live in an enchanted world you know that's what Tolkien offered that's what Lewis offered and and symbolism is in some ways the the native language of that enchantment so I don't I'm not at all surprised at the at the the movement towards those denominations I think it's also it's also important to note that these denominations are highly hierarchical the the priest reports to his bishop the bishop to his archbishop the the archbishops to the cardinals the cardinals to to the pope that's and the opposite spectrum of seeker style non-denominational congregations these things aren't accidental these different elements but they're all symbolic of different aspects and again this is where Peugeot is so powerful different aspects of reality in this way there's a reason the Protestant Reformation happened and took the directions it did some of those things were important ways to try to address things in the church other things are lamentable from it so I I think I think what we're seeing in this movement towards the sacramental the symbolic is is part of the natural cycling if you were of this of of the church and I'm and I think I think the church is stronger I think a lot of people there there are many so we look at Roman Catholic and Orthodox and we imagine well there's that but there's astounding diversity within the the Roman Catholic Church which I would know better than the Orthodox there are orders there are different different churches that practice different rights you know the different rights have different traditions so there's tremendous diversity there but now in terms of churches in the world there's astounding diversity so I see this as just sort of part of the process of our culture readjusting from the excesses of modernism while hopefully not losing some of its powers and since you sort of brought in sacrament Balkan Dark had a question that sort of touched on that questions in your recent video on critical theory you talked about how sacrament is something material that connects us to something immaterial can you explain what you mean when you say that meaning is sacrament for Jordan Peterson given that meaning is immaterial or what is the immaterial thing that Jordan Peterson is trying to connect that's a great question that's a great question and a fair point to make on my observation when I say meaning is is Jordan Peterson sacrament I should probably say the experience of meaning because the experience of meaning is not meaning itself and you know I think John Vervecky gosh he's colonized me in all sorts of ways you know meaning is one of these many things that is transjective as he would say back and forth and so meaning but so so what's our side of it the experience of meaning and so when Jordan Peterson says do what is meaningful not what is expedient that that experience of meaning is functions sacramentally so I'd have to I'd have to alter what I say there because there's a sacrament itself you know then you could push and say well is the is the host the wafer the bread and the wine are those sacraments or they functioning sacramentally for us so sacraments are in in my tradition are signs and seals are signs and seals material you know the dollar bill is a sacrament to the dollar so so yeah fair question and thanks for the chance to nuance it I hope that I hope that clears it up it's the experience of meaning that functions sacramentally in Jordan Peterson system alright so the next one is from Anamique and what do you see going forward with the IDW movement are there any potential developments that either excite or worry you well first question is going to be what is what on earth is the IDW because I and this might be totally unfair and maybe demonstrates my ignorance Eric Weinstein names it but Jordan Peterson embodied it I think and to the degree that the IDW at least my what I think of as the IDW I haven't seen anyone embody it the way that Jordan Peterson did and so what Jordan Peterson can do in the future I think is deeply tied to whatever it is we mean by this and okay so what do I mean by IDW one aspect is clearly the capacity to have as as my friend Rod Hare says 10 percent conversations the capacity to have conversations across culture war battlefields that are productive so if we if we define the IDW in that way then in some ways John Verveckis project is very much included and at the heart of the IDW if we under if we define the IDW as pushing back on what exactly are we pushing back on is it post-modernity is it critical theory is it is it political correctness is it the tyrannical left if if that's the IDW then you know Glenn Lowry and John McWhorter in my opinion are two of its brightest lights and very much would include Eric and Brett Weinstein in that number and many many others when I think of the IDW though it includes at least the at least the appreciation and fear in the fear of the Lord type sense fear of the religious layer and Eric has teased at that Brett has pointed to it briefly I think Ben Shapiro is to bought into the political aspect roles that he's playing I've Jordan is the only one I saw well John Verveckis too but of course John comes out in different ways I mean Jordan did something different and he was willing to skirt lines that make a lot of well and to say you know it would be unfair to say that John Verveckis isn't skirting those lines too Jordan is skirting those lines with Christianity and some some very peculiar ways and so I my understanding of the IDW really centers around Jordan Peterson and so its future is tied to Jordan and I think I I think I think my evidence for this is the fact that when Jordan went silent the IDW sort of disappeared because we needed a name for Jordan that wasn't Jordan and I think Eric has a tremendous gift of articulating and naming things and I think with his IDW idea he named it so I'm gonna go, Carlos actually had a follow up question from the church discipline question that is or do you think this is easy divorce contributing to breakdown of marriages as spouses can avoid their spouse instead of facing them with the consequences so try to remember exactly yeah there's no there's no thing studied that has generated more study committees in the history of the christian reform church than divorce and remarriage this is an issue that was brought to Jesus that's two thousand years ago Jesus commented on Moses treatment of it that was what maybe twelve hundred years before Jesus marriage is one of these marriage is one of these hotspots geologically there these hotspots like one of them is below Yellowstone National Park marriage is one of these hotspots and because I think many of the many of the structural elements that make people people run through marriage and and this is why I can completely understand why in the Roman Catholic tradition it's a sacrament because when you look at how Paul talks about it in the book of Ephesians yeah marriage is sacramental even though it's in this marriage material gosh see this stuff all gets hard so you know someone here sent a the other the living Hitchens brother it's not Christopher it's his brother anyway he had a talk in the Oxford Commons on marriage and no fault divorce there were there were there was a there was a whole new argument I never heard before but really had traction marriage symbolizes the height of human unity and so therefore in some ways embodies the heart of our struggle and so in many ways the capacity of a culture to do marriage well and doing marriage well is always aspirational I think could be an element of indication of that culture that cultures capacity to do life well it's just that powerful and so I've long believe that the real crisis in American marriage is not about gays that's in many ways a sideshow I agree with Hitchens on that point because the heteros long messed up marriage before you know the the gays got a chance to participate but at least as such in terms of same-sex marriage but no it's it's it's that's that's right it's that's right there and the fact that the fact that we struggle with marriage is indicative of a whole lot of other things in our world and this is also Carlos one weak point often brought up by people converting away from Catholicism is bad sermons nowadays I and many people I know listen to sermons online both from Catholic and Protestant preachers to what extent do you think the availability of sermons online on demand is contributing to new sacramentalism perhaps people being able to get their preaching fix online are now able to spend time now able to spend time offline looking for the smells and bells wow I think that's exactly right that's I never thought of that that's that's that's what I'm gonna rob I think that's so true that you know there's a balance and and if you're actually organizing worship services you're always dealing with that balance there's so many things have to happen in a worship service and they have to happen efficiently and within a time frame so churches in the Dominican Republic would go for three or four hours on a Sunday morning black churches in America you'll be you'll be at church all morning you'll eat together you'll be together they'll be preaching they'll be singing you're gonna have time for everything um now that people are that that we've we've only begun learning about the ways that these technical innovations are changing the church and COVID is gonna be a big piece of that but Carlos I think you're dead on right on this point and because yeah you can you know Jonathan Peugeot made a point in one of his question and answers about this he said you know part of the reason I go to an Orthodox church is that the priest can be an idiot and but he's he's doing the liturgy and so if I gotta suffer through a a lousy five-minute homily I can handle that because the rest of the service is locked in and reliable well Protestants are managing that in a different way everybody flocks to the church with the successful preacher now via YouTube and podcasts and other things you know I I remember my grandmother's is in the 1980s when she was getting elderly and getting to church wasn't wasn't really a possibility anymore she went to the church of Charles Stanley um so yeah these things are changing but I think that's a great observation Carlos I'm gonna steal that thing because that's I think that's dead on right yeah so anyone a few more people have joined anyone wanna voice a question over the channel I'll take the silences now I'll go to Ruby Lee and she says loving the LGBT series and curious to see where you might end up without having any fear or favor of what that might be and so if you have one question to ask the other side of specific issues you trying to untangle or challenge you would pose so what would the question be? it's funny because everybody when we look at okay where will I end up and and what and what and what people usually mean by that is am I gonna be for it or against it well for what or against what well and see this is this is what happens in church leadership things where we have to establish a policy what will we permit what won't we permit and that that's a function of that type of thing I'll tell you where I'll end up I'll end up by saying every individual is going to have to come to some sort of determination about how they will act when the particularities of the situation calls them to act and so you know I've done previous things I mentioned that I've got this cover from Christianity Today on the wall of my office of Ted Haggard because you know he of course had this huge scandal at the top you know this is when before his at the top you know this is when before his for his fall a new kind of evangelical and there he is just smiling on the cover and so I put that up just as a as a sacrament of humility for pastors that we all have feet of clay we are all broken people people look at a situation and say well here's Paul and he's got a YouTube channel and what Paul says about the LGBT stuff will influence people and that is right but finally anyone finally each of us has to figure out what to do with ourselves sexually and how will we do that I think one of the things that you look at the I think C.S. Lewis said it right I think the the Christian the Christian ideal for sexuality is is a man and a woman together in marriage that's the ideal and being fruitful and multiply and bearing young that's the ideal that's aspirational both in terms of our capacity to live it out some people are sterile some people are past menopausal some people are on and on and on and on and it's aspirational especially about our ability to fulfill the image there are many ways that I've I failed I've been a failure in my marriage certainly not alone on that score we all have to live with that and so part of the series is the desire to explore the questions without necessarily delivering and Paul VanderKlay by his authority says you should do this well anybody listening to my video I probably don't know them well enough to be able to speak directly into their lives so I wanna give them as much light as I have but they're the ones that have to make their decisions because yes I will be held to account by God for the teachings I give but each of us will be called to account to God for the things that we do and what are the really interesting things about the New Testament is that almost all the final judgment passages in the New Testament refer to not things that we think not simply things that we profess but things that we do even Matthew 25 as much as you have done this Jesus says so each of us have a whole bunch of things going on in the area of sexuality whether you're same-sex attracted or or however or however flexible or reliable the direction of your attractions are and that's that's where I'll end up that we will we're all this is the information we have I'll try and make as much of it as available as I can with whatever perspectives I have but each of us each of us are called to give an account for what we do with our bodies and how we treat other people there was that the second part of that question was quite a bit more complicated I'm do you want me yeah yeah go ahead yeah so I'm it's a sort of I'm if you were if you had one question to ask the other side on a specific issue that you're trying to on tangle or challenge how would you pose it or prosaic well I guess part of my my answer is that I don't necessary I understand that there are sides but all of the sides are contextual within certain frames and so the frame will determine what the sides are in which would determine the question because are you for or against safe same-sex marriage in the church I I the only place I would probably be called upon to answer that question would be in a specific chair in a specific room with a specific manifestation and instantiation of the church could be a council meeting it could and and I've sat in enough of those meetings to know that all of those all of the yes or no things that create sides are deeply nested with many many particularities that have that impact the answer I would give and I know for a lot of people that says well that sounds well you're you're trying to straddle not trying to straddle when when I when prop 8 was landed in California I voted when I go to CRC Senate I vote but I vote according to the proposal that is on the agenda and I vote yes or no and the frustration is that once things get to that level there's a whole lot other stuff built in and when I sit down with someone who is wrestling with their sexual activities their sexual appetites their their sexual the table setting that is before them most to the questions I deal with are this this is shaped by okay I'm in a non-affirming denomination there to deal with husbands and wives that are trying to be faithful to one another husbands and wives that perhaps are dissatisfied with the their sexual opportunities as they line up with their sexual appetites and needs the diversity in those fields are astounding and so what is more common across all of these lines is that we have unmet needs we have desires that are not being met and in almost every case the grasp that we have on what exactly is going on with us on those realms is pretty difficult and very individual so what I would how I would vote in a particular Senate is one thing and sitting in an office and talking to an individual as as we're as they have invited me into their life to figure things out that's a whole different thing and so I take the things as they come alright so next question I'm pastor Paul what you do when you're depressed upset feeling down from the things of the world you just pray to God and get over it or something else how's that process well the the the kicker in that question is from the things of this world sometimes I just have to get off Twitter and stop listening to YouTube videos and change the diet of what I direct my attention towards so if the if the things of that internet world are getting me down it's relatively easy to turn that off because I could just sort of close that door in my experience different people have and Jonathan Haidt talks about this I think nicely in his book the happiness hypothesis certain people are just temperamentally happy I look at that in my family my youngest son is temperamentally happy in a lot of ways I think he got that from me my wife has this comment I think is a little higher in neuroticism than I am she worries more I do get depressed sometimes and sometimes the depression seems to be because I'm not eating right I'm not exercising I'm not getting enough sleep or it's because I'm not attending to some things that I'm avoiding and so I'm carrying those things on me instead of attending to them and relieving the anxiety some of the times in my life when I have been most depressed have been times when there have been relationships and circumstances that I could not change I was stuck and they were really eating on me and there's a tremendous amount of pressure on me there was a time when I began to discover myself having anxiety attacks I've never had any of those before I I was basically going into shock and I would I would crawl in a warm day in Sacramento I would crawl under the covers of my bed fully clothed shivering because I was in shock and there were some very difficult things in my life at that point that I had to deal with and that went on for years and I for various reasons it was difficult for me to take advantage of mental health professionals I never took any kinds of antidepressants or anything like that but what I did was I developed some practices that I found to be effective I found music to be very effective and there was I'd have playlists of songs that I knew would calm me down and those songs were almost always of a Christian religious nature John Michael Talbot Michael Card and I could I could either put on a blindfold or go into a dark room and be by myself practice some intentional breathing and slow down my autonomic nervous system to get that under control and then of course the shivering would stop and I've also have the benefit of being someone who when I get very stressed out I sleep and again I I think this is just a function of more of how I'm wired and I know a lot of people when they're very stressed out they can't sleep and that's that's an additional problem so but but almost all of this for me involves prayer and scripture and so I will I will put on the Bible in audio form and I will listen to Christian music and I will pray and I will cry out to God and that is my practice but it has to also involve often diet and exercise and getting enough sleep and attending to the things in my life that I'm avoiding so that's that's that's how that that works for me so and Mekos just asked this question um what have you have you seen an uptick in members of your congregation or community dealing with mental illness over the course of your ministry and if so how have you dealt with it? I live with the term mental illness but I don't like it and I don't like it because I think it exacerbates an important line but I remember talking to a clinical psychologist that I was working with I have been in therapy at different parts of times in my life I was working with this clinical psychologist he had a PhD he's quite well known and respected he's a Christian psychologist in this community and I was asking about a situation asking if it was psychiatric or psychological and he he said that question probably that question in many cases doesn't matter because you're probably not going to be able to tell the difference and and that just shows how complex we are I see a lot of a lot of insurance companies like to prescribe medication because it's cheaper than seeing a psychologist seeing a psychologist can be very expensive for and sometimes psychology well done means weekly or multiple trips to the psychologist that's that's going to be hundreds of dollars a week for years insurance companies don't want to pay that I'm not seeing the members of my church right now that's a real problem and I'm a little concerned when we start doing services what some of these individuals will look like how much has this lockdown cost them a lot well that's has to be balanced on the other side of how much would catching COVID cost them potentially their lives so that's what we're dealing with people in my congregation who have been diagnosed and perhaps are on disability because of mental health diagnoses they are suffering and but is it some of them statistically speaking can probably whether the infection if they get it would it be better for them to just get it be done with it if that is in fact the case I don't know so yeah people are struggling but I on one hand I believe in psychiatry and I believe in psychology I'm just not always sure we know where that line is and often it doesn't matter and so try psych meds okay try talking therapy okay exercise diet good friends and relationships around you oh there's a lot of sanity in that so the has this question I'm an orthodox Christian but my favorite preacher the Calvinist from sacrament many others on this discord are in various traditions or no tradition but still seem to be drawing wisdom from others in a sort of cross pollination to what extent do you see this an example of a growing ecumenical in this in the larger culture that still recognizes and respects the differences between Christian traditions or do you see this more as a niche movement within this corner I think you all are the front edge I think ecumenism is happening and these technologies both afford and they give and they take away and I think about I think about Carlos's observation that yeah yeah yeah I this has been happening for a while so my friend Rod in Tucson he's much more direct than I am as a pastor but but the shape of his church affords that that's really key the pastor the gardener the gardener gardens by virtue of the the nature of the garden so for a while Rod had I'm people coming to his church saying we'd like to be in but we'd like to have our small group be a part of your church so use your facility but we we do our Sunday mornings in this other church that probably had a you know gifted pastor the kind of music they like and so on and so forth and Rod basically said jumping a lake you know if you're if you're a part of this community you you stick with this community now he's not telling people to take other people off their podcast and YouTube sessions but he expressed a reality that that we ought to be committed to a local community and I think that's right I suspect you know that the the different the different denominations and traditions started in different times and places and and I suspect partly because there was a need in the kingdom of God for certain things to get addressed in the church Brad Gregory is a historian I think he teaches at Notre Dame he's written a book that I've read and a great course a series where he goes into the Protestant Reformation he's an expert of that the Protestant Reformation made the Roman Catholic Church better I think the Orthodox the the flowering of orthodoxy in North America is making the church overall here better and you all are beneficiaries of that so you know I'm struggling right now because I'm looking at apps for our church because I need a way for our seniors to be able to connect with us online and I need a way to open up I need a way for to open up giving online so that people that like what I do can you know it's lovely that people support me on Patreon but could really support Living Stones more easily so I'm working on that and so on one hand I want to tell people who enjoy the work that I do thank you but please go to a local church and if there's room in your life to also participate in this community do so too and that will vary according to what people need and and the time they have available to them and the ways that you know it could be that your local orthodox church can't do anything online because they're orthodox and they're not good in that space but they're a vital vibrant community invest in that community if you have time in your life to invest in this weird little cyber church we have going on discord invest there too and and let God lead you and let him you know and again the Bolton secretary of my church is she came to me once kind of sheepishly is it okay to be members of two different churches at the same time what am I going to say no it's like she goes to well when we had services she goes to both services she's worked for them she works for us she's a vital member both congregations she's got that much desire capacity that one church can't do it all for her so I I think this is a cutting edge of a new ecumenism I don't know you answered this question last time was from Jacob and I'll just say if you answered it or not I've been thinking about people who come up with rationalizations for the most evil things by turning towards religion how do we know we are doing that when an interpretation is legitimate as opposed to a rationalization of what we wanted to do anyway this this no I get the question this the same question is is this same question plagues us on many many different fronts how do I know when it's basically how how can we know it's in some ways the monarchical vision question how can I see the world as it is how can I do what's right well there's lots of different wisdom and I think that's the best best way to approach it given by the Bible given by the history of the church and and I could you know most of it almost all of you will recognize pray seek out wise counsel be devoted to the scriptures try to be honest with yourself have a have a group of friends around you who know you well and can speak into your life try to listen to them and and the question which which posits evil things that's always degrees of that too and so we might get frustrated hearing all of these answers because they all sound so pat they're so common we don't you know there's so many the thing is to that as age confers wisdom partly because sometimes whether you got something right or wrong is only revealed in time and and this is part of the reason why the the Christian tradition of repentance and forgiveness is so vital because we'll get a lot wrong I remember when when I moved to Grand Rapids there was a pastor who had no my father from the Patterson days because this this guy had had lived in New York City and I remember when I met him you know all your stand son was happy to meet me and we had a good relationship but I remember him telling me something to the effect that he he felt that my father had I don't know any of the I don't know any details of the situation he felt that my father had done him wrong in one particular way which I seldom heard that about my father people loved my father but my father was not a perfect man and it was just interesting to me that this this other pastor who became a mentor and a friend at least to the degree that I knew him you know thought to bring that up to me and I think he brought he thought to bring that up to me because he was processing it and probably processing you know was Stan right in what Stan did or wrong you know I'll tell you that if you're a pastor or a husband or a father or a son anyone who has any agency who acts in the world you go back and look at the decisions you made and think was I was I you know why is I right in this and I think I guess I could the last thing I'd add to that list of wisdom is be careful of what you do when you're really emotional about things because anger enthusiasm pathos that can overwhelm our critical functions quite easily so sleep on it take some time pray study scripture listen to the church reach your chistery it's all the wisdom stuff and then when you do do evil confess and and see if you can make up for it I think there's a few more people in the voice I'd like to open up to anyone who wants to express their question with a voice or if they have a follow up to what Paul just said alright so this this wasn't directly a question but I think I found it interesting I think you might as well I'm from Brandon and said I think Christian is a great path to a sense of freedom Christian but the idea that you are completely free because you think you know the truth and are born again with a clean slate in your business in life is to do your best to keep that slate clean that's very good for you yeah I mean I think there's a lot to that and people are anxious about especially Protestantism because sometimes people look at it and say that's a cheap get out of jail free card you mean to tell me that if you if you just admit that you send then you can be forgiven without undoing the damage that your sin had caused well first of all Christianity talks about true repentance whereas we all understand the difference between saying you're sorry and true repentance and so true repentance is always costly and the other the next thing is that so often we wrong people in ways that we can't we can't fix it we can't make up for it we do that all the time a cruel word or even a truthful word said for bad reasons can cause tremendous damage and it can't be undone but then we get to the other point that the process of the process of dealing with that can sometimes yield like Eric Weinstein's idea super positions can sometimes yield super positions where you said something you you said something to this other person that was hurtful and wrong and you're forced to realize it and you have to go to that person and that person may or may not be accept your request for you accept your apology if they do and well now there's potential for for something different in the relationship so I understand people's it's a it's a very strange thing because it's Christianity just deciding to pray the sinner's prayer yeah it is but it isn't to it isn't either and there's a lot of life that's like that so yeah no I get that I get that Brendan I get that and and and then you know who's a Christian well a lot of people especially in this world this discord well I'm not a Christian because I don't believe okay someone could easily say to me you're not a Christian because you're not obedient what do you mean I'm not obedient here's three things you're not obedient to okay fair enough finally it's God who who knows his own and and we do the best we can knowing ourselves so I'm just gonna open up again to anyone if they have any questions one if no one else has one yeah go for it okay um did you become such a good listener to people you I see you listening to all these different conversation partners and you interview people and you're you obviously are a pastor for a long while how did you gain that skill like you gain most skills by doing it badly and finding the results I've had in my pastorate a short list of individuals who would come into my office whenever they'd feel like it and sit across from me and just start talking and I in some ways was a I'm kind of a prisoner of them in some ways yeah I could have showed them out the door yeah could have done that stuff but and so then I have a lot of time to listen to people and as I listened the more I listened and then I try different things try saying this one thing try giving advice try doing that try doing this then watching the results very scientific watching the results the the more I would watch how this thing would go the more I'd realize that I was often too active and that I should do more listening and I'm a I'm a buddinski I I I'm not naturally a good listener and so it's been something that I've had to learn and I still fail at it but it's it's one of these things that comes with age and to the degree that I do well that's basically what I can say thank you alright Paul I have a second question for you actually okay I was thinking about ecumenical sort of conversation I was thinking about this discord and you were talking about Jonathan Peugeot and you were talking with him about ecumenical conversation I was thinking is it likely that we are being forced if we aren't already to have more ecumenical dialogue by the pressures of secularism atheism, antitheism, modernity yeah yeah you know the Christian Forum Church used to be pretty rabidly anti-catholic in some ways a lot of that changed because of the abortion issue in America I think a lot of that changed because of the a lot of it changed because people just started knowing each other better and some of the cheap stereotyping that would happen just people learned was just not true and I remember in the eighties people would say I have this Catholic friend and they read the Bible that's that's because somewhere along the line someone told them Catholics don't read the Bible was that true and so you know there's just a the we don't live as ghettoized as we used to and alignments form and allyships form because other things come up so yeah yeah the ecumenism is being forced on the church again and I think part of that is because secular governments have become the norm it's it's a different thing when your government is Roman Catholic or Lutheran or Calvinist than when your government says I'm not taking a position so yeah but I think it's a good thing that part where you talked about reading the Bible made me laugh a lot I'm not very biblically illiterate and recently I've been reading through some passages that still sort of is I think sometimes a stereotype though because we work on tradition a lot as well so instead of just always going directly through the Bible I don't have any other questions cute so okay anyone has any voice questions but there I think I've gotten through all the Thursday questions good we don't have we don't have to go two hours by no means I mean because we're gonna do this all again tomorrow so round two so yep any any last chance at a question otherwise will yeah there's one or did I think someone just unmute themselves if anyone has a oh now they're coming in Jeff do you have a question? I have a question but I don't want to keep you extra long Paul because I have a feeling this could lead to a long answer and a long discussion. I budgeted two hours so we're within the budget and I am leaving at six because I have a council meeting at seven so fire away Jeff if you have it. First of all are we being recorded because I need to be careful about how I frame yes we are being recorded alright I came to this late so I apologize this has already been discussed has the whole race issue national conversation come up in today's Q&A no not much okay well I personally have just been wrestling with this whole thing on different fronts Paul you know this I don't know how many but I'm being recorded I'm not going to talk about that one of the things that I'm struggling with is in the denomination that I go to right now church it's called the Wesleyan denomination I think in its current form it's been around since like the early sixties and one of the things that I particularly enjoy about it is it seems it's moderate enough to where the left-leaning stuff that I encounter doesn't irritate me too much because there's right-leaning stuff to counterbalance it if that makes sense but just of late at least three pastors in the denomination who are scattered across the country but that I've met in being in this church for over a decade now have really started to actually some pastors that I really admire have really started to take on a lot of the the anti-racist I guess religiosity I guess as John McWhorter would call you know anti-racism its own religion and it's just I'm just wrestling with it because it's so difficult and it's hard for me to articulate this conversation but this question or whatever it is that I'm saying right here but I just find myself to maintain my sanity right now just diving into anytime that Glenn Lowry and John McWhorter post anything just to hear at least a more complete perspective on the whole discussion and I don't really have a question it's just a comment and I'm just interested what your thoughts on all that are I think number one try hard to not lose your patience with people who are using the boilerplate the language boilerplate that is being distributed because that they are they are well intentioned they are sincere but we all but I you know even if I disagree and even if I much more persuaded by Lowry and McWhorter's takes on these things we should be patient with the pastors and denominations and businesses that are doing these things they they they truly mean well at the same time I very much understand and experience your frustration because what I think it's helpful to take a step back and understand what is happening and again this is a good lesson in how and it's a sobering lesson when we realize well is this how we're working too you know so so these people are following Ta-Nehisi Coates or you know how it can list a whole bunch of other people who are scripting Abram X I forget his last name you know the people who are Robin D'Angelo I mean stuff this is this is how people work and people believe in tribes and people get their cues and so what we in the nation have for a long time as we say well let's look at the guiding lights in any individual thing so whether it's a medical doctor from Harvard or an economist from Harvard or a physicist from Harvard or a mathematician from Harvard once you have Harvard there there's a degree of authority and reliability that is presupposed now many of us have been involved in a conversation we've been influenced by the likes of Jordan Peterson and McWhorter and Lowry to think differently on this we ought to have patience with those who disagree with us that's a general rule and if we would like to have influence we ought to be as wise as serpents and as innocent as doves so engage with people in you know it's so funny because in the verveci space here we're talking dialogos and well maybe we think we're only going to have only going to use these tools with the nice people like like Sam who's a you know who's non-trinitarian and you know the adversaries and our friends on the discord and okay fair enough we've but that's kind of a sandbox we're playing at it when it comes to when it comes to engaging leaders in the denomination sometimes if we do so as white individuals disagreeing with black leaders that's scary because yeah if unless you unless you tow the party line you will be called racist and then I would say well number one are you a racist we ought to check ourselves number two finally you do work before an audience of one and so all of this stuff that we talk about in Christianity out loving enemies about not wrestling against flesh and blood about all this is most needed when someone is doing something that we feel is damaging and dangerous and actually putting the world at risk so now's the time to practice what we preach and that practicing in preaching is loving our enemies and well would we like to have influence and it gets really tricky because then we have to ask ourselves how can we be influential with people with whom there's a disagreement and there's a lot of emotion in the room some of that might mean keeping silent for a while biding your time and when you know they'll be a trust me they'll be another incident that grabs the zeitgeist which well it'll probably be racialized because just about everything is now but it won't be as directly so perhaps then will be the time to make a point or learn a language or all of these things that we're doing so now is when we learn to practice these things don't pick stupid fights if this stuff is driving you crazy step away take a bath watch a netflix show but your mind on something else and yeah because right now it's hot and heavy but the thing about truth is that it's the truth and it's durable and so give things time and then do this do the winsome promoting of better ideas when you have space and opportunity that's about the best we can do Jeff do you have anything else? Oh no just a thanks appreciate it alright I just want to make sure we get this question in it was sort of a follow up from Falcon Dark about Jordan Peterson so what do you think is the immaterial thing that Jordan Peterson is trying to use sacrament of experience or of the experience of meaning to connect us to or to connect to sorry I think Peter you know I often describe it as sort of an internal gyroscope that we have we have we have this experience of meaning that when we experience it when we watch it vicariously and others and movies and stories we have it when you know I was mowing the lawn and I get done and I look at out at the lawn and it looks good boy that's meaningful you know I cleaned my room I didn't really but I need to boy that's meaningful and Peterson just as a really pragmatic wise clinical psychologist who has worked and helped with a lot of people and worked with students says when you feel that that's telling you something keep seeking more of that and that that feeling is a little different kind of reward than eating that ice cream cone or or watching that self-indulgent movie or or posting that you know going to battle on social media against all the SJW's and he's saying here you have these different experiences opt for the meaningful and that will basically the whole point of of maps of meaning is that this is this is built into us this is built into us to work correctly it's really a very much a natural law argument and you know let your conscience be your guide well your conscience has developed in you for for reasons and so he's just basically encouraging people that that experience now it's sacramental in that it is in fact for him an indication of leading you towards a better world now again my critique of this which others have made is that well people if you were a if you were a communist you know starving the Ukraine well you know sacrifices need to be made for the glorious revolution to move forward or if you're a ardent Nazi prison guard well we're getting rid of the Jews will allow the natural order to once again reassert itself and the world will be a better place all those things feel meaningful to so it's not a vouchsafe perfect indicator but given where most people are at today it's a pretty good place to start I don't know if that answered your question well enough it's that it's that it's that feeling you have when you cleaned your room or cut the lawn or got an A on the test or did that chore for your mother it's that's that feeling and he says notice when you get that feeling and do more of that that's good advice yeah he's typing right now so maybe you'll have a follow up yeah yeah alright and there is another from Owen. One of your talks of spirits principalities seems very g-r-e-n-d for whom the demon on slash onqueer spirit on clean spirit is the particular mutual psychic possession one of another and the Satan is the distributed pervasive individual psychology this moves Jesus ministry from relevant to fringe demonic phenomenon to an engagement with the psychological sociological world on a most compelling manner do you have thoughts on the ontology of the spirits and powers to me the psych psyche is existing and the spirit is real and has real life even if it is psyche and dies if exercise from the possessed also can you talk about both with whiteness and whiteness studies as principalities and relate them to our perceptual lenses by which the world stands out to us and which for organizes the objects if of perception I was listening to the rebel wisdom video where the dude was in his retreat through the pandemic came out of it found the world turned upside down and again now almost anytime I hear someone use the word real a little subcommittee of my consciousness congress pauses pulls that usage aside and examines it what do we mean by this word real I think it means I'm the things which finally win in the end what do we mean the end is there an end well that all is dependent on the narrative arc of the story Karen and Michael had a terrific conversation on Karen's channel about story posted here I'm we have we have this problem in that a lot of modernity is still with us and I remember my second conversation with Jonathan Peugeot I really wasn't understanding as well spirits and principalities in terms of terms of what he was talking about so that took time for me to sort of grasp the conception of it that I have now see the the the ontology of spirits and powers the psyche it the psyche absolutely exists I mean I I don't now here's the thing who who are we talking to are we talking to Sam Harris Sam Harris I mean all these materialists are cheating like crazy as modernity washes away Daniel Dennett says there's matter and information it's like pop you just gave up the you just gave up the game Dan Dennett and and when Sam Harris uses the intersubjective all he's he's trying to he's trying to get at the spiritual by saying well here is the here is the thing that is in both people's minds at the same time as if he understands what that means and I don't think we do and again my go-to illustration of that lately has been school spirit school spirit is that I think the usage of the word that we use now that is apt and almost all of us at least in the American context can understand what we're talking about and we can easily see how let's say everyone who has gone to this particular high school has died and the the school district is no longer using this building and I never for somehow it's been abandoned perhaps let's say I walk into this building I can have a sense of that school spirit the years of decay have added onto the school spirit now this gets tricky because in let's say we we look at the story of Jesus and the demoniac the demon talks back and gives a name modernists are skeptical about that to me I think that is a bias of data why should we be skeptical of that so here's a question is there a realm in which spirits occupy that we don't have access to in the way that I have access to the how many different items sitting here in my office well quite obviously where does school spirit reside where does the spirit of CK McClatchy high school reside or Eastern Christian so yeah real enough to I use this illustration all the time Uncle Sam is real enough to make us pay our taxes and go and vote and care about politics is and when you listen when you look at the way Paul talks well is there a spirit in the you know again I are all the spirits that manifest in the world that we know off the shelf or do human beings create new spirits as we travel through history I would guess we sorta create new spirits the spirit of Uncle Sam was born and has been growing and might even die I don't find I'm violating the language when I speak that way so and but yet when we have things like spiritual possession and demons well these seem to be in some ways far older spirits that we are and they can interact CS Lewis says we're amphibious I think that's sort of a good metaphoric way of thinking about it so can you talk about both whiteness and whiteness studies as principalities I don't know a lot about whiteness and whiteness studies I have a little understanding once I was at fact talking to a friend of mine he's an elder here he's an African-American man he's been doing some reading about the history of slaves slavery once once someone made the decision that they could get away with perpetually holding in bondage people of African ancestry and they wouldn't for people of European ancestry well what was that enough of this happening creates a spirit of whiteness like enough of what's happening within a high school creates a school spirit and that principality and power reigns in this world I'm I'm I'm terribly caught in the middle of this dilemma because whiteness is real read Malcolm X so is blackness these are spiritual entities that to what degree they are off the shelf and older than humanity spirits participate in them and to what degree they are products or influenced by human beings I can't answer those questions but they are real and they are powerful and and what's anybody who is disturbed at the international the into the international mobbing around certain things certainly can't be blind to the power of spirits spirits possess us spirits possess a mob and so the spirit possessing the herd of pigs and driving them into the water how is that different from the spirit possessing a mob on an American city street that starts looting or throwing things at the police and the crowd is participating in it and individuals are participating influence are individuals are influencing and being influenced by it whiteness is whiteness a lot different from nationalities and nationality spirits no I don't think so they're historical they're born of an age but this is a level you know I think hopefully what I've learned in the last number of months and thinking a lot about this is getting a better handle on this idea of spirits but even as they get more real psychologically there's no reason to suppose they're less real in some of the other ways that I was used to thinking about them when I'd read the Bible because I've seen enough in the third world and in Pentecostal circles to say oh there's a reality there all right that that I suspect is far older than I am but most of the history is older than I am so why should I be surprised by that all right don't think I have been less than a month I just said thank you for that I don't think I have any more questions to keep up cool till tomorrow till tomorrow so if you up up up up there's one more question about Owen oh yeah all right so what is your opinion on the Gnostic and Eposwote I don't know how to say that I don't know you see that right it's in the questions for PVK well unique is it above or below Carlos's street picture oh it's it's down okay unless someone wants to unmute me up here thank you yeah sometimes our brain just never see oh what is your opinion of the Gnostic and Apocryphal texts their texts they you know that to the degree that I understand Gnosticism and Gnosticism is such a broad my understanding of Gnosticism is it's a bias towards the immaterial it's a it's it's it's bigotry against the material and so when I hear Christians say things like well Jesus makes us go to when if you die and you love Jesus you go to heaven to be with Jesus when you die and then he right swoops in and says well intermediate state but the new heavens and the new earth the the answer to Gnosticism is God declaring that his creation is good now there are all there's all this Gnostic literature that has been uncovered and I think it's of some scholarly value to get clues into the thought of the ancient world now the apocryphal text if you meaning some of the intertestamental text well I'm by no means an expert on it so I'll just give the answer that I was given which was that these are good books to read and to the degree that I have read them and I've read through some of them they're really a lot of fun but the Protestant reformers said that they're not of the same quality of the canonical books and maybe it's the bias that I was raised on the canonical books and with less attention given to the apocryphal books I think there's some wonderful things in the apocryphal books and they're worth reading but I don't treat them as canon so maybe that's helpful maybe we'll go for the shorter question on the question of text what is your thought on church traditions or sorry thought or church traditions on the authorship of Paul's letters and books of Peter as well second Peter is always a highly debated book first Peter is is debated as well because all of all of those debates are based on our ignorance and the the debates in some ways arise out of a modernist mind about the canon and almost always are questions we can't answer you know especially because we we understand that using a scribe and it seems that Paul used one it very much seems like first Peter used one and even the question of I mean you didn't bring up John the Joannine Corpus in the New Testament that's where things get really interesting because there were names were recycled mean it's like asking about George Foreman George Foreman saw to it that there's lots of George Foreman's running around so authorship is sort of a fun thing to to to deal with in biblical studies but I sort of what happened when that arrived at its peak was that Brevard's Childs came in and said you know to one degree or another the church has been dealing with the text as it's been given and so finally that's where we should put our focus so let's let's imagine that you know in the middle of the night Andrew wrote an epistle and signed it with his brother's name or let's imagine that Mark is the disciple of Peter and recorded the sermons that Peter would repeat and stories that Peter would preach again and again and again and again does it bother me that the book of Mark isn't named Peter the gospel according to Peter no these are interesting questions but I tend to just say I'm gonna deal with the Bible as canon and and I you know when I do start a series on a book a good contemporary critical commentary will have these matters dealt with at the beginning of the commentary authorship date what have you it's important but you know we we we imagine that normal people read the Bible as if it were computer code I've never found that to be the case Jesus says love your enemies I'm really bad at it but that's not a it's not a hard command to understand and you know it's Mark Twain's adage it's not the parts of scripture I I don't understand that bothers me it's the parts I do understand they bother me because I'm so bad at being faithful so all right Brian just had another question I know it's getting pretty close to yeah I got I have to I have to keep that tonight because I've gotta go home and have a council meeting and should have a little time so all right I can have as Dave if you can stash that for tomorrow no I can I can take a shot I sometimes do better if I don't have as much time all right so you get better answers sometimes what secular media movie TV well Sans, Sans, Rang the E. Do you want to go for that one? okay sorry if this comes in late I've been kind of paying attention to what Jonathan Peugeot has been doing while also spending time listening to the systems theorist for the question I refer to the game B people have been thinking a lot about that lately I know Peugeot wouldn't like to make this connection Jonathan Jonathan I'd love to if you're a YouTube personality that has a public as a private life and you wind up having private conversations with people things get tricky because I'm fairly certain that he would not like the comparison yeah I think you're probably right I wonder about your take on this it seems to me like some good things could come out of common language between the two frameworks I agree does it even and this is this is sort of where you know the diversity between myself and Peugeot and Peterson and Vervecky sort of comes into play I probably should put myself on same categories those guys but because I'm a Protestant and so some of my sensitivities are different than his he might be right I'm I might be wrong I think I look at game B I saw that I saw that video from Rebel Wisdom and boy that was red meat and I've just been so busy with other things I haven't done a video on it this week but boy I want to talk about that video this is this is religion they are they are trying to save the world and that what what makes me probably that encourages the marker in me it's like I look at game B and I think I've been working in this stuff all my life you want to look at someone who could change the world look at Jesus Christ and one of the things Rebel Wisdom is really skittish about Christianity and you know I I love David Fuller but that that's the IDW thing and Peterson again is is the only guy in some ways who who isn't afraid of Jesus and I think Rebel Wisdom and the game people they're afraid of Jesus and they they should be because you want to look at someone who changed the world look at Jesus and how did he change the world read Tom Holland so yeah I'll try to be quick here alright so which one's next Brian N? yeah the secular media so what secular media has provided great and unexpected religious slash spiritual insights for you oh that's such a hard question because good art is good art I've for years because I had young children in the house even though you know I'd sign up for a new service and they'd give me HBO or something like that I always lied to my children no we don't have that channel they did that when they were young no we don't have you know we don't have Cartoon Network even I just tuned it out of Kivo so they couldn't find it now my children are grown and everybody was telling me to watch Westworld and so so now I've got HBO on my Roku yeah there's some stuff in Westworld which is really powerful and important I've been watching The Wire recently and interesting but Christians Christians some Christians shoot themselves in the foot when they try to do art because they don't they close the circle too quickly and Jonathan Peugeot doesn't have that problem because he's an icon carver but if you're a Christian filmmaker yeah it's how do you communicate deep public truths to the world instead of yeah so you know I've been watching The Wire but part of the problem I have with a lot of these HBO properties is that I do find I do find the nudity and the the elements that keep the rated-R elements that keep Christians away from them I do find them problematic and it's often gratuitous Breaking Bad was one of the best one of the best things offered up on television and it managed to do it without some gratuitous violence but you know so I'm hesitant to offer I'm hesitant to offer recommendations because they're difficult so truth be told almost any good thing I'm watching or reading provides unexpected religious and spiritual insight for me and you all have to be the judge if any of that insight is helpful or helpful on a bigger scale so alright I think that's a I think we're gonna have to call it an evening so again thank you thank you for for coming I hope I hope this isn't a waste of your time I feel a little embarrassed by it in some ways because so many of these questions are big and important and profound and I feel my answers are unworthy but if you find it profitable then I'll try to try to do it because I feel that you know all of you who have watched my videos and subscribed to my channels and some of you have even supported me on Patreon and in other different ways and your participation in the Discord server I find all of that in many ways to be your generosity to the world and so if if these question and answer sessions are a way that I can give back to you then I will try to do it so thank you for coming and as Jonathan as John Vervecky always says it's a great line thank you for your time and attention so alright I've got a skedaddle I did record this I don't know what I'll do with the recording if you hear anybody on the server who wanted to hear the recording or well maybe there's a recording chat thing which I don't always check because kind of your I'd say if if you talk about this if other people in the Discord say oh shoot I wanted to be there and I didn't get a chance to hear it let me know and as some of you said I'll post it on I'm figuring out ways now that I can post these things I will post it probably unlisted and then if a bunch of you say there's helpful things that should be shared more publicly I can do that too so let me know if if you would have value in having access to the recording of this and I'll make that happen okay so just let me know alright