https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=bBLOLjyRcag

 I'm sorry. No, no, I'm here. I just uh I'm at work and I've been running around. Um I was in the car before. Well, your time has come. What's your question? So, tiny bit of context but uh my best friend and I both kind of he was a as you can say, believer raised in church that his whole life. Um myself not until after college but he would say that he um kind of had a resurgence in his faith around the same time that I was in college. Um I became best friends playing tennis together at the University of Mississippi. Go Rebs. Um and the kind of first I came through the sort of Jordan Peterson. Um this little corner started listening to you quite early. Paul and Lightner. Kind of that stream of a lot of content online. Yeah. Um but then more in the practical side kind of within my life came through some friends himself and my best friend included and I guess you could say or or stream of the church that I was sort of directed to um was through people like John Mark Comer. Uh. Oh yeah. That that conversation he commented on a few weeks ago. Um and through him pretty quickly into the sort of Dallas Willard Richard Foster. Yep. Kind of spiritual formation. Um and so uh I've sort of had on one hand um physically going to a evangelical mega churches in Texas where I live. I'm a coach at Baylor in Waco. So sort of a mecca of. Yeah. The sort of Southern Baptist mega church movement. Yeah. Um and and in Dallas. That's where I've been going to church. Met my wife. Uh amazing experience. Lot of amazing people. Um on the other hand uh you know very much a lurker in this little corner listening kind of you know nonstop for probably four years now. Um and then maybe a third thing would be reading a lot of the the more Dallas Willard Richard Foster. Yep. Tradition. And so um I guess my question would be this is a topic of discussion between my best friend and I lately uh is you know where are some thoughts from you on the sort of gap I guess what he and I have been talking about have identified of of older men uh specifically men within the church and sort of relationships between older men who are not pastors or priests necessarily and younger men uh not necessarily their sons uh within the church that are you know from that the Comer and Newhoff conversation sort of that discussion of stages four five and six. Yeah. Um and the necessity for these close long-term relationships. Yeah. And so I'm sort of poking around the the question but uh do you see that as a pretty big gap and what do you see as I mean maybe I don't know potential solution is sort of a big thing to ask for but you know that's kind of all the inputs there and we've just been talking a lot about that because uh we both felt that as a felt need in our life and a lack um as well and not necessarily um wanting to cross over into the therapeutic you know um like I hear your your critiques of John Mark and that that uh strain and the tendency towards the therapeutic um and so yeah just curious to have any thoughts on that. I do that is a great question. So part of what happened in the counterculture and the rise of the Jesus movement in and the see I think in a lot of ways the the breakdown of the American church began in the Jesus movement in the counterculture and what you began having was uh churches that were segmented by by by generations um demographic generations and so then so obviously the Jesus movement tended to be younger people now they're they're boomers now but they were younger people coming in and after that you had waves of church planting so the this this the the Jesus people seeds the seeker movement and Pasadena the church growth movement which had an ideology of birds of a feather flock together and so you have the you have the Jesus movement you have the born again movement the rise of the evangelicals you have the seeker movement and that all sort of starts to come undone with the boomers and behind the boomers you have the exes with the emergent movement was sort of splits between kind of a mainline revival Nadia Bolz Weber would sort of be a headliner for that and then a young restless and reformed which would be like Mark Driscoll and the young restless and reformed and then you have the John Marks owner that are sort of in between because you know people don't think about Rob Bell um Mark Driscoll uh Nadia Bolz Weber they're all in the same generational cohort and John Mark Comer they're all the same generational cohort and so then you get this you get this wave again of every time we planted churches in Sacramento it was always young people young families and the older churches were over here and so then very quickly some of the people were looking around and saying we have all this wisdom dying in older churches all younger women were looking for older women to mentor them younger men were looking for older men to mentor them and actually when we got the Jordan Peterson then estuary movement going one of the things that we got from a lot of the young guys who started coming to it were I'm here because I want to find older men to listen to that are not clergy and I think I've never heard this point made before but I think actually one of the key elements that have made the young restless and reformed movement go especially in a church like the PCA or in the acts 29 networks was that Presbyterian form of government had lifelong elders ship only for men and so what that produced in a lot of PCA churches were older men who were mature in the faith then discipling younger men and they had to be men because it was the PCA so I think one of the things one of the reasons that acts 29 and the PCA and the young restless and reform movement first and that's first in the way that it has it's got plenty of its own problems too but is exactly this point and now it's going to be interesting to see if this is a strength of complementarian churches what I mean by that is churches that won't allow women leadership yeah because what that it tends to happen is that because women are sort of barred this entrance into the institution they sort of set up the dual tracks and so and this is what I saw in churches and other cultures and Korean churches and Hispanic churches were generally speaking they wouldn't go complementarian is that you'd more often have older men mentoring younger men and older women mentoring younger women now how this is going to play out in American orthodoxy will be interesting to watch but that's not going to be interesting to watch but that is I think an element of conservatism and what's going to be happening there so does that answer your question at all yeah yeah I think that provides a ton of context and it rings true in the sense of a lot of the churches I've been around both as a member and then just friends I was in Dallas for years and so you have a mix of the Matt Chandler's as well as a bunch of other acts 29 churches with more Baptist churches and they have these slight differences but there's a lot of similarities especially especially theologically really because you know the pastors if they sit down they can hash out the differences they have but the bodies of the church are largely especially young people are largely formed through relationships like what you're talking about and because of the thirst for those relationships of older men and I'm not saying this is a negative I might disagree with some things but the theology tends to be shaped in the same way right like through the young wrestlers and reformed and it's often you know if you dig a little bit past the surface of why do you believe or why are you in this particular tradition or have you thought about these things it's you pretty quickly realize it's like oh well this was you know my dad and my dad's friends and the only men that I knew who were ever going to invest in me you know and so these men invested in me and that's why I am you know I believe in Jesus and I have this life and maybe that's how I met my wife and all these kinds of things at these churches and so you know it's a communal thing like you talk about all the time it just for my friend and I it makes it puts you in a little bit of a strange situation if you are you know fully committed to the to the church but not necessarily fully committed to all of the the axioms and the propositions and that can get a little bit in the way of that more sort of discipleship relationship that you're talking about yeah past the first couple stages so anyways great question I appreciate it great question thanks for jumping on good to say yeah all right.