https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=rHPfxvb0ZgQ

 Hi, this is Paul. As you can see, I'm back in SAC, and this is Rough Draft for Sunday, where I go through the current version of my Sunday sermon. I've been, for those of you watching the channel, I've been making a commentary on Jordan Peterson's Exodus series, and in the first episode of the Exodus series, Dennis Prager, who, it's fun listening to the commentary on some of the different individuals, he asked a question about theodicy. Theodicy is sort of about the judgment of God relating to God and evil. If God delivered Israel from Egypt with a mighty hand, why not the Jews from Nazi Germany? Well, the Holocaust wasn't 400 years, and they were delivered by the Nazis, but the question he raises is a difficult one, and it's difficult pastorally for many people, because we read in the story about these deliverances in the Bible, and then that sort of rises us. We're sort of invited to believe in God's ability to save and God's ability to intervene, and then when we seem to have a situation in which it seems obvious that God shouldn't intervene, well, why didn't he show up and do this? This issue has been raised many times. In the early 1980s, there was a class at Fuller Theological Seminary about signs and wonders. I just finished watching the Jesus Revolution movie with Lonnie Frisbee, and actually John Wimber brought in Lonnie Frisbee for the class on signs and wonders, and this was a very controversial class at Fuller, and Lewis Meads, who Lewis Meads was a member of the Christian Informed Church, taught at Calvin University, then went to Fuller to teach, eventually wrote a theological reflection on the signs and wonders at Fuller Seminary. I think a lot of this boils down to the fact that we are uncomfortable with the idea that God picks and chooses and miracles by the way that they occur in history are all about picking and choosing. The Fuller class in the 1980s had a signs and wonders class, also uncomfortable with the idea that we can produce miracles with technique, and that was some of the question around this, and this continues with, for example, the ministry of Bethel Church up in Reading. Meads asked, should we celebrate a miracle? Is it rude to celebrate your son's deliverance from a disease while the kid in the bed next door in the hospital dies? What are you going to say about God's goodness when your son is delivered and the other kid, or vice versa? These are difficult questions, and Christians struggle with them. Now, the Temptations of Jesus in the Wilderness was really all about the available miracle-working power of God and Jesus' method of salvation. Now, a few weeks ago we saw how Paul conquered Ephesus with miracles. God did extraordinary miracles through Paul so that even handkerchiefs and aprons that had touched him were taken to the sick and their illnesses were cured and the evil spirits left them. Many of those who believe now came openly and confessed what they had done. A number who had practiced sorcery brought scrolls together and burned them publicly. They were calculated when they calculated the value of the scrolls. The total came to 50,000 drachma. In this way, the word of the Lord spread widely and grew in power. Paul in his book, Paul and he writes in his book, Paul, a biography notes this, in Ephesus itself, Paul's work appeared to be going from strength to strength. In his letters, Paul and his hearers seemed to be able to take for granted the fact that sometimes the living God did remarkable things, not only in their hearts and minds, but also in their bodies. Remarkable healing, signs of new creation breaking into the old world in ways not normally expected, were never the real center of attention and in any case were always mysterious. People still got sick and died and prayers for the healing were not always answered positively. But in Ephesus, it seemed that Paul's launching of the church was accompanied by healing powers that went beyond what might have been expected or experienced elsewhere. And he writes also notes that, now I'm not going to, I thought about going into 2nd Corinthians after 1st Corinthians, but I thought the church and maybe the channel might need a little break from the dilemmas of the church at Corinth. Now, Luke's version of the story is obviously compressed. He takes a great deal of time and tells selective stories about things. And so, there are holes in the story, things that aren't covered. And now these are more apparent by the fact that we know lots of other information from the letters of Paul. And so what New Testament scholars try to do is, you know, piece something together and every scholar sort of pieces things together in their different way. And he writes, has a rather interesting thesis that in fact Paul was imprisoned in Ephesus, which Luke doesn't record. And Paul believes that in that imprisonment, Paul wrote his prison letters, which are Philippians, Colossians, Ephesians, and Philemon. And now this is a, I wouldn't say it's a controversial theory, but it's probably a minority theory among New Testament scholars. But it's a very intriguing one because you have the question, did something else happen to Paul not covered by Luke's brief summary in Acts 19? He was a was he arrested and tortured in Ephesus as he had been in Philippi? Now, we're going to pick up the story and look at some of the clues in this story. We went on ahead to the ship and sailed for Asos, again this is Luke writing, where we were going to take Paul aboard. He had made arrangements because he was going there on foot. When we, when he met us at Asos, he took him, we took him aboard and went to Matalin. The next day we set sail from there and arrived at Chios. The day after we crossed over to Samos and on the following day arrived at Miletus. Now again, sometimes Luke can take whole ranges of stories like this gap of 14 to 17 years in Paul's life that doesn't get covered. And at other times he has very careful chronology. Again, usually when Luke is right there and it's sort of keeping a diary. This is where we went, where we went, where we went. And then this very interesting little tidbit. Paul had decided to set sail past Ephesus to avoid spending time in the province of Asia, for he was in a hurry to reach Jerusalem if possible by the day of Pentecost. Now, what's interesting is that Paul, as we know, makes a habit of visiting the churches that he starts to encourage them and support them. And he decides to skip Ephesus and NT Wright asks why. It's also interesting, of course, that Luke is a physician and, you know, he sets up to meet Paul. Did, was Paul in need of a physician? Was he, had he been tortured in Ephesus? You know, why is Paul avoiding Ephesus? Now, oh, that's the question twice in the slide. From Miletus, Paul sent to Ephesus for the elders of the church. So he clearly wanted to meet with the leaders of the church, but he wasn't going there. And this, of course, leads NT Wright to suspect that maybe he really couldn't go there because, you know, perhaps he was, his life was threatened or he was banished from the area. And now what Paul proceeds to do is give a sermon. And if you recall way back when, when we started sort of dealing with the book of Acts, the book of Acts is really a book of sermons and it's full of sermons. And when you listen to this sermon, it's very interesting how Paul characterizes his time in Ephesus. And it's not at all like sort of the miraculous strength to strength image that we have. When they first arrived, he said to them, you know how I lived the whole time I was with you from the first day I came to the province of Asia. That's, he's talking about Ephesus. I served the Lord with great humility and with tears and in the midst of severe testing by the plots of my Jewish opponents. You know that I have not hesitated to preach anything that would be helpful to you, but have taught you publicly and from house to house. I've declared both to Jews and Greeks that they must turn to God in repentance and have faith in our Lord Jesus Christ. So he sends for the elders of the church. And there's also a question here from NT Wright as to whether or not he had made when he lived in Ephesus, a brief trip over to Corinth in order to follow up on his first letter. And NT Wright speculates, of course we don't know, but that perhaps that mission was a failure to the church at Corinth. What sort of sets up this mood change that you find in the book of second Corinthians, much more of a sober mood change. And in fact, when you listen to this sermon, it's not sort of a victory lap at all. It's a very heartfelt, in some ways just a, there's a lot of pain in this sermon. And now compelled by the Spirit, I am going to Jerusalem, not knowing what will happen to me there. I only know that in every city the Holy Spirit warns me that prison and hardships are facing me. However, I consider my life worth nothing to me. My only aim is to finish the race and complete the task the Lord has given me, the task of testifying to the good news of God's grace. Now, what's interesting here is that this good news of God's grace hasn't poured itself out in pleasant circumstances for Paul at all. And the letter is filled with suffering. This does not sound like a guy who plans on doing miracles and winning sinnies and being held, hailed in a triumph. He's already planning for death. Remember Acts is a book of narrative and sermons and the sermon is sobering compared to many of the other sermons by Peter and Paul that are given in the book before him. Now this is also given to the leaders at Ephesus, this place where he seemed to have so much victory. And now again, he seems to be warning the leaders that not only does Paul anticipate his own death, but hard times are ahead. Interesting also, there's no mention of the collection, something Paul writes about fairly significantly in his letters, but Luke spends very little time in. Now I know that none of you, none of you among whom have gone about preaching the kingdom will ever see me again. Therefore, I declare to you that I am innocent of the blood of any of you, for I have not hesitated to proclaim to you the whole will of God. Keep watch over yourselves and all the flock of which the Holy Spirit has made you overseers. Be shepherds for the church of God, which he bought with his own blood. I know that after I leave, savage wolves will come in among you and will not spare the flock. Look at the tone. Even from my own number, men will arise and distort the truth in order to draw away disciples after you. So be on your guard. Remember that for three years, I never stopped warning you each night and day with tears. Again, his characterization of the ministry in Ephesus is very different from this brief glimpse we get from Luke. Was it perhaps early days that Luke is writing about and these latter days now that Paul is responding to? This is NT Wright's take. And perhaps some people to whom he looked for support let him down. The hints in the letter to Philippi, written most likely towards the end of his imprisonment, suggest that it wasn't just pagan hostility that landed Paul where he was. Local people he had considered friends turned out in reality to be enemies, or at least rivals. One way or another Paul found himself in prison on a charge that might very easily have meant death. Like Sampson shorn of his hair, he was suddenly powerless. The riot was just the noisy prelude. The dark powers had other ways of striking back at someone who dared to encroach on their territory with the essentially Jewish message of the one God defined around the shocking message of the crucified and risen Messiah. Paul continues, Now I commit you to God and to the word of his grace, which can build you up and give you an inheritance amongst all those who are sanctified. I have not coveted anyone's silver or gold or clothing. You yourselves know that these hands of mine have supplied my own needs and the needs of my companions. In everything I did I showed you that by this kind of hard work we must help the weak, remembering the words of the Lord himself said, It is more blessed to give than to receive. When Paul had finished speaking, he knelt down with all of them and prayed. They all wept as they embraced him and kissed him. What grieved them most was his statement that they would never see his face again. Then they accompanied him to the ship. Now again I'll save you all the back and forth between the questions of does NT Wright have this timing right or do other scholars have the timing right? If you're curious about those kinds of issues there's plenty on the internet about it. But this is Paul's speculation about if Paul was imprisoned in Ephesus what this would look like. It doesn't take long for a little food and water for the spirits to sink. Paul and Silas had sung some hymns in the jail at Philippi, precipitating the earthquake and their sudden change of fortune. I presume that Paul prayed and perhaps sang in the jail in Ephesus. Once you get a miracle, I suppose you always expect one. Some of the ancient Psalms fit this situation exactly. Some of the early Christian poems, not those not least those celebrating Jesus as Lord, he would have in his head and heart as well. But when after a few days and then a few weeks nothing seemed to have happened, it would have been easy for him to get to the point we noticed in 2 Corinthians 4, where in retrospect it seems as though he was crushed, abandoned, destroyed, and had his wits end. No earthquake came to his rescue. He may well have been subject to regular beatings. He may have been cold, perhaps ill. All of this of course speculation. But we have to give some sort of account for what he says as he looks back to his dark moment as well as the other evidence that locates at least some of the prison letters in just this period. Some have suggested that this whole experience was in effect Paul's second conversion in which Paul finally learned the humility that had previously eluded him. I do not subscribe to this view. Things are more complicated and indeed more interesting than that. But I do think that his long held practice of Jesus focused prayer, taking the ancient scriptural poems and patterns and finding Jesus at their heart was crucial in helping him to find his way out of despair and back into hope. Christology and therapy go together, go well together, even if like Jacob, an apostle may limp in style and perhaps also in body after the dark night spent wrestling with the angel. And I think this addresses the issues that I raised at the beginning of the sermon. On one hand it's always a temptation to sort of dismiss miracles and say they don't happen. Or if the miracles do happen, sort of fall into despair and say, but they're not happening to me. We serve a God who picks and chooses. Are we to celebrate a miracle for one when one was not provided with another? I think we rejoice with those who rejoice and we weep with those who weep. What do you do when God showed up to deliver at one point, maybe even in your own life, and then leaves you to suffer in another? How do you handle that? Where do you go with that? Does one invalidate the other? Does any of this invalidate God's attention, care, and power to deliver? Can we make our peace with God picking and choosing not only between people, but also between moments in our own lives? I've seen this with friends of mine who have experienced God's miracles working through them. I think about one friend who God's done extraordinary things through him, but there are many things in his own life that God doesn't address. This is where Paul goes in his book of 2 Corinthians. Paul ends up in the same place Jesus did with the cross. He preached Christ crucified at the beginning of 1 Corinthians, but now he has to live it. Jesus of course on the cross cries out, Jesus of course on the cross cries out, Jesus answers in his own temptations will be the same answers at Gethsemane and Golgotha. Crucifixion is transformed by the promise of resurrection. The pain and the waiting for what deliverance, for that deliverance is very real indeed. Paul leans into this for those elders in Ephesus. He's going to let them know exactly where this goes. This is an old story of course, goes all the way back to the book of Job. Then the Lord said to Satan, have you considered my servant Job? There is no one on earth like him. He is blameless and upright, a man who fears God and shuns evil, and yet still maintains his integrity, though you incited against me against him to ruin him without any reason. Skin for skin, Satan replies. A man may give all he has for his own life, but now stretch out your hand and strike his flesh and bones and he will surely curse you to your face. The Lord said to Satan, very well then, he is in your hands, but you must spare his life. So Satan went out of the presence of the Lord and afflicted Job with painful sores from the soles of his feet to the crown of his head. Then Job took a broken piece of pottery and scraped himself as he sat among the ashes. His wife said to him, are you still maintaining your integrity? Curse God and die. Now when his wife said that first, he said, the Lord giveth and the Lord taketh away, blessed be the name of the Lord. This is harder. You are talking like a foolish woman. Shall we accept good from God and not trouble? In all of this, Job did not sin in what he said. The next famous verse is, he cursed the day of his birth. It was hard indeed. We try to create narratives of justification. Why did God intervene here and not there? Why did God heal here and not there? And we can never fully do this math. Our sight is too small. Our judgments are from a position that we can't possibly take everything into consideration. Paul's trials did produce a harvest of goodness for a church that had centuries of persecution ahead of it. What if everything for Paul had been just roses and then for the church afterwards, painful slog? Well, what happens to Paul will happen to many who follow Paul. And those persecutions endure still in many places today. I've told this story before, but I think it's a story worth repeating from Langdon Gilkey's Shantung compound. This was an internment camp in China that gathered missionary and business people and students and all sorts during the Second World War. Were kept by the Japanese to basically make sure that there's no mischief or nothing that would hurt their war effort. The power of the church has revealed in its ability to endure suffering without bitterness, hardships without oaths of vengeance and retribution. Of course, Jesus from the cross says, my God, my God, why have you forsaken me? And, Father, forgive them for they don't know what they're doing. In this Japanese internment camp, the youth were passing the time secretly playing around with sex and the parents didn't know what to do when they discovered it. The man who more than anyone brought about the solution to the teenage problem was Eric Ridley. This is Eric Little, actually. Gilkey changes his name. It is rare indeed when a person has the good fortune to meet a saint, but he came as close to anyone as I've ever known. Often in an evening of that last year, I, headed for some pleasant rendezvous with my girlfriend, would pass the game room and peer into it to see what the missionaries had cooked up for the teenagers. As often as not, Eric Ridley would be bent over a chessboard or a model boat or directing some sort of square dance, absorbed, warm, interested, pouring all of himself into this effort to capture the minds and imaginations of those pent-up youths. If anyone could have done it, he could. A track man, he had won the 440 in the Olympics for England in his 20s, and then he had come to China as a missionary. In a camp, he was in his middle 40s, lithe and springy of step, and above all, overflowing with good humor and love of life in an internment camp. He was aided by others, to be sure, but it was Eric's enthusiasm and charm that had carried the day with the whole effort. Shortly before the camp had ended, he was stricken suddenly with a brain tumor and died the same day. Why would God take a saint? I can't answer that question. The entire camp, especially its youth, was stunned for days, so great was the vacuum that Eric's death had left. This is often how God works. We praise him for the good things, and we endure the difficult things, trusting that he himself knows what he's doing. Amen.