https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=-RSA9WBhSZw

 Hi, this is Paul and as promised I want to get into C.S. Lewis's Abolition of Man with respect to the work of Jordan Peterson and the conversations that this is all connected to. Now recently Justin Barley put out a new conversation between Daniel Dennett and Keith Ward and some of this conversation I think helps set up exactly what C.S. Lewis is trying to address at the beginning of his work the Abolition of Man. So let's jump in. Ultimately, when it comes down to it, the fact that you think you cannot equate a brain state with the actual experience of listening to Wagner or seeing the colour red or whatever it might be means that for you this consciousness is something qualitatively different from the material. Well it's not only that you see, it's not just a hypothetical thing, it's that what makes my life worthwhile is my conscious experiences and how I cope with them. And my brain, I go along with whatever people tell me about my brain and that might be very important but it's not what I'm primarily concerned with. I'd be fascinated to know what happens to my brain when I listen to Wagner but what I'm primarily concerned with is how meaningful it is to me and the difference it makes to my life and that is something no physicist will believe. Okay so now we're going to get into this question of meaning and you might notice that my position isn't going to quite be say over with Keith Ward or Daniel Dennett because here's the question, where does the meaning come from? Now I'm planning on re-listening to Jordan Peterson's 2017 Maps of Meaning because it's worth going through again and his book Maps of Meaning is worth going through again. But is this meaning something, when we say I feel something, if I say I feel a cool breeze, what that means is that the cool breeze is out there and my body can feel it. Later in this show Daniel Dennett will talk about the eyes of a hawk or an eagle. Those eyes see something. Now the question is if we have something in our body that actually senses meaning or if meaning is what we construct. Now this I think gets into Jordan, this is right in the bullseye of Jordan Peterson in terms of meaning. What kind of a thing is meaning? Now if we reduce meaning to feeling or if we reduce beauty to feeling we have the saying beauty is in the eye of the beholder and this gets into a dynamic that most of us experience that some people find something beautiful, some people find another thing beautiful. But the question is are these things meaning and beauty and a goodness, evil, are these things out there or are they merely perspectives that individual human beings have on them? This is going to get into the simulation and the AI conversation too because the assertion basically is that the architect or the creator builds these things in and things in alignment with the order of creation will be good and meaningful and beautiful. So let's listen to what Dennis has to say. But then you should be interested in asking the hard question and then what happens? So the music is very meaningful to you. So now there's lots of things going on in your brain which are in fact embodying that very meaningfulness, that very responsiveness, the fact that it makes a difference. And here if we look at cases of brain damage we see people who have locked in syndrome or who are in a comatose or vegetative state and there's all sorts of different varieties of this if you read Adrian Owen's wonderful book on this. And here's a question for you. Suppose you were in one of those terrible states and you're listening to Wagner and if you're really in a deep coma then I think you would say well then I'm not conscious of course and it doesn't matter what's happening in my brain, I'm not enjoying it even. Alright so now we raise the level a bit, raise the level a bit and this is analogous to moving on up through from proteins to the cells and to the hands and so forth. Here in the conversation Dennett had made that consciousness is that which kind of we graduate to, they had the question of whether the ant has consciousness. Can the ant enjoy Wagner? Could the ant enjoy a waterfall if this ant's home is right next to this beautiful waterfall? And at some point, no not at some point that we can point to with a sharp line, we're going to see a gradual accrual of the very things you're talking about. The responsiveness, the meaningfulness, how it makes your life worth living, something can't make your life worth living unless it has an effect on your brain. Okay, now again listen to this carefully and ask yourself is meaning something that we feel, in the sense that we feel a cool breeze, well obviously it's not tactile like that but when we have feelings of meaning are we in fact connecting to something that is outside of ourselves that something is in fact meaningful or is meaning simply something I engineer myself. Now again it is clear that let's say I went to a certain school, I grew up in a certain home, I had certain experiences, later in life I'll have other experiences that remind me of the first experience and therefore there is meaning because it's related to these two experiences, this is a trick the brain does. But the question is if meaning is in fact something outside of me and now they're going to have this conversation about something which gives my life worth meaning and the question will be something which gives my life worth meaning to me or is there a sense of meaning that is outside my or your experience of it. It just can't. And the responsiveness, the meaningfulness, how it makes your life worth living, something can't make your life worth living unless it has an effect on your brain. It just can't. And what he says here, what's implicit in that is that this is ironic when we get into the conversations with realists who, the materialists who want to say things like you know the tree falling in the forest, that's external to us and it exists apart from our experience in it. Well that's right. But here's the question, is meaning out there too? Is beauty out there too? Is truth out there too? Now Dennett wants to say well information, when he used that word, you know thinking about for example Neil Postman's amusing ourselves to death, information is not a neutral thing. Information is not disconnected from other things. Is meaning information? Well information from whom? Information for whom? Is there a sense that, let's, okay, an inanimate object, this object isn't particularly meaningful to me, it's a little cell phone holder, but oh here's another inanimate object, here's a gift from my friend Job. And Job sent me this gift of a tin of cookies and those of you who know Dutch culture know that cookies are important to the Dutch and this is from a museum in his town where they have a dredging museum. Now again if you know the Dutch, dredging is important to the Dutch. It's all about water and land and robbing water from the city. This tin has meaning to me so I kept it because I have a relationship with Job, my friend, and you can see my video conversation that I had with Job. Where is that meaning located? Now again Sam Harris in his conversation with Jordan Peterson, this isn't unlike Elton John's glass or Elvis's guitar. Sam Harris wants to say the meaning is in the intersubjective. Okay, so this tin has meaning to me because I know Job and I have a relationship with Job and that's all well and good. But this is when we get into the question of God number two. God as agent, God as watcher, God as seer, God as actor, God as three persons. When you get into Alvin Plantinga's work you'll very much see that Alvin Plantinga pays a lot of attention to persons because it's suddenly in this realm of persons that if you have, see it again, the simulation argument for me is just a gateway to the cosmological argument in that the universe is designed. There is someone who owns this and that someone who owns it has designs and ideas about meaning and truth and good and evil and that someone who owns it determines these things. And then the question is when I see something and I see beauty is it because just like my eyes can see the granite walls of Yosemite Valley that something in me feels meaning and awe from Yosemite Valley and in fact I am built to feel that just like my eyes are built to see, my ears are built to hear, my skin is built to feel touch, my mind is built to have emotions, to feel different things that this gets into the question of have we in fact been designed for a context, for a story, for a story that is not just about beauty, for relationships, for something. Now this again gets into the conversation I've been having about goals, alright, and in my previous videos when I talked about you have reason from above, you have empiricism from below, you have history in the past that is accessible to us to a degree through empirical and rational means but the goal of existence, this is not something that is terribly easy for us to figure out. Now if I took this little, showed you this little device and if I didn't say already that it was a cell phone holder and I showed it to you and I showed the shape, some of you might say well that's kind of an interesting device and I could probably hold a number of things on it but at some point someone is going to ask the question what is this for? An engineer designed this for holding a cell phone and you have the little, you have the little, the space here so that you can actually have your plug go back here and plug into your cell phone, my cell phone is over on the charger over there so I can't get it but then your cell phone fits right in there. That's what it's for. Now you can't answer the for question until you have intentionality and that's actually one of the places that this longer conversation between them will go. And if you understood those then you would see that there was no charmed line where this something extra got added. There's just more and more of making your life worth living. And again when he's saying that there's more and more in making your life worth living, he's essentially saying there's more and more feeling like your life is worth living. He's saying that there's an individual subjective feeling that he's saying oh that's out there but there's nothing there. You're not actually, there's nothing outside of you that actually makes you feel that. That's just a feeling you have. Now Sam Harris at the beginning, Sam Harris and Jordan Peterson want to avoid relativism. Well what do we mean by relativism? What we mean by relativism is that I can say it feels meaningful for me to torture small animals. Every day I get up and I look forward to, this isn't true by the way so don't call the animal control people, but if I say it feels meaningful to me to torture small animals and every day I get up and I think about going down and finding some stray cat and torturing that animal because that feels meaningful to me. We would rightly say you are sick. Well why do we say that? It feels meaningful to me. This is the very definition of relativism that, well let's say I was raised by two sadistic cruel, if we may use those words without reference to moral knowledge or moral standards outside of ourselves, cruel people and they taught me and raised me to be cruel to animals and for me understanding cruelty to animals is something good and this gets into Matt Delahunty's conversation about well how do you know that your God isn't the devil? Well because what we're saying is that creation is built in such a way that goodness is actually in alignment to something but again this is where we get into this question of goal. Can we know the goal? Because good for what? Good towards what end? This is where this conversation goes. I haven't set up enough for this because I'm kind of doing this on the fly. Let's keep playing. ...of making your life worth living and there are almost certainly are states that you could be in. For instance, your loved ones might say play Wagner through headphones into his ears. This will give him solace. Again another emotional reaction. They may not be able to tell now whether this is giving you solace but if they could read your brainwaves they might be able to say yes, yes, see look at the, these are the reactions of a person who can enjoy, who is thrilled by the music even though he can't talk, even though he can't. So there's every imaginable variant from dead comatose to wide awake thrilled and at no point does a special extra thing called consciousness come into it. Well I'm not at all happy about that. I agree that of course there are different degrees of consciousness. I agree also that the brain works and solves problems and things when you're not conscious. I mean I agree with that. So I agree there is a causal connection between the brain. In my view the brain does exist. I'm not an idealist who says there's no brain. The brain gives you access and if it's working normally it will give you access that we call full consciousness. Now again access you can say well eyes to see. Well if your eyes don't see you can't see anything but that doesn't mean that what you are trying to see isn't there. It just means your eyes aren't seeing in the same way with your brain and you can be, you can be disturbed, you can be brought up poorly, you can be any different ways but what you see very quickly when you start talking this way is you begin to understand that there is a right and a wrong. That there is a way the brain is supposed to work and there's a way the brain isn't supposed to work. There's a way you're supposed to bring up a child and there's a way you're not supposed to bring up the child and our entire civilization is predicated on this. That there is in fact a, there is in fact good and evil and that they exist outside of ourselves and this is where C.S. Lewis is going to go. Okay I started this before but we'll go over it again. So he sent the word to slay and slew the little childer, Carol. I doubt whether we are sufficiently attentive to the importance of elementary textbooks. That is why I have chosen as the starting point for these lectures a little book on English intended for boys and girls in the upper forms of schools. I do not think the authors of this book, there were two of them, intended any harm and I owe them or their publisher good language for sending me a complimentary copy. At the same time I shall have nothing good to say of them. Here is a pretty predicament. I do not want to pillory two modest practicing schoolmasters who were doing the best they knew but I cannot be silent about what I think the actual tendency of their work. I therefore propose to conceal their names. I shall refer to these gentlemen as Gaius and Titius and to their book as the green book but I promise you there is such a book and I have it on my shelves. In their second chapter Gaius and Titius quote the well-known story of Coleridge at the waterfall. You remember that there were two tourists present, that one called it sublime and the other pretty and that Coleridge mentally endorsed the first judgment and rejected the second with disgust. Gaius and Titius comment as follows. When the man said this is sublime he appeared to be making a remark about the waterfall. Actually he was not making a remark about the waterfall but a remark about his own feelings. What he was saying was really I have feelings associated in my mind with the word sublime or shortly I have sublime feelings. Here are a good many deep questions settled in a pretty summary fashion but the authors are not yet finished. They add this confusion is continually present in language as we use it. We appear to be saying something very important about something and actually we are only saying something about our own feelings. In other words the question is, is there something in the waterfall? Is the waterfall itself within the frame of, speaking as a Christian, creation or frame of the natural order, is there something there that through the eyes, through the apprehension, through the mind, through the experience, through social life, through the entirety of history when we look at it we say it's sublime, it's pointing to something or are we saying when I stand in front of a hot waterfall I feel happy? Before considering the issues really raised by this momentous little paragraph designed you will remember for the upper forms of schools we must eliminate one mere confusion into which Gaius and Titius have fallen. Even on their own view, on any conceivable view, the man who says this is sublime cannot mean I have sublime feelings. And we're going to bump into this issue again and again and again because language betrays us and if you listen carefully to the Dennett Ward conversation, Dennett keeps violating his own principles again and again and again because you can't help but talk as if the waterfall has beauty, not just the waterfall makes me feel like it's pretty. Even if it were granted that such qualities of sublimity were simply and solely projected into things from our own emotions, yet the emotions which prompt the projection are the correlatives and therefore almost the opposites of the qualities projected. The feelings which make a man call an object sublime are not sublime feelings but feelings of veneration. If this is sublime is to be reduced at all to a statement about the speaker's feelings the proper translation would be I have humble feelings. Now pay attention here, veneration is a word that we connect with worship and we might ask well why is it that ancient people worshiped waterfalls? Why is it that ancient people worshiped the sun? Why is it that ancient people worshiped the stars? What was happening that drew them to this action? Now if you have a Bible you might read Romans 1 but something's going on here, something very deep, something very old. Now it's easy to just throw this all away and say ancient people were silly and foolish and they would worship anything. Alright you can say that but it doesn't address the question which is in fact the question that Jordan Peterson gets at with Maps of Meaning. Is there something else going on or are we just simply confused and now this reducing any experience that we have to something contained within our brain is that an upgrade? Feelings. If the view held by Gaius and Titius were consistently applied it would lead to obvious absurdities. It would force them to maintain that you are contemptible means I have contemptible feelings. In fact that your feelings are contemptible means my feelings are contemptible. But we need not delay over this which is the very pons a senorum of our subject. Okay, now one of the things that you might notice is that in fact someone has gone to the trouble of creating a website that deals with all the references to Latin in C.S. Lewis's Abolition of Man and there's the mercury.webster.edu, KINDT3, AI course, Latin in Lewis.htm and so pons a senorum bridges the bridge of asses. A problem that severely tests the ability of an inexperienced person. In other words what Lewis is saying here is that to say, you know, if you're wanting to say well it's just feelings it would force them to maintain I am contemptible means I have contemptible feelings. It doesn't mean when you say I am if you're saying to someone that you are contemptible you're actually saying that I have contemptible feelings. And you're not what this assumption and assertion about language says basically is that we can't even talk to each other. If you think Jordan Peterson is stupid then all you're saying is I'm having stupid feelings whenever I'm around Jordan Peterson. It just simply doesn't work. And this is the problem and Lewis points this out. It would be unjust to Gaius and Titius themselves to emphasize what was doubtless a mere inadvertence. The schoolboy who reads this passage in the green book will believe two propositions. Firstly that all sentences containing a predicate of value are statements about the emotional state of the speaker. And secondly that all such statements are unimportant. It is true that Gaius and Titius have said neither of these things in so many words. They have treated only one particular predicate of value, sublime, as a word descriptive of the speaker's emotions. Their pupils are left to do for themselves the work of extending the same treatment to all predicates of value. And no slightest obstacle to such extension is placed in their way. The authors may or may not desire the extension. They may never have given the question five minutes serious thought in their lives. I'm not concerned with what they desired but with the effect their book will certainly have on the schoolboy's mind. Now Lewis is going to get into something very important here in that Lewis is savvy enough to know that what Mr. Plinkett says, you might not have noticed but your brain noticed. The way, this gets into a really wonderful video with Dallas Willard, the way we learn is not usually the direct way. We are, our brain is always picking up filters and assumptions. And so what we're really looking at, and again Peterson's been very helpful with this, what we're really looking for is status. And if we figure out that all of the other elephants are now using language this way, well the writers are going to start using language this way. So we can have status with one another. And in many ways this is exactly how worldviews are transmitted. They're seldom communicated forthrightly, directly. We are not like Neo where you plug something into the back of our heads and we just take it in. We are most attuned as the elephants are to the dynamics of the herd. And so when we see someone gaining status having a particular point of view, we mirror them with that particular point of view. And so what's happening in this school book is really conditioning beneath the surface. In fact it's not happening at the surface level for Gaius or Titius or the others, but it's going on beneath the surface and it's at this level where our assumptions get calibrated and where we start to pick up that which the herd believes. And this is why, a point I've made in many of my other videos, we don't believe alone. We believe together in herds. So if you want to change your beliefs, you need to change the group of people not only that you hang with, but the group of people that you esteem, your heroes. And if in fact you want to change your beliefs, that's how you change it, not by just drumming it into yourself. And I think about the Saturday Night Live character Stewart who sat in front of the mirror and gave himself these affirmations. And I hear sometimes people do this. Well I'm going to sit in front of a mirror and I'm going to say, I am enough. I am enough. Does anybody buy that? If you have to sit in front of a mirror and say, I am enough. Everyone around you knows you don't believe you are. We're not that dumb. So it's all of these subliminal, behind the scenes, the other things that our brains are seeing, these are actually calibrating and forming the world we are actually living in. In the same way they have not said that judgments of value are unimportant. Their words are that we appear to be saying something very important, when in reality we are only saying something about our own feelings. No schoolboy will be able to resist the suggestion brought to bear upon him by that word only. I do not mean of course that he will make any conscious inference from what he reads to a general philosophical theory that all values are subjective and trivial. The very power of Gaius and Titius depends on the fact that they are dealing with a boy, a boy who thinks he is doing his English prep and has no notion that ethics, theology and politics are all at stake. It is not a theory they put into his mind but an assumption which ten years hence, its origin forgotten and its presence unconscious, will condition him to take one side in a controversy which he has never recognized as a controversy at all. The authors themselves, I suspect, hardly know what they are doing to the boy and he cannot know what is being done to him. So in other words, this isn't a program that the authors sat down. These are the assumptions built into culture. These are the principalities and powers that are at work within the authors and the authors are simply sliding them under the table to the boys. The boys don't even know they are receiving them but at some point these little boys are going to grow up and they are going to reflect on it and they are going to say, oh yes, the waterfall, there is nothing there. I have just been conditioned from my youth and my culture to imagine that it is pretty but why should it be pretty? You could do the same thing with respect to torturing animals. Well, it has only been my culture that has conditioned me to imagine that torturing animals is evil. Torturing animals makes me strong. We all know this today. Do we? How? Before considering the philosophical credentials of the position which Gaius and Titius have adopted about value, I should like to show its practical results on the educational procedure. In their fourth chapter they quote a silly advertisement of a pleasure cruise and proceed to inoculate their pupils against the sort of writing it exhibits. The advertisement tells us that those who buy tickets for this cruise will go across the western ocean where Drake of Devon sailed, adventuring after the treasures of the Indies and bringing home themselves also a treasure of golden hours and glowing colours. It is a bad bit of writing, of course, a venal and pathetic exploitation of those emotions of awe and pleasure which men feel in visiting places that have striking associations with history or legend. If Gaius and Titius were to stick to their last and teach their readers, as they promised to do, the art of English composition, it was their business to put this advertisement side by side with passages from great writers in which the very emotion is well expressed and then show where the difference lies. Don't forget that C.S. Lewis is himself a teacher of English. Power growing underweight. And again, I would, I'm running through this, pick up a copy of The Abolition of Man and I've read this book now about six times. It's very short, it's only three essays, that's all this book really is, but the more I go over it the more I see, you know, just how masterful Lewis is at rhetoric. A lesson which had laid such literature beside the advertisement and really discriminated the good from the bad would have been a lesson worth teaching. There would have been some blood and sap in it, the trees of knowledge and of life growing together. Right there, look at that. There'd be some blood and sap in it, the trees of knowledge and of life growing together. What are these trees he's talking about? He's talking about the trees in the garden. He's talking about how literature and beauty can give you a sense of fulfillment of heaven and earth. The power of this to point to something and not just give me a feeling about something, but actually point to something that is true and right. And so when I have a feeling of awe, when I pause and I realize what he's done with that sentence, I begin to say, Oh my goodness, I was built for this. It shows the power and what we're really talking about is, I should pull this book off the shelf, I should have myself organized before I do these things. I might have to edit if I can't find this book right away. Here it is. A friend of mine named Len Vanderzee has this book from InterVarsity Press called Christ Baptism and the Lord's Supper. And what this book goes into is really a sacramental view of life. What do I mean by sacramental? I mean that when we look at the bread and the wine, now I'm a Calvinist, I don't believe in transubstantiation. I don't believe that after the host blesses a wafer, you could run that wafer to a lab and you could find the genetics of Jesus in it. But that wafer, the bread and the wine is connecting us to something, just like we are apprehending when we see the beauty of Yosemite Valley or a waterfall, when we say this is sublime and when we see a piece of writing that we say, oh my goodness, this is connecting me to something, or we hear some music. This is a sacramental view of life that says that the stuff here in the world is connected to something deeper. And that when I hear a piece of music, it's not just that the music is giving me a feeling, well sure the music is giving me a feeling, just like when I go to Yosemite Valley and I open my eyes which are working correctly, I see the granite walls and I have a sense of awe. Well I see the granite walls and I have a sense of awe because something has been formed in me and I have been raised correctly and I can see, what I can really see is glory. And that glory draws me to a creator and that glory draws me to other human beings. And suddenly the world starts to fit together. That's what Louis is saying here when he just with that little phrase, there would have been some blood and sap in it. What does he mean by that? He means that it would be, not just sap, but blood and sap. The trees of knowledge and of life grow together. This is the fulfillment of heaven and earth. Now, this is part of the point that Louis makes. If we reduce it all to just simply feelings, well, then there is no honoring Elvis's guitar or looking at Elton John's glass or going to a cathedral or having a drink with him. Or even understanding an heirloom. This isn't really an heirloom. Sorry, Joe. It's a tin that I kept because it's kind of neat. But okay, so it's connected to Joe. But so what? In fact, what you really cut out is the entire transmission process of meaning. That's what this is about. But we don't notice. All this is very true. Talents inferior to those of Gaius and Titius would have sufficed to discover it. What they have not noticed or not cared about is that a very similar treatment could be applied to much good literature which treats the same emotions as the same emotions that we have. What, after all, can the history of early British Christianity in pure reason add to the motives for piety as they exist in the 18th century? Why should Mr. Wordsworth's inn be more comfortable or the air of London more healthy because London has existed for a long time? Or if there is indeed any obstacle which will prevent a critic from debunking Johnson and Wordsworth, and Lamb and Virgil and Thomas Brown and Mr. de la Mer, as the Green Book debunks the advertisement, Gaius and Titius have given their schoolboy readers no faintest help to its discovery. From this passage, the schoolboy will learn about literature precisely nothing. What he will learn quickly enough, and perhaps indelibly, is the belief that all emotions aroused by local association are the same as the schoolboy. What he will learn quickly enough, and perhaps indelibly, is the belief that all emotions aroused by local association are in themselves contrary to reason and contemptible. Now, keep going with this, because what you very quickly see is that, well, what is your mother? What is your father? I mean, this goes all the way down to anything that has meaning. What you have done is basically destroyed meaning completely and said, these are just all emotions. You see, this is actually what's under Jordan Peterson's work, because Jordan Peterson, like the schoolboys that Gaius and Titius have given books to, at some point saw the Americans and the Russians looking at themselves with nuclear weapons and said, what is this about? Well, they're just all having feelings. Well, now we get into Sam Harris talking about, well, the fight in the Near East, well, that's just something that can be resolved with land contract. Do you have any sense of connection to your ancestors? Well, that's just simply feeling. There is no connection. Well, there's a biological connection, but there's no meaning, there's no purpose, there's nothing that makes anything worthwhile. And this is exactly the conversation there that Ward and Dennett are having, and Dennett is saying, congratulations, you've graduated to having feelings, but that's all they are. There's no meaning connected to it. How could there be? And Ward is saying, there has to be meaning if throw out meaning and what is life worth living? This is the entire Jordan Peterson phenomenon in three little essays, The Abolition of Man. He will have no notion that there are two ways of being immune to such an advertisement, that it falls equally flat on those who are above it and those who are below it, on the man of real sensibility and on the man of real sensibility. Now, again, real sensibility here is Lewis saying, the man who rightly senses there are things to die for, the man who rightly senses that there are reasons for blood and sap to well up, and that things in this world that we sense point us to the reunion of heaven and earth and point us true, dear glory, and point us to true value, that these things exist and that these things are what make life worth living, not just experiences, but things that the experiences and the feelings and the emotions point to. There is real meaning in the world. ...ability and on the mere trousered ape who has never been able to conceive the Atlantic as anything more than so many million tons of cold salt water. There are two men to whom we offer in vain a false leading article on patriotism and honor. One is the coward, the other is the honorable and patriotic man. None of this is brought before the schoolboy's mind. On the contrary, he is encouraged to reject the lure of the Western Ocean on the very dangerous ground that in so doing he will prove himself a knowing fellow who can't be bubbled out of his cash. Gaius and Titius, while teaching him nothing about letters, have cut out of his soul, long before he is old enough to choose, the possibility of having certain experiences which thinkers of more authority than they have held to be generous, fruitful and humane. But it is not only Gaius and Titius in another little book. Well, before we get to Orbilius, I should probably stop here. This will be a shorter video. Patriotism. Die for your country. What is your country? My country is nothing. My people are nothing. My family is nothing. Nothing. There is no. All I'm doing is having an emotion and the emotion is arbitrary to the world. There is no. All I'm doing is having an emotion and the emotion is arbitrary to that which I grew up with. There is no. I mean, what Lewis reveals is that this manner, which is just assumed and slid under the surface, is simply an invitation to nihilism. Because why would you die for your country? Why would you stand up and take a bullet for your child? Why would? Right away, you feel it in your chest. The title of this is Men Without Chests. You feel it in your chest. There are things that make your blood boil. When Jordan Peterson tweeted that tweet, maybe your blood boiled because you said, it's wrong. And Owen Benjamin comes on and says, it's wrong. And Peterson's been my idol and he's been my hero, but I will forgo Peterson because I must have the truth. Now, this doesn't mean that Owen Benjamin is right or wrong, but what it does mean is that he's alive and he has an understanding that things matter. That's what this is about. So I'm going to cut this short now because I have a two o'clock appointment, but I will pick it up and we will pick it up. So there's just the next installment in The Abolition of Man, the beginning, part one.