https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=ig2SvfemF5A

 Reports of a Ukrainian fighter called the Ghost of Kiev. Many people are sharing these reports as beacons of hope and evidence of Ukrainian strength and courage. Nearly immediately following these reports, people began criticizing these reports and some Twitter accounts seem to be dedicated to all of their posts of fact checking these apparent false reports of the Ghost of Kiev. The Protestants among us, fact checking. Something about this fact checking fury seems more harmful than the lies they are fact checking. When does a myth become more truth than a lie? Something seems more true about the mythical Ghost of Kiev than the posts by the fact checkers. You're very much onto something Christian and this has a lot to do with everything that's in terms of the tensions within this little corner of the internet. Because it is modernist and Protestant in some ways to demand that everything be true at the physical level and if it is not true at the physical level, we're going to reject it. There's something good about that because that which is most true is true at all levels. So the video I posted this morning of the John Bear Sam conversation, which was excellent. I know Anselman doesn't think a lot of John Bear but don't give up Anselman. Anselman won't give up. That's part of the beauty of Anselman. He's down for a fight and he's not going to give up. I love people like that. Whether I agree or disagree, you stick to your guns because that, we've got a little weird noise coming through here. Rick, what is that? Is that you? Hey Joe, could you mute yourself? Okay, there it is. Thanks. So when you watch Peugeot and Richard Roland do their universal history thing, that's connected to this. Because all of these stories about Alexander the Great coming to Jerusalem, all these, all the hagiographies, the Orthodox quite clearly have a love for this and a way of incorporating it as does and did the Catholics. But of course the Catholics pass through something that the Orthodox didn't or haven't yet. And this is why I always say there's a point made by Protestantism which is really important. And that point, even though Protestantism itself is all over the map, that point has to do with this issue that the most real things are real at every level. Now there can be things that are real at the physical level but less real than things, not less real. See it's these ways of comparing, it's this grammar that make it difficult to talk about Because there's a reality to universal history that is credible and stands on its own apart from the physical history. And this is part of what Peterson points to when Peterson says a novel is in some ways more real than a physical description. He doesn't use those words but that's really what he's talking about. And it's very difficult for us to fully get our minds around this reality. So this is sort of what legends are made of. And when I say it that way, say, oh the ghost of Keefe, that's a legend. And if in fact, I watched Peugeot's, those of you who follow me on Twitter know that I watched Peugeot's video about Ukraine this morning, really enjoyed it. Because Peugeot hit a bunch of things that I had sort of been feeling too, although I was a little quicker to make some commentary on some things. But we don't know what's going on. Everything that we know about this war is filtered and heavily filtered. So a good bit of caution is in order, first thing. So let's say that the ghost of Keefe is a legend. Well, what's a legend? Generally speaking, a legend is a tall tale. That's a bit of Americana. It's a story that's probably based on some physical events and some physical human characters that gets embroidered. We'll use that language. And it gets magnified. And basically it gets fed the kind of stuff that makes up universal history. And it's important and we need it. And we love it. But it's a legend. And so part of the Protestant dispute and our journey into Protestantism was the question, well is Jesus' resurrection a legend? And so one of the things that Jordan Peterson did when he talks about the resurrection, he is he, if let's imagine, and this is a distortion of course, but we'll go with it. Let's imagine that this is the physical story beneath the legend. And the legend is this whole thing. And the legend will probably distort elements of the physical story in order for the legend to function. Jordan Peterson, in terms of the resurrection, speaking psychologically is comfortable to talk up here. And so then when he has this conversation with Peugeot, Peugeot sort of brings him down here and starts to drill into this. And that's when Peterson gets nervous. Because as a scientist or a modernist or a modern historian, you want to deal with this part down here and you're skeptical about this part up here. And though part of what's being exposed now that modernity is receding is both the necessity of this part up here and the value of this part up here. And the fact that we actually see this part down here through that part up there. And the ghost of Kiev, if in fact it is a legend, there's probably a Ukrainian fighter pilot that's been better than most, that's had some success against the Russians. And maybe the ghost of Kiev is a compilation of a few different fighter pilots. You know, we don't know. But there's a truth about the legend that the individual instances contribute to, but don't adequately embody. And that's the function of a legend, especially when it comes to our principalities. And this has everything to do with storytelling. So the critical drinker this morning released a new video on why movies suck. It's just pure critical drinker. But he makes a lot of good points comparing. He compares the cartoon Mulan, which I really enjoyed. My kids watched that growing up and I just I loved I loved that story. Mulan is, you know, I love that little cartoon. And I've never seen the live action one because for the most part, I've seen what they've been doing with those. And it's like now, now, now you're missing the point. And the critical drinker does a nice job of showing what points they're missing. So there's this so a legend is really important for us because. So I just released a little video both on my Vanderclips channel. I didn't check to make sure it went through. But and then on Twitter of the Guardian had a nice little piece about Ukrainian reservists. And it had a nice little segment of basically a little bit of a little bit of a little bit of a nice little segment of basically a ballad singer using an ancient Cossack instrument, singing an ancient Cossack song. And the narrator of the video is saying how, you know, the spirit, you know. The spirit fills us, the spirit of their ancestors, of the Cossacks to resist the Russians. And if you watch, listen to the rest of history, you'll learn a little bit about the Cossacks. And Ukraine and Russia and the history and all of that. So those spirits live on and legends are very spiritual. Because they, they, they embody that the spirits get, get carried on through the legend. It's sort of like. There are certain people when they try to tell a story, they don't know how and they can't do it. And they can even ruin a great story, just like you ruin a good joke. And there are people who can tell a great story and can deliver a great joke. And that's sort of the difference. So I think your your instincts are exactly right here, Golden, that that what's happening here is far bigger than who's the who's the who's the hero. So Warren Mills, who organized my trip to Australia now going on three years ago, his second book that he wrote about what's good about the Golden Rule. The first book that he wrote that wasn't published, and he's still trying to get it published, is a book about the father of drag racing. Because when Warren was a kid in 1950s Australia, Don, big daddy Don Garletts was his hero. And so he's written a book about it and he's he's reworking the book and he wants to get it published about big daddy Don Garletts. And so when he was so when Warren was a kid in Australia, they were kind of peeved at the British because they felt that the British had abandoned Australia during the Second World War. And the Americans came to their aid. And so little Warren Mills was a wonderful and I'll listen to this. Little Warren Mills was just fascinated with California and he was a petrol head. That's how he introduced himself to me when I met him. Of course, petrol is the British way of saying gasoline. He was a petrol head and he he'd monkey with engines and he worked his career in the automotive industry. And he built a race car himself. And I mean, he just he's just that kind of guy loves doing that. And then his retirement started writing books, which is really a fascinating thing. A lot of people don't have that kind of bandwidth to sort of make the jump from being, you know, working in the automotive industry with nuts and bolts and your hands and grease and everything to writing books. But he finally, as later in life, got a chance to go to America to meet big daddy Don Garletts. And, you know, there's this saying, which is also true, you know, don't meet your heroes. Well, why? Well, they'll disappoint you. And that could be, you know, if to the degree that whatever distortion field YouTube is creating, some of you someday might want to meet me and and you might walk away disappointed. So they'll say, well, he's taller than I thought he was. But, you know, he didn't give me the attention or he didn't he didn't live up to my expectations or or or. Because in some ways, PVK is a legend. A little legend, but there's some legendariness about me, too. It's just by virtue of the medium and storytelling and and how this medium works. So. But the legend is an important thing. And and there's sort of a demythologizing modern Protestantism that wants to just sweep the legend away. And so fundamentalism basically tries to take the legend and and make the physical layer. Fit the legend. And that's not a bad desire. And and sometimes that Protestant fundamentalism is a corrective against the inherent skepticism. But sometimes the legend should just be kept as a legend. And that's OK. But. And this is part of the point of fundamentalism that it makes imperfectly and and and is that the physical layer remains important. And and we know that because movies that are based on a true story are better. Because they're based on a true story and people who know the story well at different layers will critique the movie and be involved in all that. And so this is a real thing. And all of these big world events that we're going through, Covid, the Ukrainian War, everything around us are lessons in sense making. If you pay attention to them and you can grow in wisdom by paying attention. One of the one of the big things I learned from Peterson was that when he talked about attention, you you might not be the smartest person in the world. And and I don't mean that I'm not the smartest person in the world. I mean, I don't I don't even know what my IQ is. And frankly, I don't even care. But I'm not and I'm not I'm not low in intelligence. I'm not genius level. I'm maybe better than average in intelligence, but I'm not the smartest person in the world. But even if you're not very smart. If you pay attention. You can gain wisdom. And I have known many people who are not very intelligent, who pay attention and become wise. So if you're not very intelligent, don't let that discourage you make up for your lack of intelligence. With wisdom gained through attention. Because in the long run, you'll outcompete the very smart. Because attention is powerful and. So don't dismiss legend. And that's what part of the reason I've been fascinated by Peugeot and Roland's. Universal history because universal history includes legend. And. Well, I'm going to avoid. Yeah, I'll leave it there. I'll leave it there. So it's a good question.