https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=DeymNQfKC4c

 Hi, this is Paul. I'm sure the YouTube algorithm has already dished this up for you, but in case you haven't watched it yet, you should. This was a great interview. It starts out a little slow, the first 45 minutes, but once they sort of find each other and begin to really trust each other, it becomes a really good conversation. And you get a much better sense for who Chris Lunsford is, Lunsford, stage name Oliver Anthony. And Jordan is really at his best here. When I finished listening to this now, I listened to this on the daily wire and there's like another half hour on the daily wire, which is some of the best stuff really. And that is often the case because they usually do it after. And so they build up momentum and that's really where they get comfortable with each other, where they can really share with each other and ask each other difficult questions. But to me, when I listened to this, I remembered Jordan and his university lectures, Jordan, the clinical psychologist. And in many ways in something like this, especially with a blue collar guy, Jordan is really at his best. Jordan is telling personal stories, some new ones that we haven't heard before. Oliver Anthony had taken both the big five personality test and had done the other test about mapping out your life. And so he'd been a big follower of Jordan. And he says in the interview that he decided he wanted to go on Rogan and he wanted to go and talk to Jordan. And he says, maybe now after these two, I won't do anymore. And I deeply appreciated this conversation. And now I continue to pray. I pray for both of them because this level of attention and potential is challenging, especially for a younger man. So I pray that God gives him wisdom to know how to manage what he's done. But this was really great. I know a lot of people are going to want to sort of shoehorn it into the culture war, but again, this isn't about the culture war. This is about far deeper things. And sort of what I said on my Meet John Doe video about Lunsford, I have to retrain myself now to use his real name, I think is very true. It's very much how he comes off, comes off quite genuine, very interesting guy, very likable guy. So really, I know Jordan does a lot of these conversations and especially if they're political or, or there seem to be, you know, someone who's just sort of popular for the moment, I'll sometimes skip over them unless some of you who do watch all of them say, Oh, you really got to see this. And then I'll go back and watch it. But this one, you don't want to miss. It was really, really good. And I'm sure I'll be taking a look at some parts of it at some point. If you're if you've still got a daily wire subscription, definitely listen to the whole thing. You obviously don't then have to worry about the emplacement ads. And the the last part of it was I thought in many ways, some of the best parts. So sorry for the YouTube. Only people in that I, I don't know if I've listened to two or three things since I reupped my daily wire account, I just don't listen to that much of their material. But this one I listened to and it was really good. So just a little just a little pointer.