https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=G4EGfOEqTEs

 Hi, this is Paul and this is Rough Draft for Sunday where I work through the current version of my Sunday sermon. This week on one of the channels that has grown from this little estuary project, I learned about Project Bluebeam and it sounded a lot like some of what the church in Thessalonica was struggling with. Now you might ask what on earth is Project Bluebeam? Well, in 1994, this individual, a French Canadian, a journalist conspiracy theorist, published the Project Bluebeam in which he detailed the claim that NASA, with the help of the United Nations, was attempting to implement a new age religion with the Antichrist at its head and start a new world order via a technologically simulated second coming of Christ. And he went around giving talks about this theory. He was ready to expose NASA for trying to simulate the second coming of Christ, thus provoking a new world order led by the Antichrist and a new age religion. It was uncovered that this actually was sort of the plot of a 1995 unreleased movie that was sketched out by Gene Roddenberry, who originated Star Trek, and had some ideas that were from a 1991 Star Trek Next Generation episode. Project Bluebeam, NASA tries to simulate the second coming, causing people on earth to fall victim to the Antichrist. Very similar last week to second Thessalonians, where the people there had heard by somebody that Paul had said that, no, Jesus had already come. And so Paul basically sets them straight. We saw that last week. Don't be deceived. And he runs through what he had run through before. Our theories tend to prey on our need for the novel and our desire for security. There's a typo. Now as human beings, we're very interested in the future. And so the church at Thessalonica was wanting to know God's plan for the future and how it affected them. Now when it comes to the future, there's usually three options. Things will get worse, things will get better, and things will stay sort of the same. And in some ways, Christianity sort of integrates all three views. Last week we talked about this man of lawlessness, and this week Paul goes on in chapter three to say this. As for other matters, brothers and sisters, pray for us that the message of the Lord may spread rapidly and be honored just as it was with you. Paul is seeking and anticipating that the message of Jesus' Messiahship and resurrection will grow in the Roman Empire. And it did. And so that's a betterment idea. And pray that we may be delivered from the wicked and evil people, for not everyone has faith. But the Lord is faithful, and he will strengthen you and protect you from the evil one. We have confidence in the Lord that you are doing, that you are doing, and will continue to do the things we command. May the Lord direct your hearts into God's love and Christ's perseverance. In other words, yeah, all that stuff last week about the man of lawlessness comes through, but at the same time, Paul anticipates a harvest and he's encouraging them to pray for him. It's their job, in fact, to participate in this harvest that is coming. And this, in fact, is well underway, and it's exactly what happened. And Christ's spirit has been rewriting the world ever since then. One of the things that I've noted often is that atheists today attack Christians based on the moral system that they, in fact, inherited from Christians. Christians aren't loving enough. Christians don't perform well enough. Now there might be some other points that they take issue with, but in many respects, so much of what Jesus taught has, in fact, gone out into the world and slowly seeped into our assumptions in ways that people no longer recognize as Christian. Christ's spirit has gone out through history, challenging the world in dramatic ways that were unthinkable during the classical period before Jesus' life and ministry. It's amazing here that Paul asks for their prayers. You might imagine that Paul would say, well, I'm this apostle who's had a vision and God listens to my prayers, and so no need for you to pray for me because me and God, we have it all sewn up. Paul doesn't see the world that way. They are to pray for him. They are to participate in this ministry, in prayer, in evangelism, and there's power there, and this should come as great encouragement to us. You might feel yourself a small Christian or a weak Christian or a wobbly Christian or barely a Christian at all, and the encouragement is to pray, to ask God to listen, to ask God to move, to ask God to make the world a better place. He continues now, In the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, we command you, brothers and sisters, to keep away from every believer who is idle and disruptive. This kind of sounds bad, keep away from them. What do you mean by that? And does not live according to the teachings you received from us. For you yourselves know how you ought to follow our example. We were not idle when we were with you, nor did we eat anyone's food without paying for it. In the sanctuary, we worked night and day, laboring and toiling so that we would not be a burden to any of you. We did this not because we did not have the right to such help, but in order to offer ourselves as a model for you to imitate. And we knew from the earlier descriptions that when Paul went to Thessalonica, he worked with his hands, he did that in fact in a number of places, so that he would not be a burden he says here, so that he could model this, this self-reliance instead of imagining how taking from them, leading to the imagination that he's a grifter or suddenly he's just going to eat just interested in them for their money. For even when we were with you, we gave you this rule. The one who is unwilling to work shall not eat. We hear that some among you are idle and disruptive. They are not busy, they are busy bodies. Such people we command and urge in the Lord Jesus Christ to settle down and earn the food they eat. As for you brothers and sisters, never tire of doing what's good. Take special note of anyone who does not obey our instructions in this letter. Do not associate with them in order that they may feel ashamed. Yet do not regard them as an enemy, but warn them as you would a fellow believer. So here you see Paul very much showing a lot of nuance and saying you can use a little bit of social pressure here to encourage people to do the right thing. The image of a Christian is not someone who is going to simply take advantage of people that they convince with their fine words or scare by some story or basically popular word today is grift. A Christian is someone who is busy so that they have something to share with those who are in need. Now there will be people who are in need and especially in a day like that you'd have people, there's no social security, there's no safety net. These individuals would struggle to find food, especially if they had no family and the church is there to share with them. But what Paul is teaching is that this is the model and we'd like to replicate this model and see this model grow. This addresses what sometimes people call the free rider problem because people use religion to con and in many ways there's no easier con than the religious con. But not all users are cons. You don't encourage the religious con. But Paul modulates it. He's not saying attack these people. He's not saying treat these people as an enemy. He's basically saying subtly demonstrate that you know what, we understand the game that's going on here and if you're able body, if you're able to do it, you should shoulder your own weight just as we do and in fact work so you have something to share with those who are in need. You don't have to demonize them, but you also don't have to feed them. What's interesting how he concludes this letter very much wraps it all together because again the people had been conned. Now may the Lord of peace himself give you peace at all times and in every way. The Lord be with all of you. I Paul write this greeting in my own hand which is the distinguishing mark of all my letters. This is how I write. So in other words, sending this letter back and saying you see this handwriting right here. This is me. This is me, Paul, the one that you know. Here are my teachings. This is what I would like you to do. Follow my example. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all. Now we are naturally anxious about the future. That's simply part of how we are as human beings. Will things get better? Will things get worse? Will they always remain the same? There are grifters, con men, dupes and fools in every age and in fact you can find many early Christian writings that deal with this because once people sort of figured out that these Christians were generous, others sort of hopped in in order to take from them or get a free ride and Paul says, you understand the game that they're playing. Don't play along with that. Don't attack them or treat them as enemies, but gently encourage them to in fact understand the program because this type of living is a sign of a regenerate heart. We are promised in fact suffering, but we are to pray for our deliverance. We are promised betterment, but we are to expect frustration and labor. We are promised deliverance, but it comes through suffering. It comes with betterment and it comes with Christ's power to deliver us from our sinful nature from the power of the devil and from the power of the world. So the teaching here is to participate in that proximal and ultimate betterment to be examples in fact of the Christian life for others that they may follow along as you emulate the way a Christian should live. Pray, share the good news of Jesus' resurrection, don't feed what you don't want to grow, and gently admonish those who are weak to grow to be givers and not simply takers.