https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=4xfY7FbQTsA

 Hi, this is Paul and this is Rough Draft for Sunday where I run through the current version of my Sunday sermon. Many of you know the story of St. Boniface when he fells the, you can find on a Wikipedia, Thor's Oak or Jobe's Oak. Jobe is basically short for Jupiter. Jupiter's Oak or Donor's Oak. He, St. Boniface, was doing missionary work among the Germans and he wanted to make a point that his God was more powerful than the God of the Germanic tribes that he was reaching out to and this was a sacred tree and the point was that if he could fall the tree, well, then that would prove that the God wouldn't protect it and well, he fell the tree and the wood was used to build a church and the people were mighty impressed and so the story goes, they became Christians. Now, it's interesting how this story plays. In secular post-enlightenment, especially Protestant people say, of course, it was all superstitious about the God of the tree. Thor is no God. Odin is no God. These are no gods. These are fake gods and so therefore go ahead and fell the tree without fear because it's a nothing. But why do we remember the story? Is the point of the story that there was no God behind the tree or is the point of the story that because the people believed there was a God behind the tree, Germany became Christian and world history was changed. Now, is stuff just stuff? That's sort of the Enlightenment position, but it's also the position of the Church of Corinth and their elites, at least with respect to the idols in the temple. The Church in Corinth, their elites, found in the liberation in Christ the freedom to eat meat sacrificed to idols or to attend a social meal in a pagan temple precinct. If there is only one God, so the logic goes, all of these other gods are empty vanities, so therefore eat away. Now, lurking behind this is the very old conversation about the nature of these gods or demons or the nature of demons or just statues. Israel was strictly warned about worshipping idols, but as the book The Religion of Israel goes on to say, something is curiously missing, especially from other documents far later in history where, well, why don't worship idols? Well, it's not really said. This has everything to do with their unique allegiance to the one God of Israel. That much is clear. Israel was not told that these idols are fronts for demons, and that word demon is pretty complex as it goes through history. The Old Testament, the law and the prophets, has within it in many ways the seeds of secularity, and you can find this in the work of Tom Holland. He picks that out. The Hebrew prophets are right there saying that God wants obedience, not sacrifices, but yet sacrifices were still made, sacrifices were still done, sacrifices were still in order, but why have them anyway if they were worthless? What's going on in terms of religion and idols and statues? And then if you read Mark 7, you find one of the most shocking things that nobody pays attention to. Everybody wants to fight about the virgin birth, but they should pay a little bit of attention to Mark chapter 7. Again, Jesus called the crowd to him and said, listen to me everyone and understand this. Nothing outside a person can defile them by going into them. Rather, it is what comes out of a person that defiles them. What do we mean by defile? To put distance between them and God? After he had left the crowd and entered the house, his disciples asked him about this parable. Are you so dull? He asked, this is Jesus to his disciples, you had to be sort of brave to ask Jesus a follow-up question. Don't you see that nothing that enters a person from the outside can defile them? At this point they have to say, wait a minute, we have, it sounds a little high, I'm going to lower it. Sorry about that. We have all of this law from Moses, don't we? Wasn't that important? What about clean and unclean and what about when Aaron's sons sought to bring strange fire because the altar was unlit and the Lord destroyed them? There's a lot of questions. And then what the NIV notes as a parenthetical remark, but again there's no punctuation in the Greek text. This is clearly the narration from the author who is a disciple of Peter. This isn't coming from Luke or Paul. In saying this, Jesus declared all foods clean. Does that include food that has been on an altar in a pagan temple? This is what Paul is wrestling with. This is actually a very difficult thing. He went on, what comes out of a person is what defiles them. For it is from within, out of a person's heart, that evil thoughts come, sexual immorality, theft, murder, adultery, greed, malice, deceit, lewdness, envy, slander, arrogance, and folly. All these evils come from inside and defile a person, making that person further from God. But even that statement, that's rather metaphorical, isn't it? Because if, well, if you listen to what you were taught in Sunday school, God is everywhere, well how can you get further from God if he's everywhere? But at the same time we sort of understand those who are close to God are close to God and those who are far from God are far from God. And then Jesus again has what in previous sermons we've called a vice list. Now in this whole section between chapter 8 and chapter 10, Paul is dealing with these issues in the Gentile world and he's dealing with them using this illustration of meat sacrifice to idols and the Corinthian church. So if you remember in chapter 8, he basically said, well, you're not sinning against God by eating this meat, you mature elite Corinthian leaders, but you may possibly be be sinning against the body of Christ because you might be leading some of your people to stumble. People perhaps at the same level of those who who watched St. Boniface fell the tree. Chapter 9, which we talked about last week, Paul says, now don't play status games with me about this because after all I am the source of your connection to Christ. You learned about him through me. So if you're going to start playing status games and trumping each other and talk about talk about who is mature and who isn't mature, you will lose that game. And then he says the radical thing that for the Gentiles, Paul condescends for them because Christ condescends for all of us. Now he continues in chapter 10, for I do not want you to be ignorant of the fact, brothers and sisters, that our ancestors were all under the cloud and that they passed through the sea. Now right away you have to pause because we sort of read through this and our minds very quickly sort of connect the dots, but these are Gentiles he's talking to. He's been very clear about that throughout the whole argument and yet he calls Israel in the desert their ancestors. Well ancestors in what way? Through blood and you know even if we say through blood, what does that really mean? Do we really just receive blood from our parents? No. Well how about genetics? Well genetics are proteins but they're coded in a certain way. So do we receive code? Very quickly we're lost in this mind versus matter or matter versus spirit thing. We're sort of neck deep in philosophy right now but we're using symbolic language and Paul is basically saying that in some ways the Corinthian church, and this has been our thesis all the way along from the start of the book, the Corinthian church is participating in the story of Israel and that somehow they are connected to the story and they can learn lessons from the story that relate to them. They were all baptized into Moses and then suddenly baptized? You're using that word that we have been using for being baptized into Christ and talking about Israel being baptized into Moses in the cloud and in the sea. They all ate the same spiritual food and drank the same spiritual drink. Now right away spiritual food, well that must be that manna that fell from heaven that they were eating. That certainly seems spiritual because it didn't, it comes from heaven quite you know I don't want to use literally I want physically, it comes from heaven from above but what about spiritual strength? Oh that's right the rock and the water speak to the rock and it will produce water when there was no water in the dry and thirsty land and so what Paul is redoing is rearranging their ideas of matter and spirit and connecting them to Christ and there's a certain looseness in here that again you find this consistently throughout the Bible. You find it in the Hebrew prophets and this is very difficult for us because on one hand as secular materialists we don't tend to think this way too often unless of course someone comes into a church and drops a cuss word and then they say I'd better be careful or lightning might strike me. For they drank from the spiritual rock that accompanied them that that almost makes it sound like the rock is walking around the desert and that rock was Christ and and now suddenly Christ is back there in the desert with them. Was he there through the cloud? Was he there through the manna? Was he there through the water? Somehow Christ has been present through all of this and that Christ is their connection from Israel to Corinth and they are participating in this same story. Nevertheless God was not pleased with most of them. Their bodies were scattered in the wilderness. Now wait a minute. In many ways I have made thousands of hours of video circling around these issues. They are deep and difficult to talk about while in many ways they're issues that we all sort of natively understand or touch on just to a limited degree. Paul is basically saying stuff is stuff. It belongs to spirit and it is wielded by spirit and this is the level that you must think about it and your little Corinthian church is a mess but you are tied into God's work all the way back to Israel. You are part of this story. Now if I say part of this story we all sort of understand and we understand it as spiritual which is so sort of storyful but then God was not pleased with most of them and their bodies were scattered on the wilderness. In other words God comes into the story and participates in it too in a very significant way. Now these things occurred as examples to keep us from setting our hearts on evil things as they did. Now okay well what are evil things? Is the meat in the market evil things? What makes it evil? I thought before you said that it's sort of just meat unless of course there is a spiritual connection to it. Well where does that spiritual connection, what is the nexus of it? It's you. You are the nexus. Humanity connects heaven and earth. We are the breath of God and the stuff of earth. We are right in the middle. Do not be idolaters as some of them were as it is written people sat down to eat and drink and got up to indulge in revelry. Now there's a lot behind this quote too because part of what is connected in the pagan temples is basically orgies, sexuality. This was pretty commonplace in pagan temples. Well why? Well we feel spiritual when we hear familiar words, when we do holy things, when we sing holy songs, when we maybe if you drink enough wine or drink wine laced with something else you might feel spiritual and then we feel spiritual when our sexuality gets triggered and we lose ourself. Why are there a million romantic songs in this world? These are just as religious as the songs on Christian radio in some way. We should not commit sexual immorality. Athene has been dealing with throughout this story as some of them did and in one day 23,000 of them died. Paul is saying some of your sins might have consequences here and now. Be careful. We should not test Christ as some of them did and were killed by snakes. He's speaking about the story in the book of Numbers that gets picked up in the gospel of John that we talked about a few months ago. And do not grumble as some of them did and were killed by the destroying angel. That raises a lot of eyebrows here. Paul might be commenting on a tradition rather than the text itself but the point is clear that Christ and God are one God. I'll say it that way. And you ought to be careful about sin because as he'll say in the book of Romans, the wages of sin is death and sometimes those wages are demanded now and sometimes those wages are demanded later. But be careful. The stuff doesn't have power but it can still matter what we do with it. God can bring judgment upon us. These things happen to them as examples and they were written down as warnings to us. That book is for you. It was not written to you but it was written for you. On whom the culminations of the ages has come. In other words, you've seen more clearly in Jesus Christ than they got to see in the water and the cloud and the manna and all of those manifestations. So if you think you are standing firm, be careful that you don't fall. In other words, elites of Corinth who, well, we're free. Better be a little careful with that freedom. No temptation has overtaken you except what is common to man and God is faithful. He will not let you be tempted beyond what you can bear. Now, this text is used for a lot of reasons often but it's seldom read carefully. No temptation has overtaken you. In other words, there's a little bit of implication that they're not doing well with this temptation and it's common and if in fact they stumble with it, they're guilty of it. But when you are tempted, he will provide a way out so that you can endure it and what Paul would probably be saying is that you can endure it and what Paul would probably be saying is that I'm part of this way right now, this warning you've been given. Therefore, my dear friends, flee from idolatry and this again is completely in keeping with the Old Testament. I speak to sensible people. Judge for yourselves what I say. He's saying this isn't hard to understand. You get this. Flee from idolatry. Is not the cup of thanksgiving for which we give thanks a participation in the blood of Christ? And is not the bread that we break a participation in the body of Christ? Again, there's a ton here that we can go into and it's really in some ways difficult because that is what they're doing and that is participating in the story of Israel, in the manna and the water and all of the story. But the body of Christ is on one hand the body of our Lord and the communion of each other. Because there is one loaf, we who are many are one body for we all share the one loaf. Consider the people of Israel. Did not those who eat the sacrifices participate on the altar? Huh. Now again, this is going back and forth and they are this is this is the kind of thing that's going to make them go back over this again and again and again and really think it through. Do I mean that the food sacrifice to an idol is anything or that that food is anything? No, but the sacrifices of pagans are offered to demons not to God and I do not want you to be participants with demons. Now he's been talking about storyline and basically what he's saying is that if you participate in a pagan temple you are participating in that story and your identity will come in that story and that will be the story in which you operate. But if you participate in the church, the story of participation of the blood of Christ and the body of Christ through the wine and the bread you are participating in that story. Now you've got blood as wine or wine as blood and bread as body. This is the participation. How do you participation is the participation in the meat or is the participation in the mind in the heart in the spirit in the relationship. But that also makes the meat mean something and it's a very deep meaning. You cannot drink the cup of the Lord and the cup of demons too. You can't really have it both ways. You cannot have a part in both the Lord's table and the table of demons. Huh are we trying to rouse the Lord's jealousy? Are we stronger than that? He's making the point that Israel tempted the Lord in the wilderness and it didn't end well. Be careful about this but but then what about the meat? So maybe it's best to not eat the meat but again we've talked about the meat and it's not in the meat. It's in the connection of the meat and human beings are the connection between all of this. I have the right to do anything you say but not everything is beneficial Paul says. I have the right to do anything you say but not everything is constructive. Well constructive to what? It's obedient not sacrifice constructive to the body of Christ and everything that Christ wants them to be. No one should seek their own good but the good of others. Oh where do we get this? Well Christ who didn't seek his own good but sought the good of the church. Eat anything sold in the meat market without raising questions of conscience. What? What about the table of demons? Oh but if it's not connected through your mind and your heart and your spirit it's just meat. For the earth is the Lord's and everything in it because the meat belongs to God. Demons don't make meat. The earth belongs to the Lord. God takes the stuff of earth and breathes into it the breath of heaven. But if someone says this has been offered in a sacrifice suddenly something changes. Now suddenly because of the words said over it the consciousness and the valence of this meat has changed. Then do not eat it both for the sake of the one who told you and for the sake of conscience. Why? Well because now the meat is different. Are you saying the meat is different? Are you saying if we bring it into a lab and test it that the meat will be different? No. Just like all those experiments about well if we put someone on a very sensitive scale when they die can we weigh the soul? You're not understanding how the world works. Are the words spoken over that meat important? Are you there to hear it? Are you there to participate in it? I am referring to the other person's conscience not yours. In other words you really are free. For why is my freedom being judged by another conscience? I am free to eat that meat but there is something going on between us that is more important than the meat in question. If I take part in the meal with thankfulness why am I denounced? Because of something that I thank God for. The meat belongs to the Lord. So whether you eat or drink or whatever you do do it for the glory of the Lord. Another quote that often gets lifted out of that but what he's saying is if you have meat to eat praise God and in that culture you're wealthy indeed and it's going to be a wonderful meal that you often don't get to participate in. Well what about the spiritual life of the cow? It's a cow. What about how we relate to the cow? See this all gets really complex. Do not cause anyone to stumble. This is the point he made in chapter 8. Whether Jews, Greeks, or the Church of God. In other words in the marketplace if someone is saying this meat has been on the altar to Zeus say no thank you I won't participate in your pagan cult. But if it says this meat is meat whether or not it's been on the altar nobody knows he knows she knows nobody's spoken it into being in a sense eat it with gratitude. This is not easy to understand even though the application of it is simple enough. Even as I try to please everyone in every way for I'm not seeking my own good but the good of many so that they may be saved. Follow my example as I follow the example of Christ. Paul is saying this is how to approach the problem. If you go to the market and nobody's paying attention to the participation in the story of Zeus the meat is fine. If they're paying attention to the participation in the story of Zeus don't eat from the meat because if you do in the mind of the other they are participating in the story of Zeus and you are too. Oh you want my Zeus meat? It's a complex thing but Paul clearly believes the Corinthians are capable of understanding this. Was the tree just a tree? Well the reason they became Christians was that the tree the earth is the Lord and the fullness thereof and when the tree was felled they understood. Now there's a lot of nuance in a sense you have a don't ask don't tell attitude about the meat that they find in the market in Corinth and Paul says that's perfectly okay but be careful because the mind and the spirit matter. If someone is going to make an issue out of it consider how it will play in their spiritual religious relational mental map. In other words this isn't in other words this isn't simply a law that makes you not have to think this is a law that you are going to have to think through and have responsibility for and figure it out and from day to day moment to moment context to context it'll matter. You have an amazing freedom freedom to do and freedom not to do. You in fact are participating in the Lordship of Christ the earth is the Lord's and the fullness of thereof this is yours this is your inheritance but be mindful of others and how these things play with them and if you have to take a hit for the spiritual relational religious health of another or for your witness take the hit. You have amazing freedom freedom to do and freedom not to do use that freedom in the way Christ uses it. These issues beset us they beset us with sex they beset us with food they beset us with leadership they beset us all over the place. How to use freedom we've been given Paul is very clear God's judgment can fall oh wow how do we think through that we've been thinking through that ever since. Don't play chicken with God or confuse patience and kindness for indifference. The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom. Paul says this stuff is given to us to think about. At every turn it is the crucified Lord who leads us into the free and sacrificial love that encourages our neighbors and builds them up into the cosmic Christ who will rule the age to come. This is Paul's message all of this stuff belongs to him there's not one square inch of this world meat included that doesn't belong to him and everything that you do keep this in mind. There are demons there are valences there are idols and other gods floating around in that sense so operate on this level be conscious of it but look what Christ does because this is the main pattern that all of these other laws come through. This is your inheritance work it now. We are the stuff of earth and the breath of God Genesis 2 we are the intermediaries is it meat on a is it meat in a market it's just meat the person comes and says this is the meat of Zeus aren't you a Christian maybe I'll not take this right now you're going to have to work that through will you get it right will you get it wrong the main rule is love sacrificial cruciform love receive the spirit of God Jesus says in the gospel of John after he rose from the dead in that spirit the world changes find the rhythm of your cruciform freedom with the spiritual relational religious health of the people around you and all of the ways that this drama plays out the drama that uses meat the drama that uses sex the drama that uses flesh and blood it's all part of it when to say yes when to say no how to love with your freedom