https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=r0jasBeUak0

 Hi, this is Paul. In the video I did earlier this week, I had a little clip from Malcolm and Simone Collins. I had never heard of them before, but as always, you all send me the most interesting things. The same person that sent me this sent me another very interesting video with Jordan Peterson on and a couple that I... What's very interesting is that a bunch of these channels, they're small YouTube channels, but you get the sense that these people are living out there in the online world in other ways. So I am something of a digger and so I started digging into Base Camp with Simone and Malcolm Collins and lots of videos. It's not a very big channel, 7,400 subs, lots of videos, many videos with some of them 2K, 1K, other videos smaller, videos in the triple digits. And then I noticed that, oh, wait a minute, this channel has a history. This channel goes back a long ways. Simone has been doing YouTubes for quite a while. And then 11 years ago, 11 years, this is old time YouTube. And then I saw the first one of them together and I thought, oh, that's got to be interesting. Let's take a look at that. Wow. It has been a long time since I have uploaded anything here and that's because a lot has happened. For example, when I first was posting videos here, I had this mission to fall in love and have my heart broken in one year and learn how to date. And then I met this guy and I fell in love with him. He broke my heart. And then something really unexpected happened. We decided to get married and we're going to get married in summer of 2015. And we also decided to start a business together. So I quit my job and he quit his other plans and we started an art commissioning business called Art Corgi. So we do actually make some videos related to that if you want to see more of our videos. So if you want to get more updates from the weird girl who you once saw videos from, you can do so by subscribing to both or one of those channels. Now I didn't go and dig up those channels. I'm not even sure those channels could be dug up. But I did see in fact that they were on Piers Morgan at one point. They're super into this post natalism. In fact, there was a Vice article about them back in April of 2023. Simone and Malcolm Collins, the elite couple and pro natalists who are breeding to save the world are also prolific rhetorers and unstoppable posters. Super online. And anime is going to trigger some of you. I know that. A good friend of mine said anime is right next door to, and then I won't finish his sentence. And then I found this conversation with Alex Kachuda who, you know, I heard a bit about her before and I've never really followed her too closely, but it was interesting that they showed up here. So it's just very interesting sort of looking at where people sort of arise and how they transform. And of course, I've always got this sort of profelicity stuff in the back of my mind. They get a little bit into the background of how they met on Alex's channel. There's a background here. How did you find each other? Because you are kind of a kind of a hydra. You have the same project. You're very much aligned. You know, most people, myself included, were just kind of like fumbling in the dark and maybe we gather some things, but you guys seem to have a very structured approach to everything. You're literally writing books about it. Simone, you want to go over the story of how we met? Yeah, sure. I'll do the rundown. So yeah, you're totally right. We're way too weird about the way we did everything. So the way it came down for us meeting was I turned 24 and had never really dated anyone before. I mean, people probably thought they were dating me, but I was too autistic to actually realize that. So whoops. But you never kissed anyone, never had sex. That's what she means. Like never went out there. Completely clueless. So I decided that even though I was going to live alone forever, because that would be amazing that I would first fall in love and have my heart broken so I could say I tried it and it was underwhelming. And then people wouldn't look at me and be so weird about it. Like, oh, that poor girl has never known love. Pause. When we had our Barbie livestream last week, Sam commented and told me about this Mary Harrington Taylor Swift piece, which of course I looked up because I wasn't not going to look that up. And it's again, it's it's a common knowledge that women love like love stories and those which gain iconic status tend towards tragedy. Why? It's just the tragedy that speaks to the emotional intensity of being young. I'm stayed middle age now, but I remember the exquisite agony of teenage unrequited love, not to mention the perverse draw of sexual liaisons to edgy, kinky or otherwise intense to last. She basically talks about how part of the Taylor Swift story is leading towards in some ways kind of a dark, a dark romantic vision of. Hmm. Well, the conclusion. Since I was an adolescent in the 90s, the internet has eaten most of the culture and normalized mass embodiment. Perhaps it's no wonder so many of us and especially young women now experience these interconnected longings first to escape embodiment and then relatedly to be dissolved into passionate intensity. Taylor Swift's genius is her capacity to give catchy tunes to that sweet, painful, multifaceted longing for something other or higher than what's in front of us. Now, this is rather ironic given the goal of these two, which is very much remember and body on the surface. Her work recounts relatable romantic highs and lows, but it's 800 year undertow implicitly glorifies those who renounce any possibility of happiness in this world in exchange for the exaltation that comes from seeking something higher, even if the price of every union with the divine must be death for young women who thrill to this promise. Don't even realize that they've, they crave is not sexual or romantic, but spiritual. It's the cruelest imaginable way to both promising and denying relief, but that's the fault of the age, not of the 21st century's foremost troubadour Taylor Swift. Now, so she's got, you know, again, this, this sort of young, dark romantic fatalism, but of course it doesn't happen now actually recorded a bunch of this and it wasn't recording. That's, that's one of the things that are going to conquer next year. I've lost way too many things recording and not really recording. Part of what's fascinating about this story is that the narrative of online-ness is disembodiment and nihilism and antinatalism. And these two that are about as online as you can imagine are going the other way. It's, it's online-ness. Now, all of us are formed and shaped. We, we, we absorb this first draft map of the world, you know, mostly from our parents. And then of course, as bit by bit, we begin to look beyond our parents. And right now, a lot of that looking beyond is looking at screens and absorbent things and screens. Walk through Hans Georg Mueller's nomenclature, sincerity he defines as living out the cultural, traditional, religious expectation of our group in which we are birthed and formed. Authenticity is the quest, expressive individualism, the quest to live out the secret, sacred self and to, to somehow always be checking that secret, sacred self against the world to, to, it's the quest for authenticity which is sort of a back and forth, inside and outside. And when you find positive feedback coming back, back then somehow you discover your true self. Authenticity adds the additional dimension of being watched and getting input from those watching you and, and shaping yourself to the camera, to the black mirror. And, and these two seem deeply in the realm of profelicity. So I created a scoring system. I created a competitive dating round at my office where you get points for like first base date that lasts longer than five hours or something to, you know, motivate me to get out there because dating is hard. So I was dating very heavily. I, I keyword stuffed my OkCupid profile at the time with like sort of Know Your Meme references because I knew exactly my target audience. I was posing in film grade Stormtrooper armor in my, my photos. So, you know, I knew. It's so funny because of course many women are, they're, they're navigating, we do our sense making through each other. And so part of the women reason, women are always competing with each other and they're navigating with each other instead of, let's say to a degree, women use men as proxies to peel off the top, right? And women are using men to push, push each other up the hierarchy. Women are playing a different game over here, but they're still using each other for two in this, in this mating competition. What I was in for, and Malcolm similarly was on a, what he, he would call a high throughput screening kind of campaign. I was trying to do five dates a week at least for a period of about two years. And so he told me basically that on our first date, he sat across from me at dinner and he said, well, I'm not really looking to date. I'm looking for a wife and I expect to find her this fall at Stanford where there's a large pool of pre-vetted candidates. So he made it both clear that he, that he was looking for a wife, that he didn't think that I was that wife because he was going to get one at Stanford. And that, you know, he was really honest and it was the first honest date I ever went on, right? I mean, when you go on a date with someone like typically like it's, they probably want to have sex with you or they have some of the... Now, honesty again, if there's something that's sort of emerging out of the meaning crisis, it's honesty. I mean, honesty is a hallmark of the Jordan Peterson movement, tell the truth or at least don't lie. Jordan has many, many hours on the internet talking about why it's so important to tell the truth and not just, and it's important to tell the truth so that you don't mess yourself up, so that you don't lose yourself. There was a lot of time in the, in the recent Chris Williamson Jordan Peterson conversation about that. No one ever talks about that. You talk about like anything else, but what people are actually there for, which was for me so frustrating because I just wanted to know what people wanted. And I just thought that was great. And I also thought it was perfect because that way I thought I could date him, we would break up. I forced him to set a breakup date with me and then he would go find his wife and I would live alone forever. That particular I forced him to set a breakup date with me. These are two unusual individuals. Plan completely fell apart. We were very happily married. We've been together for 11 years now. And we have three kids going on, hopefully seven. So we're in it. And we love life together, but it was both very intentional, but the outcome was not what we had expected. And I think that's kind of the thing is we plan to the nines and do try to intentionally think through everything. But we also rapidly iterate and update when we get new information. And it doesn't matter if it's about like a life partner or a philosophy or scientific information. When we get new information, we adapt and we change our plans. We don't just stick to something because it's what we originally believed. Now, what she said there is going to become super important when it comes to religion, because as their scheme unfolds, it's phenomenal story. I mean, remember what I said in a previous video? You say, Paul, there's only been 2500 videos. How can I remember what you said in a previous video? No, no, no. More recently, in that video that not a lot of you watched where I had the Chris Williamson, Constantine Kiss and the Chris Williamson, Jordan Peterson, Chris Williamson makes a really important point. Maybe I'll find that video. The things I've been talking about in the live shows is your comparison group is incorrect. The fact that, you know, we have the opportunity to sit down and listen to anybody on the planet, right? The best minds, the best athletes, the best thinkers, the most articulate that are alive right now, all listen to the people that have died that were around when video cameras existed. And you can compare yourself to that group. Yeah. But that's not your comparison group. If you have the impetus to sit down and listen to me and you waffle on for three hours about these deep topics, these interesting ideas, you are so already selected out of the normal group. You're already asking yourself questions that almost nobody else is. Right. But because your comparison group and people that are unbelievably high performing. I remember before I started my podcast, I'd listen to you or to Sam or to Joe. And I think, God, that recall is amazing. It's so it's like they've just got this identity memory and everything that they've ever read. So there's so there's a there's an idealization. There's a there's a sort of reaching for the ideal. But earlier, there's also the the forming of the Internet. So earlier in the in the video. Earlier in the video, Chris is talking about the fact this this whole gym thing where where people are people are sort of calibrating with each other. You know, women are taking videos of themselves and they're looking at how often men look at them. And then if men look at them too often for them, then they're, you know, annoyed. It's the it's the gaze. It's the male gaze. And yes, of course, that whole that whole Tom Brady Saturday Night Live skit. Unless, of course, she wants she's there for the guy to want to look at her. But of course, the beauty means that everybody sees it and she wants to be sort of a sharp shooter for the guy she wants. But what she's really doing is sending out a signal that everybody is seeing. So these two are just super online and you can just see all of this stuff just building, building, building, building. Yeah. I mean, very interestingly, this is a very kind of similar strategy to one that I use. It wasn't so well structured. It wasn't so well thought out. It wasn't so, I guess, detailed and meticulous in this execution. But that's pretty much what what both me and my husband did. We were very kind of with the keyword stuffing that that brings very true. Like, I definitely did that with my OKCupid profile. That's where I met my husband. And I just kind of I keep encouraging people to see these websites as as a tool, because I feel like they've kind of taken on a cultural life of their own. I mean, these are. But you can see the tooling of how many other things in these stories where they're they're just tooling at different levels. The profilicity levels are just layer after layer after layer databases of people. Many of them will be looking for similar things to you. But I think people over optimize for for reach and for mass appeal, like, you know, women posting cleavage shots, even though they want to get a husband. I mean, yeah, we'll get more engagement, I guess, if that's what you're optimizing for. But that's a vanity metric. If you have to, you want to find the one. So don't park your boobs on the thing. That's not how you get it. So, yeah, I mean, it's it's hard to convince people of this. But I think updating is is can be very useful. I mean, it's proven miraculous in my life. And, you know, I'm now heading for baby number two myself. And, you know, there is great, you know, it's it's it's app derived. It's it's generated by the the terrible algorithms. But, hey, it worked. And I think it can work for other people. But they have to have a pragmatic approach to how to use this stuff. I mean, updating has really changed recently. And I think we need to be transparent about this. We found each other back in the old days of OkCupid before the swipe dating revolution. And I saw a tweet recently that I really emphasize was where it said, you know, being a, you know, in a happy relationship these days feels a bit like having caught the last chopper out of NOM. Like I look at the people who are dating today in this like Skinner box swipe. That I get the sense this guy is really smart. He is he is really sharp. He's really intuitive. But we're going to keep listening to him because, again, smart smart is not all there is in terms of being right or being wise. But he's really smart. Based ecosystem. And I don't know if I would have been able to be as effective in the dating pool in this current market. It depends. I think I was you know, I met my husband about six years ago and we were very much within the swiping system. I mean, we swiped on OkCupid. OkCupid had already transformed into a Tinder clone. It did have a more, I guess, generous space dedicated to the bio. It wasn't like three points. But yeah, it was it was kind of like that. And I'm sure things are much worse. And I do have the, you know, the last chopper out of NOM feeling. But it's I think it's it's still possible. You know, it's still people, you know, maybe it's like a boomer now. But it's you know, it's there's still people in there, I think. So, yeah, I mean, I do hope it still works. I hope I'm not giving people terrible advice. But yeah, I mean, I guess it worked for me. And, you know, my chopper was fine. So I guess get your own chopper. Yeah, I think if you're intentional enough and you understand the adverse incentives and other corrupting factors at play in the current design of the system and you play the system, then you can absolutely play the game. And you can absolutely make it out of NOM. I think the problem is that people are getting played by the system and they're also like women are going on. They're serving up bootpicks because it generates attention. Then they end up pairing off with a lot of men who would sleep with them but would never date them. Then they get the impression that those are the men who would be willing to commit to them. Now, I know nothing about this stuff because, of course, I was getting out of Dunkirk, not NOM. Well, actually closer to NOM, but you get my point. Of course, you know, the boob stuff that that was built for an era of there's only a certain number of men to see you. But of course, it's multiplied by the way that the Internet works. So it's again, it's an adaptive problem that the boob picks are. Yeah, they're right. They're looking for the wrong thing in that environment. And the other environment. I shouldn't have said anything. And they aren't. They're lazy eights. And maybe these women are like a six or a seven. And so then they're not willing as a six or a seven to date sixes or sevens who would be interested in marrying them. And then there's this sort of like broken dynamic where a lot of you know who that sounds like. You've all seen this. All right. So go ahead and take this down, man. Men who make the kind of money you're talking about have options. And off Kevin Samuels goes. A lot of like we'll say like sevens and below of men have trouble finding anyone who's willing to go on a date with them. And then women who are sevens and below have a lot of trouble finding any men who are, you know, eights, nines and tens who they think would be interested in them to ultimately marry them. So a lot of people just end up alone. Yeah, I think. Yeah, I'm just saying this stuff should be common knowledge, but it is very counterintuitive. And a lot of people, at least in the case of women, you know, hope hope dies last in a lot of these things. And I know a lot of women, you know, essentially stuck in the so-called friends with benefits hell, you know, just waiting on to be, you know, wife number five for some some strange guy who's, you know, maybe like to slightly more attractive than they are. And then, you know, they're just hoping that one day he'll just wake up and, you know, propose because I don't know if she's really good in bed or something like that. I know it doesn't work like that, but, you know, like I said, hope hope dies last. I mean, I think we also need to be honest that we are having a bit of a masculinity crisis in terms of what it means to be a man in our modern society is very interesting to me. On some recent podcasts, one people were saying, oh, he looks so soy. And I'm sorry, I have to apologize to your listeners. This is not my house. I'm staying at a guest house right now. I did not choose this background. Speaking of looking soy or that they look like a lesbian couple. And what it has made clear to me. I think the guy is really smart. The other thing is that the male role models we have in our society today are often the iteration of masculinity that men are when they are teenage boys. When a man is in a long term monogamous relationship and when a man starts to have kids his testosterone level drops because his biology basically turns off suicide mode and is like, okay, now you're secure. And when you have kids, we want to keep you alive a long time. Turn off this high risk high reward strategy. And this sort of kinder iteration of masculinity when people look for it in our society, they see so few role models and embody it. The first thing that pops into their head is, oh, lesbians, that's kind masculinity. And it's a real I mean, you see someone like Andrew Tate, right? I'm really surprised they don't have more followers on YouTube. I really am because although you listen to like, I think a lot of his stuff would go really good in sort of little snippets because he just I mean, at some point it's sort of like listening to machine gun. It's just ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba Oh, it's it's it's Pee Wee Herman playing it straight. It's blues clues guy. It's it's it's Wow, Billy B's in Anaheim, California. Well, now I know just doing the googling for you. A fire truck or something. And of course to a little kid. It's like this guy is living in heaven. Oh my God, he gets to dance around fire trucks all day. Um, but as an adult, like I see the pain behind his eyes. And I'm like, I know no adult actually wants to live this lifestyle. And if you are a dad looking at Blippi could make bank, but every morning he lays in bed thinking, Oh, I gotta do it again. At least Mr. Rogers had dignity. Andrew Tate's lifestyle. He is like the Blippi for teenage boys, where you're like, nobody is enjoying this. That's brilliant. Andrew Tate is the Blippi for teenage boys. That's really good. Yeah, no, that's a very good comparison. I mean, it's it does seem like we've kind of stuck culturally on a certain archetype, which is in a way not differentiated at all. And I think maybe, you know, people like Andrew Tate are kind of a reaction to the fact that, you know, the baseline is very androgynous. You know, we're all the same type of cog in the machine type of person, the ideal producer consumer who has to go out and get the status points, get the money. And then I guess, you know, in our spare time, we fetishize these cargo cults of masculinity of them. I mean, even I mean, Andrew Tate is essentially the mirror image of Kim Kardashian, which has all these like hypertrophied aspects of femininity. I mean, it's, you know. That was brilliant, too. That was brilliant, too. I never sort of put Andrew Tate and Kim Kardashian next to each other in terms of the they've got all this they've got all this plastic masculinity and femininity. And of course, Andrew Tate is a pimp. I mean, what I've heard of the dude, the dude is a pimp. That's what a That's what he is. And, you know, as frankly as a father, I have like zero respect for a pimp because a pimp isn't even a man. A pimp, a pimp is a pimp is a bully who makes money off other women's misery. So, but again, back to the profelicity part of it again in the screen world. Reductive worlds must accentuate what the biases of their world. And so Kim Kardashian, Andrew Tate, they have to accentuate certain things because that's what the that's what the medium forces that's that's the combination between the medium and a hierarchy. So it's going to it's going to sort of run it up the hierarchy. And that's, that's what we get. They're golden calves of whatever is missing in our in our core culture. That's brilliant, especially golden. That's really good. Culture. And it really, you know, I feel like, you know, what's missing here is just the pragmatism of what it would take to to continue our culture, because, you know, that this this infinitely malleable producer consumer, you really he can't think above the timeline of his own life. I mean, production consumption happens within, you know, mostly youth, you know, because even even old age is very much questionable under the producer consumer model. You know, my wife and I, we tell our kids, we say, we don't need anything for Christmas. Please do not buy us anything. All we want, you know, it sounds so cliche, like a drippy love song. But all we want for Christmas is you at home. All we want for Christmas these days. We're at that point in our lives where we look around at our kids and we just want to see you. We just want to spend time with you. We just want to know you. All we want. We don't we don't need you buying any stuff for us. We just want, you know, you to visit us in the nursing home. So it's interesting again, because now I've listened to a little bit of Simone and Collins videos and there's a lot about the perpetuation of the culture. But of course, that has to be understood because all of them are sort of acknowledging that the culture is in something of a death spiral. So it's like, well, do you really want the perpetuation of the culture? And there's sort of, again, so this is all pitched to sort of pragmatism, but so often what is kind of missed in pragmatism is that the ideals and the goals are implicit. And this culture that is in a death spiral, this is the one you want to preserve? Or ought you to think about actually improving the culture into one that is worth saving? And then suddenly you're into the much more religious landscape, not a religious landscape that, well, we have to be religious so that culture must be preserved. Well, this isn't the culture you want to preserve. You don't want to keep producing a culture that that shoots Andrew Tate and Kim Kardashian up the hierarchy. That's not the culture you want. So then you have to do the much harder question of what is a good culture? What is the culture that ought to be preserved? What culture is pointing towards eternity? What are you going to consume? You know, you can't really play the status games very much. So you've got about a 30, 40 year window where you can be a good participant in this culture. And I feel like, you know, it's really shortchanging, not only older people, but our entire future, the entire horizon of what's coming after us. You know, it's almost making us blind to what's coming. And that's what I appreciate about you because you're thinking about this very deep. Let's talk about the collapse of civilization. Yes, please. This is very important topic. So this is something I really got. So I was a venture capitalist in South Korea, you know, and I'm always Now, again, hearing origins, why, Paul, do you do these Randall's Conversations? Now, some of you are saying, I haven't seen a lot of Randall's Conversations yet. Yeah, that's because I was traveling. And it's also because I'm putting the Randall's Conversations into the $3 membership thing. Is that a money grab? No, not really. Some of them are never going to be sprung from there. Others of them are sitting there. And at some point, I'm going to feed them out into the general channel just so that it's going to even out the pauses. And so some of you are going to say, yeah, then I'm going to see reruns. Because I'm a $3 member. Life is tough. He's having to predict the future of the economy there and everything like that. And if you look at their current fertility rate, which is 0.8, that means for every and it's dropping every year. So it might be like 0.7. Then next year, it looks like that means for every 100 Koreans alive today, there's going to be between like 6.6 and 4.3 great grandchildren. So we're looking at a 95% population collapse in the next century. And I went and I brought this to the other partners at my firm. And I was like, there is no economy here in the future. Like, what are we talking about? Long term Korean economy? There is no long term Korean economy. Like, the way we structured our economic system doesn't work with this kind of collapse. And what they basically said is, oh, yeah, we all know. We all know about this. But like, we've just chosen collectively not to freak out about it. So just pretend like, it's not the case. And when I came back to the US, we are today where Korea was in the 90s. But we're seeing all the same trends here. It's like a black mirror episode or like a slider is there something I got to travel back in time 20 years. And I get to warn people about the things that I noticed. One is there is no point at which people really start to panic. And by the time people start to panic, it's too late. So if you have a society where 80% of the population is over 50, you know, they may still have 50 years of their life left, like after life left. But they're not having any more kids. And so if you wait until that happens to sound the alarm, it's already game over. You know, you've got to sound the alarm way before you notice this in population levels. This is so interesting. And it's well argued. Catastrophism is big business. It really is. Now, I watched this video, the video that I'm talking about with Malcolm and Simone Collins, and I was thinking about this video that I watched with Brett Weinstein. And they're all talking about the woke ism as sort of the collapse of civilization. I mean, the truth is, there's always these all these threats all over the place. Well, you know, the people on one side say, oh, climate change is going to do you in other people say, it's not going to be climate change. It's going to be woke ism and what that had and, and, and oh, if we had a chance to go back in time and and warn them in the past, this way, if we take your question about what could we have said to the people of 1995 to get them to save us from the world of 2023. The the coming calamity that is going to happen if we just simply embrace the religious doctrines, philosophies and values of the past and hope that we can now ride out the storm. That's when we could stop now by having a conversation that says, look, it was wrong to dispense with these compendiums of wisdom that we've been handed in the last few decades. And I think that's the point. And I think that's the point. And I think that's the point. And I think that's the point. And I think that's the point. And I think that's the point. And I think that's the point. And I think that's the point. And I think that's the point. And I think that's the point. And I think that's the point. And I think that's the point. And I think that's the point. And I think that's the point. And I think that's the point. And I think that's the point. And I think that's the point. And I think that's the point. And I think that's the point. And I think that's the point. And I think that's the point. And I think that's the point. And I think that's the point. And I think that's the point. And I think that's the point. And I think that's the point. And I think that's the point. And I think that's I don't want to candy coat it. There's no simple solution to that that doesn't involve repeatedly injuring ourselves as a civilization as we discover which fraction of those traditions is still relevant, which fraction has become toxic and inappropriate, what it should be replaced with. Now, in a lot of ways, Malcolm and Simone do sort of belong sort of right next to Brett Weinstein, even though they're looking at completely different catastrophes because Brett is, you know, if you've watched any Brett, he's, you know, he's, he's on the one point again and again and again and again about, you know, the, the assassin genetics and we have to transcend them. And, you know, I've dealt with a lot of this idea before. And what's fascinating is that Malcolm and Simone are saying, you don't have to, you don't need a time machine. Actually, if you look at this now and you look at the numbers now, but this is a, this is a kind of a slow thing that there's nobody, nobody recognize it. But of course, it's a different thing than what Brett is talking about. So basically you got all these sandwich board guys, the end is near and if you throw Eric Weinstein into the mix, then you really have a group of sandwich board guys. And it's not without truth because, so you take, you take Malcolm's, you take Malcolm's doomsday that, no, we're just doing it to ourselves slowly. And if you have a population which is more than half over 50 years, yeah, you're, it's just math to, and add that to, to, to Eric and Brett. But you also have to throw C.S. Lewis into the mix with life in the atomic age and please tell me when humanity wasn't hanging from a thread. He is enjoying this. Yeah, no, that's a very good comparison. I mean, it's, it does seem like we, we've kind of stuck culturally on a certain archetype, which, Oops, you got to kill that one. Got to kill that one. When you have too many tabs over, sometimes you forget exactly which one you're playing where. And the other thing was, is that there, there is no natural floor. Actually the U.N. or I think it's the U.N. or the World League, I don't remember, but one of the major organizations that track this, they used to believe that no country could fall below repopulation rate. So in all their data, it would just show everything plateauing when a country hit repopulation fertility rate. That means that they're having enough kids just to repopulate the number of adults. If you look at the world today, people are like, oh, this is a developed world problem. No, no. If you look at Latin America as of two years ago by U.N. statistics, so like a lot of progressives, they're like, oh, well, just import immigrants, right? You know, in the U.S. at least. It's like, you don't know that like as of two years ago, Central America, South America and the Caribbean collectively fell below repopulation rate. In fact, on average, a country falls below repopulation rate today when the average citizen is earning over $5,000 a year. So the only countries that are really massively above repopulation rate are desperately poor countries. And so the question is, yeah, it's got my attention is, well, how do we maintain if it turns out that like prosperity, gender equality, education and access to technology create cultures where that are just unstable intrinsically? Like, what does the future of our species look like? And that's what we're really focused on. And how do we prevent that? That's why we started the pro natalis foundation and why we wrote the pragmatist guide to crafting religion, which was our latest book, because like a lot of people, they first hear this and their first thought is, oh, give people money. But like, it turns out the less money you have, the more kids you have. So that's like not the answer. And like when you have free childcare, like in Europe, the countries this free childcare actually have lower fertility rates and oh, cash handouts don't work either. Like Hungary spent like 5% of its GDP last year on this and they got fertility rates up by like 1.6% when like they were falling by like 2% a year before that or something. So it turns out the only real solution is probably religion. And that's something we go into a lot. Yeah. And that makes this very interesting right next to Brett Weinstein. I mean, it's just kind of like a lot of things on this podcast. I learn mostly from my own example and I know my kind of conversion to pro natalism has been cultural, if maybe just maybe tangentially a little bit religious, but not purely so. So I mean, this seems to be, and also knowing the examples of other people around me, I know people coming from families with their parents had five or six brothers and sisters have decided that they don't want children, which is very much a cultural thing as well. I mean, this is not like, you know, these were people who, you know, they, they fraudulently multiplied very well up until five minutes ago. And I know, I know exactly the software these, these, these women and men have been downloading because I was kind of, you know, marinating it at myself until I realized that, wait a minute. I'm just like staring off the edge of the abyss here. But yeah, I mean, and I think that's, that's a very interesting lever to pull. I think, you know, what's, what's a bit harder to do, I think, is the, you know, any sort of top down in position of this stuff, which I think, you know, we're talking about mega trends here. I mean, how do you see that? Because I mean, you wrote, you wrote an entire book about this. This is the Pragmatist's Guide to Crafting Religion, which sounds very ambitious. But yeah, how, how would this work? I mean, in practical terms? I mean, we're rabidly against any sort of top down in position. We just, one, it doesn't work and it always leads to evil. When you're as a government trying to decide who should have kids, who should breed, who should not breed, that always leads to evil. I'd like to preserve some aspect of our pluralistic society, but any one couple that represents one culture and decides to join the pro-natalist movement, decides to try to craft a culture that they can pass to their kids and that their kids want to maintain, can sort of save that cultural unit. Because, you know, if we have eight kids and our kids have eight kids and we do that for just 11 generations, that's more descendants than live on earth today. You know, this is very, the problem is, is the homogenization of the world today. So many unique cultures are dying out. So that's one problem. The other problem is the economic effectiveness, because we have sort of structured our society like a pyramid scheme that requires constant growth. I mean, yes, you see this in social security, which is a problem, but you also see this in debt. You know, we as a society have been taking out debt at every level, which is fantastic if you're growing. You know, if you make an investment, you know, we used to be private equity people, if you'll make a $10 investment, right, and $2 of that is equity and $8 is debt, and that grows by just 20%. So it grew by $2. My equity investment has grown by 100%. I mean, 100%. But if it shrinks by just $1, my equity investment has dropped by 50%. If it shrinks by just $2, my entire equity investment is wiped out. And this is kind of what happened to Detroit, because their tax income started to go down and they were supporting a fire department pension and a police department pension from a time period, because these were functionally debts, because these weren't pre-funded pensions, from a time when the city was much more dependent on the state. And then you get the same problem with the sewer systems and stuff like that, you begin to have shut down with water supplies, and people here are falling populations, and the first thing they think is cheap real estate. But when everybody knows that real estate is always declining in value, which you don't get as cheap real estate, you get a Detroit situation, you get endless urban blight, because it is no longer relevant to invest in real estate. Hold on. But if we're talking about the basics of either how to craft a culture slash religion that survives, that is what we would call intergenerationally durable, that is to say it is passed. Now part of the real challenge of navigating almost any conversation is the seemingly nearly impossible task of remembering what was just said in the conversation minutes before. Because all of the anxiety from the Weinsteins to many other people is we want to preserve our culture. And everybody's basically saying, the culture is in a death spiral. Is that the culture you want to preserve? Or is there another culture you would like to preserve? Oh no, I'd like to preserve what I value in the culture and let the death spiral stuff, that stuff go away. Now again, coming back to the whole religion question is fascinating, because part of, and I haven't yet read their book, I did pick up their book, and I do have it on my Kindle, but I haven't yet read their book. And now, you know, it's always kind of a horse race between all of the different little hobby horses that I'm interested in at any given moment. And obviously when I do a video, it both in some way satiates the desire, but also just reinvigorates some of the interest. But religion, both for the Weinsteins and for the Collinss at this point, is pragmatic. That, well, they can see the pragmatism in past religions because those have succeeded, but then we need a new religion, but then you're back in this funny trap that we keep coming back to around again and again and again. I'd like to be religious, but I really don't believe it. Sarah Hayter said something almost identical to that. It's interesting that this really where society is. I'd like the world to be enchanted, but it's dead. I'd like this, but that. I wish we had a religion. Now again, you're sort of in Donald Hoffman territory here where the religion doesn't have to be true at all. It just has to make sure we continue to multiply like rabbits. But that's not necessarily such a good idea either, because if the religion is just about human multiplication, the religion is also going to be guiding people in terms of how they should live and how they should behave. And that's going to have adaptive either positivity or negativity too. In other words, you can you can plan a religion that has everybody multiplied by rabbits. But if they're killing each other in some other way because of the religion, well, that's going to be a problem. So it's very interesting how all of these motivations, all of these projects motivated by self preservation that see religion as instrumental. I'll have this enormous gaping flaw that if the religion doesn't actually deliver truth, and I don't mean just propositional truth. I mean all four P's of truth. If the religion doesn't actually. This is where we get back to Vervecky and Peterson and and logos. If the religion doesn't actually deliver on getting alignment with the logos to actually develop a culture that is going to be a culture of eternity, you're just going to. OK, now we don't have the problem of reproduction, but now we're back to the Weinstein problems or we're back to because of course, in some ways, if you think about Brett's, you know, Brett's whole thing, which he has said for a very long time. I should find that clip. That was a great clip. This is this is this great clip from Rebel Wisdom five years ago where Brett, he hasn't changed any of this. Of course, this is the this is the deep truth. And what's ironic about the deep truth is that the genetics don't need sort of a religion in order to multiply themselves beyond. This is just what they do. An awakening to a deep truth. And I the analogy I use is this. If you discovered that you were a robot and that you were sent to, I don't know, assassinate some person who was innocent, if you discovered that that was the explanation for you, you would reject your program. Right. You as the robot. I'm sorry, every time I hear this. If you were an Intel chip, and you discovered that the hard drive that you were connected with has Mac instead of Windows, you would reject Mac OS. No, you play Mac OS. And if you had been given decency in order to get by everybody so you could commit your assassination would say, actually, I prioritize the values and I reject the mission that I've been sent on. That's who we are. We are that robot. We are on a genetic mission that is absolutely unacceptable. How would you just how would you just succinctly define that genetic mission. That genetic mission is just propagation at all cost propagation of your particular genetic spellings. And here's the key. It's a little subtle. But if you and I have different spellings for a particular, let's say, a respiratory enzyme, and let's say that respiratory enzyme functions better in you than in me, it's 10 percent more efficient. My respiratory enzyme still wants your respiratory enzyme to go extinct because it doesn't care about the function. It cares that that spelling is advanced and your spelling is in conflict with my spelling. As long as yours is around, there will be fewer copies of mine. So our genomes are actually interested. I mean, if I can just be clear about it, the mind fuck of the whole thing is that the entire evolutionary story is the cosmic spelling bee and it ends in genocide. Right. Once you realize that that's what you are, that you're built to advance your genetic spellings into the future generations, irrespective of what they spell and that under circumstances like these, we can afford to be decent to each other. But if things were different, one of us would be putting the other in a gas chamber. No way. I want no part of that and neither do you. So when people realize that that's really what they are, they are built to be nice when it makes sense to be nice and they're built to be genocidal in circumstances when genocide is the thing, then the question is, well, all the things that you actually value, how consistent are they with being that robot on that mission? So it sounds like you are sort of saying at our root, we are nasty, British in short, right? That the old selfish gene kind of thing compared to some ascensionist or triumphalist, clearly, you know, it's very prevalent in the self-help popular psychology space. We are on the frothy edge of realizing our true natures as, you know, spiritual beings, blah, blah, blah. Is that something you don't hold out hope for? You feel like at root we are just self-oriented robot programs? What's our shot at redemption? Do we have one? It's easier. It's easier than you would think because the fact is, I'm telling you, we are that robot on that mission. Once you know that that's your mission, you could just reject it. Right? I'm not putting anybody in a gas chamber. I just won't do it. Right? I don't care about that. Again, it's this strange gnosticism. But now we're back over here. And now we're basically saying, oh, what we really need is a religion that's going to energize us so that we and then it's like, well, won't we then be sort of. So remember, the one thing that Brett, if you go back to his talk with Alastair McGrath, the one thing that again, the one thing that I really appreciate about Brett is that Brett in fact sees. So you've got the genetic track and then you have the memetic track. And I think Brett's a little naive about the way he sets up these two things. But so these two are all about the memetic track at this point. What we need is what we need is a religion that's going to. And the truth is that I, you know, one question for them is, well, how can you be so sure that there isn't in fact a religion right now that perhaps is one of the religions that's doing OK. But when things fall to a certain realm, that religion isn't going to sort of kick up again, because what we usually sort of. Was it Foucault who talked about the fact that we really only sort of have a memory of like 40, 50 years and we're usually talking about like our grandparents generation or our parents generation. That's always the generation we're responding to. How do you know that 40, 50 years in fact, certain religions, I know probably be the main religions that are already at play are going to in fact continue to proliferate. And they're going to talk about the Jews a little bit here. They spend a fair amount of time talking about the Jews in Israel. That's going to be really interesting for some of the Israeli audience in this little corner. Stunned from generation to generation. And there are future generations or to reinforce an existing religion to make it intergenerational, a durable in the face of globalization and modern technology and prosperity, which is kind of the big sort of cliff for many existing religions where they're just like not able to survive in this modern environment. There seem to be like two simple keys to it. And I mean, our book is very long and goes into a lot of detail, but there seem to be two basic components and Malcolm, you might want to clarify this further. But if I were to break it down, it would be one, find a reason why people would want to have kids. And that could be build a culture where everyone lives off the grid and literally you have to have kids because you need farm hands and like a retirement plan. Or it could be, you know, build a culture that really idolizes having kids and that that celebrates and elevates parenthood and makes it look really cool. You know, there are different levers you can use to do this. And then the other element of intergenerational durable culture is it imparts fitness. And that's two types of fitness, obviously, like one form of fitness is people who practice it have surviving offspring. Clearly, the other part of it, though, is ideally it imparts some kind of advantage. Either within its own ecosystem or within a larger ecosystem that could be, for example, many religions impart greater mental resiliency, better physical habits, you know, like a literally better day to day fitness, but also professional fitness. You know, think about Latter Day Saints who are often sought after sales hires because they, you know, if you've been on a mission and you've been like pitching a kind of hard to pitch religion to people in another language, like, you know, Of course you can pitch sass like that's easy. So those are the. And I love that example, too, because we start thinking about this. Well, the actual I mean, the Latter Day Saints and the Muslims have a similar problem that they have different problems in some ways, because of course, Latter Day Saints are so new and the Muslims are so old. But both of them have real issues with their foundation stories. And the thing about the Latter Day Saints foundation stories is that you're really hard pressed to find, you know, these 10 lost tribes of Israel running around the United States. And if you know any history about the burned over district in upstate New York, you know that all these ideas are sort of circling around there and yada yada yada. But basically what everyone is saying here is it doesn't really actually matter the content of the religion. It just matters the payout. But once again, that's an extremely short sighted thing because you're going to go full hand wives tale on this thing. I mean, religions are successful. Religions are very interesting things because they do sort of like Brett Weinstein talks about in terms of mimetic genetics. They do travel through time and they do evolve as they travel through time. And for religion to actually travel well through time, they both have to you need things that stay the same and things that evolve and adapt. And it's a very complex little dance that goes on with respect to it. And what's interesting is that both the Collins and Brett and Heather and probably Eric too are they're looking through it through the frame, the evolutionary frame, let's say. And well, whatever frame you use to look through something, that frame is going to select what you see and what you value. The two elements. And so it's pretty simple. Motivate people to have kids and make them give them a competitive advantage. Yes. So to follow up on something she was saying where she's like a lot of religions, I think people aren't familiar with the statistics here, which is religion is the single thing that protects people from fertility collapse the most. But it is still eroding in the face of our modern toxic culture. You look at something like Mormons by current statistics, they probably fallen below replacement rate or they will as in five years. You know, and I say when Mormons have fallen below replacement fertility rate, that's not, you know, the canary in the coal mine dying. That's when the miners skin is bubbling off. You know, you are in deep. Again, the dude is good. You know, I might have to take it. He's a very clever man. He's really good. Chris Williamson talked about the fact of you mean both. You both got to get the idea and you need the meme. And this guy does. This guy's very sharp. When the when the Mormons fall below repopulation rate. But some cultures seem to be really resistant for prosperity induced fertility collapse. And keep in mind, we're talking about prosperity induced. We're not talking about the countries that are hand to mouth starvation. They still have really high fertility. But in the prosperity induced ones, like one country that is just like off the charts, good with fertility is Israel. And you actually see this around conservative Jewish cultures. They are one of the most resistant cultures to fertility collapse. A lot of people think Amish culture is resistant to facility class, but it's really not a Anabaptist culture more generally. So it is a little more resistant to fertility class than other cultures. But the primary resilience comes from being sort of air gapped. Cybersecurity term, i.e. when they use cell phones, they also have fertility collapse. But when they don't use cell phones, they don't have fertility collapse, which it's the cell phone. Now, now it's interesting, of course, because in terms of the conversations with the Israelis in this corner, they are the ones pointing out that, yeah, we had a whole bunch of these immigrants, really religious immigrants who moved to Israel. And they are having all of these kids and they're studying Torah the whole time. So they're hyper hyper religious and they're really reproducing fast. But they're doing it on the dime of the state. And the rest of the Israeli population, a good bit of which is secular, a good bit of which is not Jewish, are looking at them and saying, I'm not sure we're going to continue to pay for that. And that's when, of course, things are going to get interesting. In other words, part of the difficulty is relevance realization, it's frames, it's trying to figure out what's going on. You look at these very religious Israelis and say, well, they're multiplying like rabbits. That must be the. But again, you're selecting the ideas in really an isolation to from all of the other ideas. And if the state of Israel gets to the point of saying, yeah, we're not going to subsidize that anymore. What will happen now? Suddenly, you're going to have a whole bunch of all the same pressures that a lot of other people are having to begin to reduce this dynamic. Which I think shows where this is coming from in our society. If you view this is something Simone was talking about, if you view religions and more traditional cultures as this aspect of humanity that evolved alongside us to sort of enhance our individual fitness. You know, that's why they figured out all the stuff that progressives are just now realizing. Like, oh, yeah, you should have arbitrary self-denial rituals from like Ramadan to Lent to Feast of the Firstborn. You know, every ancient culture is like, yeah, you should like not just eat whatever you want all the time. You should have arbitrary fasting rituals and stuff like that. And now just now you hear like, oh, I'm on my juice cleanse or I'm on my fast today. And like they figured this out after throwing it out for 50 years. It's like, what else did you guys throw out? But anyway, the again, the parallels between these guys and Brett, they're super interesting. This is like a traditional healthy cultural unit. But you have the thing that we call wokeism, but it's more than wokeism. It's like this virus that exists behind our world today and evolved out of religion. We actually argue in our book, it evolved out of Hickside Quakerism. But it's not a full one. It can only survive by parasitizing on healthy cultures because it doesn't motivate a birth rate. And so it has to very aggressively get into things like the education system to convert people from these healthy cultures that are still motivating high birth rates to survive. And it's really scary because it is so, so, so effective at reaching our kids. You know, as you say, you have friends even at reaching you. You know, you begin to normalize to what the virus says is normal. And this is where I get to something, you know, you were talking about how some conservatives may disagree with us or whatever. I don't know, but I consider myself a conservative, right? And I think one thing that's great about the conservative party or conservatism in general is that we have a diversity of ideological perspectives that come from our traditional cultural backgrounds that we are trying to preserve. Whereas the progressive movement is just sort of this virus. If I go to a far progressive Unitarian Universalist versus a far progressive, I don't know, some other far progressive Muslim or far progressive Jew and you scratch beneath the surface, many of their beliefs about morality, about the nature of the world are just the same. This is a super interesting point. If I go to a conservative Muslim versus a conservative Jew versus a conservative evangelical, their actual views about how the world works are radically different. Yet they can work together to achieve a combined outcome. And that's one thing I really respect. Now what's interesting is that, yeah, they can, but now we're sort of back into questions about secularity. This from Jerry Mueller's The Mind in the Market. Coming to the London Exchange, a place more respectable than a court. You will see assembled representatives of every nation for the benefit of mankind. These are the Jew, the Muslim, and the Christian deal with one another as if they were of the same religion and reserve the name infidel for those who go bankrupt. Here the Presbyterian puts his trust in the Anabaptist. The Anglican accepts the Quaker's promissory note. Upon leaving these peaceful free assemblies, one goes to the synagogue for another drink. Yet another goes to have himself baptized in a large tub in the name of the Father through the Son to the Holy Ghost. Another, his son's foreskin is cut off, and over the infant he mutters some Hebrew words that he doesn't understand at all. Some go to their church and await divine inspiration with their hat in their hand, and all are content. A little earlier in the book on the Enlightenment, Voltaire's main concern was remarkably consistent through the course of his long career. He championed the pursuit of happiness, the expansion of individual freedom, the rule of law, and the use of human reason modeled on the methods of the natural sciences There's the Scientist's Lab leak right there. to challenge the non-rational claims of religious faith. Closer related to these concerns was Voltaire's long campaign against the Catholic Church, and his antipathy towards the political claims of institutionalized religion. He can still hear this through Steven Pinker quite clearly. Voltaire's significance for our topic comes from his popularization of two important themes. The legitimation on political grounds of the pursuit of wealth through market activity, and the moral legitimation of the consumption of wealth. It was the former theme that he developed in the Philosophical Letters, a work of social and political criticism that marked the beginning of the French Enlightenment as a public force. Voltaire's defense of the market in the Letters and later in his Philosophical Dictionary was political rather than economic. Market activity was valued not because it made society wealthier, but because the pursuit of economic self-interest was less dangerous than the pursuit of other goals above all religious zealotry. Again, this is a time in which they're very concerned about religious people killing each other over religion. So let's just switch and have them all want to get rich. Because if they want to get rich, they'll stop fighting, and that's where all their interests will be, and won't that be great? And now we have Malcolm and Simone saying, you know what's at the heart of this? Wanting to get rich. Because once you get up over $5,000, your culture is in an economic nosedive. I once read something. Where did I read that? It's like, I think a guy was a Jew. And like he said really weird stuff, but it was sort of famous, you know? He said like, bless her to the poor in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of God. Bless her to the meek, for they will inherit the earth. Voltaire never would have said that. And then he said, you can't serve God and mammon. Spect about the conservative movement. I think it's also kind of a function of being out of power. I mean, power at the center consolidates, and it's very easy to align with it. Even, you know, there's a lot of people who maintain the trappings of whatever, you know, ethnic flavor they have, and they're, you know, like nominally Muslim or something. But it's pretty clear what exactly power demands of you now, just because it's in the water. I think a lot of people, like you said, you know, if you scratch them, you know, it's like, you know, the progressive Ten Commandments are just below the surface. It's because they're in everything. That's how I know exactly what software, you know, my maybe not anti-Natalist, but non-Natalist friends are on, because this has been hyped and hot through every medium for, you know, since we've had television. I mean, that's, you know, it's pretty clear what you're supposed to believe. And if you're kind of agreeable and if you're interested in status games beyond your own little village, which is kind of one of the problems that has led to kind of fertility collapse here as well, because people are, you know, they're interested in what's going on in America. I mean, obviously I'm included in this group of people. Yeah, that's going to lead to this and it's going to lead to people essentially running the same moral and, yeah, just having the same orientation. Here's the great thing, though, I think from a lot of people's perspective, is this is leading to a genetic change. So the people who are sort of susceptible to this memetic virus are essentially genociding themselves from the gene pool really aggressively. And if you look at the rate to which voting patterns, so like if you look in the US, the rate to which voting patterns correlate with genetics, which it's like 30 to 50 percent, and you look at differential fertility rates, we should see a genetic shift, a state one standard deviation shift more conservative in voting patterns within the next century. At like a genetic level. But there's other negative genetics. Now, this is what's so hilarious, because we just listened to Brett Weinstein say, your genetics are doing this, and you just have to opt out of it. Now, what it seems like we opt into into sort of Voltaire's decision, and that's killing us. And so the genetics are The genetics don't really have much of a say. It's just fascinating the similarities and contrast between these worldviews and how it all fits together. I am out of time, but this, as is often the case, I start a video thinking, I want to poke around at these people. And then you start doing a little bit of digging, and that's like, I've done a little bit of digging offline too, but it's a little bit of digging and I mean, a little bit of digging not in front of the camera. And then it's like, hey, wait a minute, these guys are just like, these guys are just like Brett Weinstein, alike, but different. And the memetic and genetic levels are working in very interesting ways. And this utilitarian religion is working in very different ways and sort of the way around, you know, religious, religious warfare, of course, Voltaire and the Enlightenment. And that's what secularism did. We don't have to fight about religion. Let's all get rich. Yeah, that's that'll do it. That's the key. Anyway, I'll be very curious to hear what you all have to say about this video. So leave a comment.