https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=ha6a32QdXhI

 So this morning we're going to start by hearing from Dr. Richard Mondrell. He's a professor in the Department of Philosophy at Lakehead University and teaches courses in biomedical ethics, philosophy of mind, logic, and critical thinking. His current research concerns consciousness and the determination of neurological death. Dr. Mondrell has a passion for discussion and leads and participates in meaningful philosophy discussion groups in the local area, which is part of why I felt he would be such a good fit for this conversation. So I invite you all to welcome Dr. Mondrell. Thank you, Catherine. That was a very kind introduction and good morning everybody. First of all, the title of my paper has nothing to do with what I'm talking about. The titles were submitted some time ago and a lot has happened since then, so you're not going to hear about Nietzsche today. And if I get a chance later, I'd like to thank Catherine, Scott, and the crew at Urban Abbey for doing all the work to put this together. They've done a really great job and they don't have the resources of the Marriott hotel chain, but I think they've done a better job than Marriott would. So I'm coming at consciousness today from two directions. When I started teaching at Lakehead over 30 years ago, I inherited a course in philosophy of mind from my predecessor. And so I developed the course and I teach it every year or every other year at least, and that gives me a chance to revisit. The subject and to go through the readings and every year to look at what the new publications are on consciousness. Of course, there's a new crop coming out every year. And what has to impress you about the field of consciousness is the huge spectrum, a broad spectrum of different theoretical perspectives. So we've got quantum theory of conscious, the Hameroff Penrose theory. We've got panpsychism. We've got we're probably living in a simulation. Huge variety of the sheer variety of it would suggest that maybe we're some distance from a final understanding of what consciousness is. Now, if there's anything I've learned from my reading of phenomenology years ago, it's that we aren't necessarily experts on our own experience. So, for example, if I were to ask you if you believe that you're awake right now, you'd probably agree. But if I were to ask you how you know that you're awake or why you are confident that you're awake, chances are you wouldn't. When I do this with my class at the university, sometimes I'll get the coherence answer. There's a certain coherence to the experience I'm having now, perceptual immediacy, which is absent from the dream. But if you look at the dream experience, you'll find that as you are waking up from the dream, you know that you are waking up. You now know that you're awake. And so what is happening is a kind of reflective consciousness is coming into play, which wasn't there while you were dreaming. Recursive self-awareness, something like that. Another example would be around the act of imagination. So, I mean, we can even try this. So you just look to your right at the stained glass window on your right, and then close your eyes and try to count, let's say, the windows on the lower level, the window, using your mental image. Right, so you're counting it. Now, what typically happens when you try to do that is that the supposed mental image disappears. Now, that might suggest that when we're analyzing imagination, it turns out that maybe there's nothing there. Maybe there's no image. Maybe imagination is nothing like perception at all, although we might believe that there is. Right? Many people maintain a belief in the reality of mental images as a kind of quasi-perceptual experience. So that's one of the methodological problems that we're going to run into in getting clear about consciousness. We're not necessarily authorities on consciousness, although it's a thing which is most immediately accessible to us. Daniel Dennett makes much of this with the notion of hetero-phenomenology. You can't just take the subject's word for it. You have to check or verify what they claim is going on in their consciousness with what we know independently or objectively. Now, the other problem with consciousness, if you're trying to understand what is going on in the brain with consciousness, is that you run into what's called the reverse inference problem. And this is something which is relevant to what I'm going to talk about today, which is the notion of brain death. And it's the idea that using imaging technology, you can associate a certain subjective experience with certain brain event. But the question is going to be, is the brain event constitutive of consciousness or merely concomitant? And how do we address that question? How do we solve it? Because the question of consciousness is different from other scientific problems or questions that we've had before. For example, thunder and lightning. What is thunder and lightning? Well, it's the discharge of ionized water vapor in the upper atmosphere. That's what it is. That's distinct from the way that we experience it, the way we experience it subjectively. Here, we're talking about the experience itself. And there's perhaps a methodological problem here, which is going to be difficult to solve. Colin McGinn has made the argument that, in fact, we're not going to solve that problem. We are permanently cognitively closed to bridging the explanatory gap between what's going on in the brain and our subjective sensation of it. We'll see. Again, there are quite a variety of theories of consciousness now. And in fact, with the Tonnoti and the HEN theories of consciousness, we now have an international competition funded by the Templeton Fund. Maybe we're finally getting to the point where consciousness lies within the realm of science. That means we've got theories which not only explain but allow inferences which are empirically testable. It appears that we're moving in that direction now. So the other direction I'm coming at consciousness from here is the work I do with bioethics. I teach a course in bioethics and I write on the subject of biomedical ethics. And the last few years, I've been working on the idea of brain death. And it's something which I think is fair to say, although it was introduced a little over 50 years ago, 1968, Harvard University, despite all the progress in brain science and medicine since then, there's probably more confusion around the notion of brain death now than there was back in 1968. In 2018, at Harvard University, there was a conference on brain death. It was to commemorate the 50th anniversary of the work of the ad hoc committee, Harvard Medical School, that developed it. The papers presented at that conference are published in the Hastings Center Report, December 2018, if you'd like to have a look. I think you'll find it interesting, if you're interested in brain death at all, just how critical many of the contributors are of what was offered in the way of the concept of brain death in the first place and what's become of it since then. One of the things that we go back to 1968, we have to recognize is that brain death was a new concept of death, which was motivated by developments in medical technology, particularly life support technology. The concern was that unless something like brain death was introduced, intensive care units would gradually fill up with what were, in fact, living cadavers, people who could be, their metabolic functions could be maintained technologically, although there would be no hope of them returning to experiential life. However, the work of the ad hoc committee at Harvard was focused on diagnostic criteria, and the publication of that's very short, appeared in the New England Journal of Medicine, it's about a page and a half long. And what decided was that the criteria should consist of what are essentially tests of brain stem reflexes with an ancillary test of other brain functions, so that the Harvard concept was a so-called whole brain concept of brain death, functions of the whole brain, although the diagnostic criteria do focus on brain stem. One thing to keep in mind is that in Canada and UK, we've taken a different direction of brain death following the Harvard brain death notion. Pretty much every country in the world has adopted some version of it. In Canada and UK, we use what's called a brain stem criterion on the assumption that if the brain stem is damaged or destroyed, the patient cannot be conscious. The brain stem is responsible for wakefulness, which of course is a precondition for consciousness. And so if you look at the diagnostic criteria published by the Canadian Medical Association, those diagnostic criteria are exclusively tests of brain stem function. They're very simple, bedside tests, right, tongue compressor, a light to shine in the eyes, and the last in a series of tests would be the apnea test, so that if a patient's on a respirator, that's shut off if the patient gasps for air. That's a sign that brain stem is still functional. What you don't get typically is any EEG test or any other imaging technology. It was decided by the Harvard committee that EEG at the time simply wasn't reliable enough to use it for that purpose, hence ancillary test. So their definition at Harvard was irreversible cessation of all functions of the whole brain. And it became law, eventually the United States, with the Uniform Determination of Death Act of 1981. Another difference between US, Canada, and Britain is that death is not defined legally in Canada, where Britain is left as a matter of medical judgment. Now, what happened in 1981 was that the notion of the concept of brain death was revisited by the President's Commission on Bioethics. And critics of what the Harvard people had done in 1968 pointed out that what we got then was largely diagnostic and focused, but there was insufficient attention to the philosophy or the concept of brain death or even death itself. It had been driven by pragmatic considerations, but it didn't sufficiently reflect upon how we are to understand death. And so that was the job of the President's Commission in 1980. What they came up with was something in which the notion of consciousness was left out entirely. And instead, they took the view that with the death of the brain, the inevitable result is the loss of the integrative unity of the organism. What that means in particular is that what usually follows brain death is that the heart stops, usually three and a half to four days later. The reason they opted for that was that they wanted a concept of death which had unity, logical unity to it, and they wanted to avoid a situation where we'd be working with two distinctly different conceptions of death, a clinical cessation of heartbeat on the one hand and loss of brain function on the other. So what they worked out with the notion of loss of integrative unity was the idea that we've really got two windows on the same phenomenon. So brain death is circulatory death. It's just that you're going to have a period of time separating the two events. Now the situation in 1981 was there was abundant clinical evidence supporting this view. So there were large scale studies done in the US and Britain which found that typically people who are determined to be brain dead suffer cardiac arrest typically a few days later. But we've since discovered that this is not necessarily the case and the point was made in 2018 looking back on the history of Harvard brain death criteria is that with proper treatment following brain death the patient can be stabilized and live indefinitely. The critical aspect of this is the rebalancing of hormones and there's a case report in the literature of a young man who lived for 20 years following the termination of brain death. At least his body lived for 20 years. So it would seem that perhaps the concept of brain death was worked out in 1981 in the interest of filling out the notion philosophically is somewhat problematic now. And there are those in the biowithics literature suggesting that what we need to do is to revise definition of brain death so as to include consciousness. The definition of brain death is something like the irreversible loss of consciousness. There are good grounds for doing that not just medically but philosophically and legally because consciousness is intimately connected with the notion of personhood which is both a moral and legal concept. So consciousness is the source of identity. The identity out of which develops a sense of self a self that has interests in the future including an interest in remaining alive the interests which are the basis for rights both moral and legal. So it seems that what we would have is a definition of death which has both a medical or biological aspect to it but also a philosophical aspect. That seems to be probably what we want. The definition of death has to be at least partly philosophical because the question is going to be what matters to us so much about the definition of death? So what matters to us so much that it's loss marks the passage from life to death. That's an important threshold in many ways emotionally, financially, legally, medically. And so taking or using a consciousness based notion of brain death would enable us to accomplish that. It's out of consciousness the sense of self is something that persists over time inhabits and arises out of consciousness as the subject of our cognitive life. It's that for the sake of which one has interests in the future including an interest for example in one's continued existence. Andrew Baker and Sam Shimi offer a possible definition which goes like this. Being dead can be defined as absent brain function with no biological potential in the brain to reinstate sufficient cell function required to attain emergence to consciousness. In other words death is an irreversible loss of the capacity for consciousness. So in many ways this would offer a satisfactory definition of death, satisfactory both medically, philosophically and legally. The problem is if we were to implement it we would need to have some way of detecting consciousness in someone who is brain injured. How do we diagnose the presence or absence of consciousness? Now someone who's doing a lot of work with looking for consciousness in the brain injured is Adrian Owen at University of Western Ontario. He's been working with people in the unresponsive waking state. It used to be called persistent vegetative. So he's been working with people in the unresponsive waking state. It used to be called persistent vegetative state. And these are people who are one step from coma. The only difference between UWS and coma is that UWS people go through a sleep-wake cycle. And until recently it was assumed that these people are not conscious. They are for all intents and purposes comatose except that their eyes open for a period of time each day. Owen has been working with these people and he's been using functional MRI to explore their world. Owen has been working with these people and he's been using functional MRI to explore their world. And he's done it in a very clever way. So what he's done is he puts his subjects in the MRI with a set of the headset. And he asks them to imagine one of two situations, either playing tennis or walking through the rooms of their house. And going through that imaginative exercise in one case or the other is going to use different brain structures. In the case of walking through the rooms, it's going to be the parahippocampal gyrus. In the case of imagining the head of a person, it's going to be the parahippocampal gyrus. In the case of imagining you're playing tennis, it's the supplementary motor cortex. And these two parts of the brain are sufficiently removed spatially. That's very clear which one is being active. Now once you've got those two activities, you can attach yes or no to those activities. They have a way that a UWS person can respond to questions. So that's the procedure they used. And in many cases he was getting intelligent responses from his patients. He was getting the characteristic images with his functional MRI, consistent with an appropriate response to the question he was asking. He thinks that as many as 20% of people diagnosed as UWS are actually conscious, although they're unable to communicate. Now there's one case that he writes about in his book, Into the Gray Zone, fascinating book, it's a trade book in which he talks about his work and some of the cases, the particularly interesting cases that he has dealt with. One concerns a Toronto teenager named Ron Torres. His mother found him one morning in bed not breathing. So nobody knows how long he went without breathing. He was resuscitated but remained unresponsive. He was taken to Owen for assessment. And Owen does a lot of that at Western with his MRI, again with the tennis walking through the rooms of the house, looking for any sign of consciousness. In his assessment of Owen, it was entirely negative. No sign of conscious activity. So, Juan Torres was sent home with a grim prognosis. Now what Owen does typically is he follows up with the families of his patients six months later, see how they're doing. And when he called the Torres household, he got his mother who said, Well, sure, you can talk to Juan yourself if you want. And so he was speaking on the phone to Juan Torres, who was by now living the life of pretty much a normal teenager. The only disability at that point was he was having a bit of trouble walking. But even that might come around with some physiotherapy. So honestly, I think it's a very interesting book. So on that case, I'll read out what he has to say about it. The more I thought about Juan, the more I realized how little we still understand about consciousness and its many faces. We've thrown everything we had at Juan, every type of brain scan, every newfangled technique we had at our disposal, yet we had failed to spot consciousness. So that's not really the most amazing part of the story. It was when Juan told Owen that he remembered Owen trying to contact him at Western, which would suggest, would it not, that Torres must have been conscious at the time, unless there's some other way of explaining that. And yet there was no sign, there was no neurological sign of conscious activity. For a look into the world of UWS people, there's a good book, The Diving Bell and the Butterfly, by Gunn and Bo Bee. He had locked-in syndrome, brain stem damage, unable to move or speak, but he was able to move his left eyelid and wrote the book by blinking his left eye, about 75 pages long. That's a view from inside. And rummaging through the medical literature, I found a study of people with locked-in syndrome. And many would think, well, if there's one fate worse than death, it's got to be the locked-in syndrome people. Unable to move, unable to speak, unable to eat, unable to communicate. Except that what they found was, this involves the idea of hedonic adaptation, the idea that when we experience a catastrophic event, loss of a loved one, or a major setback in life, there's a temporary reduction in health, or let's say, spinal cord injury people. Typically depression for a period of time, but with rehabilitation and overtime, they usually return to their pre-accident level of happiness or contentment. It works the other way too, with lottery winners. There's a period of euphoria, happiness, obviously, before they return, regression to the mean, back to their standard, almost like a sort of thermostat level of happiness. And that was found to be true of the locked-in syndrome people too, amazingly enough. The situation is so terrible that typically they would like to die. Of course, there's no way that they can take their own lives, but over time they return. Now, this is a hugely important thing, I think. I always pointed out to the students in my biomedical ethics class, is that we have to be very careful about making judgments about what kind of life is or is not worth it, from the perspective of an able-bodied person, where even people in this terrible condition find eventually that their lives are worth living. Now, there's another reason to maybe revise the concept of brain death, particularly in countries like Canada and the UK, which employ a brain stem definition of death, and that's the argument made in the 2018 Journal of Clinical Neurophysiology by Walter et al., who make the argument at length that it is possible, it's theoretically possible that brain stem can be damaged in such a way that the patient will pass the tests for brain death. But they will remain conscious. Now, they don't talk about the probability of that. It could be extremely rare, but the very possibility of it is something that we need to be concerned with. So I'm going to leave you with that this morning, the idea that theoretically or in principle, a consciousness-based concept of death meets a lot of our demands, not just medically, but ethically. All we need then is a good bedside diagnostic tool to detect the presence of consciousness. That we don't have. And again, the quest for such a tool brings us back to the reverse inference problem. Are we looking at something which is concomitant, supportive of consciousness, or are we actually looking at consciousness? In the case of Juan Torres, she gave us reasons to pause. So thank you. I'll leave it at that. Thank you.