https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=8moDVxIzBMg

 Hi, this is Paul and I have a special guest today, Kristen Cobes Dumay, if I said that correctly? Close enough, Kristen Cobes Dumay. Dumay, okay. And I say that because I told her, I said, you know, if her name was Huysenga or Plantinga, two names I regularly hear butchered in the regular press. I know how to say Huysenga and Plantinga, but all these strange Dutch names that we the Christian Reformed Church try to, you know, are comfortable with and then here's one I didn't know, but we'll talk about that a little bit later. Kristen is a professor of history at Calvin College. So this makes this a very special treat for me because I got my degree in the history department at Calvin College. I graduated in 1986, took me five years to get through because I didn't decide on a major until my senior. I didn't decide pre-sem until my senior year and I needed two years of Greek for Calvin Sem at that point. So Kristen has obviously come to the school quite a bit after I departed from those hallowed halls but it is a treat for me and Kristen has written a book that we're going to talk about, Jesus and John Wayne. And this, actually I got connected with Kristen because some of you know I mentioned there's two Christian Reformed listservs I participate in. One is Calvin in Common, which is a listserv that developed after George W. Bush decided to speak at Calvin College with insufficient background checks because he thought it would sort of be like a safe, conservative, Republican, evangelical context. And anyone who knows Calvin College or at least the subculture of Calvin College in Western Michigan could anticipate what would happen, which was there were protests because actually George W. Bush bumped a local patron saint of the school, Nicholas Waltersdorf, and he stepped into a whole history. And so this listserv developed, my parents were part of that original group that signed that protest and then my mother knew I did a bunch of things online so she said, oh Paul, you should join this. So Calvin in Common is one thing that we're going to talk about this dynamic because I think it's especially important with this book. The other dynamic is CRC Voices, which was actually begun by Don Waltheis, who was a professor of computer science at Calvin College. And this is kind of the original Christian Reformed listserv. And so back in the early days of the internet, this thing started and when I moved to Sacramento, I jumped into that. And so I haven't been as active on Calvin in Common for a couple of years since I started doing YouTube, but the CRC Voices is a community I care very deeply about. And two people that go to church with Kristen are good friends of mine from that listserv, retired CRC pastor Len Bandersey, who has been on my channel a couple of times and will be on again, I'm sure. And Bill Harris, who has never been on my channel, but Bill has been a dear, dear friend. And when Kristen was preparing this book, as we'll talk about, Jordan Peterson came up. And just so happened that here in the little corner of the internet of Calvin in Common and CRC Voices is the Christian Reformed Church's preeminent expert on Jordan Peterson, which is me. Yes. But Jordan didn't really make the book. I only saw one reference to him in the book. But we'll get there anyway. But I don't want to just jump in. And I want to give Kristen a chance to share her story because I am... So Kristen's on now. Rudy Gonzalez of Christian Reformed Race Relations is going to be on in a couple of weeks. That's going to be another interesting conversation. So I'm super happy to have more Christian Reformed Voices on this channel. So Kristen, thank you so much for coming. And thank you for being here. Oh, thank you so much. I really appreciate it. So I have to say that this book was given to me by the publisher. And bloggers always have to say that. I don't know if YouTubers have to say that. But I'll make that disclaimer. And I usually buy Kindle books because my office runneth over, which is a disease I inherited from my parents. But let's start, Kristen, with you. And tell me a little bit about where you grew up and whether faith was a part of your household and what that was like. Sure. I'm from Sioux Center, Iowa, a little town in northwest Iowa that folks in the Christian Reformed Church will recognize. And otherwise, people probably won't. And I did grow up in a little Christian Reformed enclave. So my mom was an immigrant from the Netherlands. And my dad was an ordained minister in the Christian Reformed Church and a theology professor at Dork College. So that's my pedigree. Oh, boy. Oh, boy. Let's talk about your mom a little bit more. So she, what year did she, she emigrated from the Netherlands? What year did she leave? I think it was 47. It was just after the war. Just after the war. So she was part of, so in terms of CRC history, there was a wave of immigrants, the immigrants that came after the war. My grandfather actually took a church in Owen Sound, Ontario. My grandmother and eventually my aunt did not appreciate the move at all. But my grandfather very much felt called because, you know, we think about it now that, I mean, these people leaving the Netherlands, they didn't, we didn't talk about post-traumatic shock or anything in those days. But having suffered under the German occupation, how old was your mother during the war? Yeah, so actually she was, she was very young, has no memories. And I think I got it wrong. She must have immigrated in 49 because I think she was born in 47. So she was two when she came over. So she was the little sister. Some of her older siblings have memories and my grandparents. But, and they immigrated initially, very briefly to Minnesota and then continued the trek out to Southern California. And they were a dairy family. You probably are familiar with that story and settled in Artesia, Bellflower area, and then Ontario. And yeah, they started up dairies and they had a family dairy business for many years. So that was her story. Where did she meet your father? She met at Dort College. She actually went to Calvin for a year or so or a semester, I can't remember. And ended up transferring to Dort, thankfully for my existence. And yeah, they met. And after that, my dad went off to seminary at Calvin Seminary. And so he lived in Grand Rapids for two or three years. And then ended up in Sioux Center where my dad got a position at Dort. So that's kind of, again, for Christian Reformed folks, this is a very familiar geography. Where did your father get his, did he get, I mean, to teach, he probably got a degree after Calvin Seminary. Where did he go? Yeah, eventually. So first, that time Dort was a very small college and they had different standards. So they took him right out of seminary with an MDiv. Really? And yeah. And then, so it wasn't until I was in high school that he went for a PhD. And then he got a PhD at Florida State University, which was a great adventure for my family. We got to move to Tallahassee, Florida. That's when I learned that, you know, the Christian Reformed Church was a very tiny, tiny denomination in the broader landscape of American Christianity. Nobody had ever heard of it in Florida, or at least in Tallahassee. And so it was a real learning experience, culturally, religiously, in so many ways. It was actually a really great time. Wow. You do have a very CRC story. And I mean, I was a little curious when you mentioned your mother and then in Iowa, because generally speaking that post-World War II, they went to Canada or California. And of course, Artesia was one of those places that they went and started dairies. And in California, you know, they went basically Artesia Bellflower, then hopped out to Chino, and then up to Visalia and other places. That's sort of the hops that these families took. What was it, so you moved around a fair amount. What was that like for you? Well, I mean, actually, it felt like I just grew up in, Sue Center was always home. And Tallahassee was just two years. And then my third year of high school, I guess I had one year in North West Iowa, two years in Tallahassee. And then I was an exchange student in Germany for a year, which also gave me a different vantage point on not just on my own tradition and in my own religion, but also very much American culture and American history. So then after that, I returned, my family had already moved back to Sue Center, and I started DORT. So it was really just three years that I was away from Sue Center. Okay. Let's talk about DORT College a little bit and its history, because for those who know the Christian Reformed Church, my grandfather went to Calvin College when it was sort of a prep school. They were training clergy and Christian school teachers. And so then my grandfather went there and then to the college. My great grandfather, I learned this a few years ago, my great great grandfather was Jewish. And we don't know why he left the Netherlands and then assimilated with all of the Dutch Calvinists in Spring Lake, but he did. So then my great grandfather was a house painter in Southeast Grand Rapids. And well, actually, they were living in Spring Lake and his wife died in childbirth with their sixth child. And after she died, they left Spring Lake and moved to Southeast Grand Rapids. And my grandfather, that's where my grandfather met my grandmother, Southeast Grand Rapids was very much a CRC enclave at the beginning of the 20th century. Calvin College was, Calvin College continues to be owned by the Christian Reformed Church. There's deep connections between the Christian Reformed Church and Calvin College. But Dork College is one of these sort of upstart. What's been interesting to me is a lot of the, Mark Holland is a colleague of mine, he went to Dork College. Eric Dirksen is a colleague of mine, he went to Dork College. So out here in the West, a lot of Californians send their kids to Dork and not to Calvin. What's the history of Dork and what's its reason for being? It was originally founded to train school teachers and to be, I guess, a kind of outpost in that part of the Midwest. And so it was very strong in teacher education and also pre-seminary. It was, yeah, I think it kind of, as it grew, by the time I got there in 93, is when I started at Dort, and I was coming again just back from my stint in Germany. At that point, I felt that Dort had an identity, kind of self-identity as more Reformed than Calvin, that Calvin was a bit worldly, right? You know, Grand Rapids was a term of mild disparagement. And that we were purer and more Reformed, also because we were not owned by the Christian Reformed Church. So we were doing, you know, sphere sovereignty properly in the Papyrian tradition. And that, yeah, we were just a little bit more Orthodox and, and obviously also scrappier than Calvin, right? We didn't have the same funding. We didn't have the same prestige within the denomination. But we were just fine with that. And I actually had a fabulous four years at Dort, very wonderful professors who, although looking back, I can see that my education was constrained in some respects. It was also just, I was really trained how to be critical, right? How to read every text critically, because we were always asking, what is the Reformed approach to this particular question? And we never really got it good enough, but we sure tried, you know, like what's the distinctively Reformed Christian approach to whatever topic was at hand? Let's talk about Kuiper, because one of the things that is, so when I started doing my YouTube channel, I, people have spent a long time trying to figure me out, because, basically because of the history of the CRC, and, you know, because I also have a very Christian, I mean, I'm a third generation Christian Reformed minister. Although because of my father's work in the Black community, I'm a little different from others in the denomination. So, and I know that Dort, because I know some other Dort alum that are fiercely loyal to their institution, what is, this actually also has a lot to do with the post-World War II immigration wave too, because the, so my mother's, my mother's, the immigrant wave that landed my mother in Whitensville, Massachusetts, which is of course a place you recognize, Mr. Whiten's cow died, cows died in a flu, in a cow influenza, and so Mr. Whiten, kind of the Eastern industrialist that founded Whitensville, I mean, it's one of these towns that was an industrial town owned by the magnet. He wanted, he needed new dairy stock for his town, and so the best dairy cows in the world were over in the Netherlands, and so he imported these, these cows from, from Friesland, and imported the workers with them, and that's how my mother's family got over, and so Whitensville is a strongly Friesian place, and we didn't quite know why we didn't have all the family relations on my father's side until just a number of years ago we uncovered the fact that they were Jews, and so they didn't come over with a network, they were Jews and they sort of assimilated into the, into the Dutchness, and, and actually when the, the courthouse burned down in Spring Lake, Michigan, my grandfather and his older brother dropped, they had actually been named because the Jews had this patronomic system where the names were handed down one generation to the other. When the courthouse burned down, they had the opportunity to sort of deep-six their Jewish heritage, and they took on American names, so my grandfather went from Hyman, which was this name that had been passed down, to Hiram, you know, from the Bible, and Hartog became Harm, so, you know, this is a little bit of family history, or where was I going with this? Oh yeah, so my, so my family came over in the, you know, 1890s, 1900 wave of immigrants from the Netherlands, but after that, of course, Abraham Kuyper, well let's talk a little bit about, I've talked a little bit about Abraham Kuyper, let's talk a little bit about Abraham Kuyper and how he factors into the Christian reform story, and you know, especially Dort College, because in some ways I got the sense that when Dort was founded, they were going to be the pure Kuyperians as opposed to those watered-down sorts in, because the Western Michigan immigration wave was back, been royalty in the 19th century, so maybe you can flesh out some of that for us. Yeah, so I'm not an expert on Abraham Kuyper, I can tell you how I received the Kuyperian tradition, which was, you know, again, every course at Dort was framed in terms of this kind of covenantal narrative, creation, fall, redemption, consummation, and I mean, so much so that my first year, my first semester, I started to wonder if the problem was me or the college, because no matter what the subject I was taking, our intro weeks were almost identical, you know, they were really getting down that narrative of, you know, the basic kind of covenantal understanding of the Bible, of Christian history, and then how that was going to frame every discipline, so it took us several weeks to kind of really get into, you know, what was distinguishing one discipline from another, but again, it was this idea that if you are a Christian, then your faith commitments will shape everything that you're doing, and you can be responding either obediently or disobediently to kind of God's normative structure of creation and of society, and so it was really up to Christians for us to test and discern and always be critical to try to figure out, you know, what are the proper obedient responses in every sphere of society, and you don't want to mix your spheres, you don't want to have, for example, government interfering with the church sphere, or, you know, with the home sphere, and then you've got economics, and you've got all of these different areas, and in each subject we were trying to figure out, you know, with a lot of other Reformed scholarships at our fingertips, you know, what is the proper obedient response to creation normativity, I guess, and how are we working to bring about shalom to redeem this fallen world, because the world around us is not, in fact, conforming to the world that God designed for us, so that was my college education in a nutshell, and I found it incredibly inspiring. How did that sync up with growing up? You went to Christian school in in Sioux Center, and for those who don't know it, before there was a Benedict, you know, I sometimes read Rod Drears Benedict option, and I always say, you know, the CRC was doing that. Maybe we had our Christian schools, we had our Christian colleges, but now part of what came through in the Kiperian tradition was also other distinctly Christian institutions, and part of what I have a, you know, fairly strong contingent of Roman Catholics that follow my channel, you know, they're used to a parochial school model where, in a sense, the church owns it, but in our Dutch tradition, Christian schools and Christian colleges are run by the parents and by, you know, maybe you can flesh that out a little bit, because that's a little different from what a lot of people expect as well. Yeah, yeah, so I mean, I'm a product of Christian schools, with the exception of the three years when I didn't live in Sioux Center, and yeah, it's parent-run, you know, kind of school board-run organizations, and in my community, in Sioux Center, within the Christian Reformed Church community, it really was an option. All of the kids in that community went to the Christian school. That was the way to be obedient, it was the way to be faithful, it was not perceived as an elite institution. It was no matter what your income level, you would send your kids to the school, and all of the Christian Reformed Churches would take collections every week to fund the tuition, and particularly for parents who really couldn't afford to make the payments, and so it was very much, you know, it was perceived as a covenant community institution, and our kids needed to be trained up properly through distinctively Christian education, and I can say that, you know, that was formative to me, but I also, because I left Sioux Center for three years, and we ended up in Tallahassee, where there was one Christian school, but it was a white flight academy, a private institution, and there was no way that we could afford the tuition on my dad's graduate student stipend, and so I ended up being tossed into a large public high school of 2,000 students. It was actually the best experience of my young life, and I think what that did for me is it helped me to own my faith in a way that, you know, in the kind of Christian high school in northwest Iowa, to be cool was kind of being to live on the edge, to be as, you know, kind of to reject as much as you could get by with, because we were all in the thing, you know, we're all Christian, but in Florida, in the high school there, I quickly realized if you called yourself a Christian, people kind of expected that to mean something, otherwise why even bother with it, so I think that what that did for me is I didn't kind of receive the inoculation phase of Christian education, where I felt like by the time I got to college I'd heard it all. Instead, you know, between those two years and then going to a public gymnasium in Germany for my senior year, by the time I came back to Dort, I was kind of ready to learn at a more sophisticated level, you know, Christian philosophy, reformed thought, and so looking back, I mean, I'd highly recommend that as much as, you know, there may be fans of Christian education, the mix for me was actually really formative and I think productive. Where did you go to church when you were in Tallahassee? Yes, we ended up at an Orthodox Presbyterian church, a very small, very conservative church that, where I learned about Southern culture and Southern white patriarchy. Yeah, so let's, because that figures into your book quite a bit. And you and I both, I mean, there's a weird dynamic that happens in, boy, there's so much stuff here, and I would imagine, so I grew up just sort of at the end of the baby boom, and my experience was when I was growing up in the 60s and 70s, in some ways, the Christian reformed Benedict option was at its height. Christian schools, if you were a family in good standing, and I use that word, a family in good standing in the Christian reformed church, you sent your children to Christian school. And in many ways, the community put their money where their mouth was in that. Christian booster clubs were serious, fundraising was a way of life at Eastern Christian where I grew up in New Jersey. And so, and my parents, when, so my parents were, my father went to, my father and mother went to Patterson, New Jersey in 1960, to sort of take over a, what had been sort of a sandwich and gospel ministry by the CRC, who I think, so the CRC in the 50s and 60s were moving out of Patterson as, have you read Isabel Wilkerson's The Warrant of Other Sons? Wonderful book. And so, you know, when I read this book a few years ago, it was like coloring in the black and white pictures of my childhood, because suddenly I understood where all these people I grew up came from, culturally and socially. So, and so my parents moved there in 1960, and my father, his job was to take what had been sort of this gospel mission type thing. You know, this gets into the whole Christian reformed tradition of chapels as opposed to churches. Churches were places where pretty much mostly Dutch white people were going to church and did the program. Chapels were places where the rules could be a little bit looser. And so I grew up in a chapel, and my father's job was to, of course, turn that into a church. And so, of course, the civil rights movement happened. And so that was a very big part of my growing up. But I still went to Eastern Christian. So, you know, all of these, you know, nobody, I can't talk about any of this stuff with hardly anybody else, because nobody knows about this stuff, where I live, at least. And so all of these dynamics, but when you, as you, as you described well, well, I think when I grew up in the baby boom years, and sort of sort of at the end of the baby boom years, I'm kind of on the cusp between the boomers and the extras, you very much did have that dynamic that the upbringing was almost smothering to the degree that in order to have status in your school, you had to be somewhat of a rebel. And so we had, you know, wasters and potheads and all of that. And you think, well, how would you have that in a Christian school? Well, in our Christian schools, the dynamics were very different than, let's say, what you would find in a Christian school that would be spun off, let's say, by an assemblies of God church. Okay. Or, and so the Christian, a lot of people don't recognize the fact that the Christian school environment in North America is also a very diverse ecosystem. And in the Christian Reformed Church, because of our Kiperian discipline, we established Christian schools, international, but basically CSI schools. And so all of these Dutch Reformed, now we had an American name on it, but we all kind of knew who we were. My sense is, and I'd love to hear your thoughts on this, that part of what I saw in Grand Rapids, let's say, so I was in, I was at Calvin College from 81 to 86, and at the seminary from 86 to 90. Part of what I saw in sort of the post-baby boom affluence was sort of the breakdown of some of this Benedict option mentality within the Christian Reformed Church. Increasingly, some missional people, like my parents, they founded an inner city Christian school in Patterson called Dawn Treader when Eastern Christian closed down the Pasek School, which was sort of the last school left in the inner city areas. But Christian schools increasingly became, did take on a sense of elitism, especially in some places like Grand Rapids or New Jersey. If you go to the Wikipedia entry for Eastern Christian, most of the notable alumni are Peter Craeft, who of course was a notable Calvin College defector from New Jersey who joined the Roman Catholic Church, but almost all teen pop stars from Eastern Christian, and when I read that I was, because when I went to Eastern Christian, there was not going to be any teen pop star that ever came out of who we were, because the closest thing we got to dance was the clomping, you know, in Holland or maybe you guys did that in Iowa. And my sense was that Iowa, partly, Sioux Center, Iowa, Northwest Iowa, partly because of its immigrant ethos, its isolation and Dork College and this sort of neo-Kyperian wave, in some ways the dynamics were different. Absolutely, absolutely. I think that's very accurate. You know, those dynamics might be shifting a little bit. I get back to Sioux Center fairly regularly, but I'm not really embedded there, and in the last 15 years or so, there's been a significant wave of Hispanic immigration into the town, and so for the first time, I think you've got some clearer kind of differences between the Christian school and the public school, particularly in terms of race and ethnicity and socioeconomic differences, and so, you know, things might be changing in terms of the relationship of the Christian school now to the rest of the community, but certainly when I was there, it was not perceived certainly by me as elite, simply as they were side by side. If you were like really Christian, meaning Christian Reformed, you went to the Christian school, and if you were less than Christian-ish, so if you were Assemblies of God or if you were RCA, then you went to the public school, and so, again, I was younger, so maybe there was some elitism that I was not aware of, but looking back, I see no evidence of that at that time, but now I live in Grand Rapids. My kids go to Ada Christian School here in Grand Rapids, and I've watched as a historian kind of come to understand the history of Christian schooling in Grand Rapids, and even though originally, as you say, it was intended to be an expression of this Reformed Hyperion commitment, it also ended up being an elite educational system that ended up leaving in some communities in Grand Rapids the public school system high and dry. It did exacerbate segregationism, and that's also the legacy we live with, so, and we participate in, and so, as a kind of insider-outsider here in Grand Rapids, it's always interesting to me to hear a lot of folks in the CRC defend our Christian schools by going back to this, you know, these lofty ideals, theologically, culturally, and pretend like we are not also part of this history and that we are not complicit in educational inequities and residential segregation that we've actually exacerbated because of our Christian schooling, so we really have to hold both together, I think, and we cannot absolve ourselves of the historical consequences of our actions by, you know, holding up some theological ideal. In Grand Rapids, there has, as there was, you know, my parents were involved in first EECUMP, which was sort of a booster system to allow, so in the church I grew up in in Northside Chapel, and then in Madison Avenue, which were sort of the two churches in North Jersey that became majority Black congregations. They had EECUMP, which was basically a booster club, which is what churches usually had, to, they very much in the in the 60s and 70s didn't want, they were sort of resisting this increasing tide that as the Christian Reformed Church was becoming more ethnically diverse, becoming less Dutch Calvinist in isolation, they very, in many ways, they were Dutch CRC loyalists that said, hey, if these Black folks are going to be a part of our church, they should also get to go to Christian school. Now, how that worked out in the CRC in the 60s and 70s was complicated because one of the things that, you know, obviously the very famous Timothy Christian episode in Chicagoland, how that worked out was that the Christian Reformed people in the United States had some racial, had some racism issues of their own, and this came up then suddenly when you had, say, an overwhelmingly Dutch Calvinist school and three or four or five Black students, the treatment that these students might receive from teachers, from janitors, from bus drivers, I mean, these then became very big issues in my growing up years, and as the CRC really had to sort of work through these issues, and then of course in Grand Rapids, is it the Potter's House in Grand Rapids that was started? Yeah, as an alternate kind of to the Grand Rapids Christian system, you have the Potter's House started out. I actually attended Roosevelt Park Community Christian Reformed Church, which is connected to Potter's House, an intentional multi-ethnic, multi-racial community which no longer exists. We couldn't really make it work. Yeah, I was the best man in Reggie's wedding. Oh! So I know Reggie pretty well. Reggie and I went to seminary together. We met at seminary. We lived across the street from each other. Yeah, well, the CRC is a pretty small place. It is, it is. So I'm really curious about, because, you know, I, part of my concern about your book with a lot of the people I talk to is they're going to read it in a certain way, and if they don't understand who you are and where you're speaking out of, they're not, I, and so I'm trying to avoid that, and that's part of the reason I want to do a lot of this biography, but now, of course, I didn't know a lot of this stuff, and so it's a little of this stuff, and so it's all getting even more interesting for me because I've read the book, but I want to hear about your experience of Christians, because, you know, the strange thing about Florida is the further you go north, the further you go south. Tallahassees. Oh, yeah. It's Florida with a southern accent, yep. And so masculine and femininity, which is a big theme in your book. So my sister moved around quite a bit, my sister and my brother-in-law, and they spent a fair amount of time in Raleigh-Durham, and so I've, you know, I saw how, so my niece had some formative years in Raleigh-Durham, and so I'm really curious about going to high school, first time at a public school, going to an OPC church. Yeah. Now, they're not all the same, but they've got a reputation in the CRC, and then was it an integrated high school at all, or? Yes. So this for you, so when my grandfather moved to Owen Sound, Ontario, and threw my aunt into that world, which she didn't like, she cried for a few days, she said when she moved there, you got thrown into a very different world, and I'm really curious about how this formed you, and how this changed your view of Christianity, of masculinity, femininity, all of this, because of course, we can talk about the male-female dynamics and history within the CRC, and there are certainly some connections between that, but I would imagine in the South, that's a whole different ballgame. Yeah, so you know, it was, it didn't feel like an incredibly disruptive experience, it was just a fabulous experience. I had so much fun, I think that partly by growing up in Sioux Centre, Iowa, I always yearned for adventure, right? I wanted to see the world outside, and I finally got to do it, and so it was a wonderfully diverse school. The way that Tallahassee responded to school integration mandates was that they carved the city into four pie slices, inner city to suburbs, and then there were four high schools, and so, you know, every high school kind of got a bit of each sector, and so they were racially diverse, and my parents told me later that they sent us off that first day with great fear, and you know, wondering what they were doing. They had only ever sent us to Christian schools, they had gone to Christian schools, or at least my mom had, and so it was just wonderful, you know, I met, my closest friends were from India and Indonesia, and they were African American students and Jewish students, and just the ethnic and racial diversity was, it was just incredibly refreshing and dynamic, and then I realized that I was weird, that I was, you know, that the fact that I was Dutch was just charming to people, and I thought Dutch was standard, right? Everybody I knew was Dutch, and now I was getting all these questions about tulips and wooden shoes, and I was thought to be adorable. Same thing with the Christian Reformed Church, right? You know, people would ask, you know, when it came out that I was a person of faith, you know, well, I learned very quickly to not even bother saying I was Christian Reformed because no one had ever heard of that, so then I learned to kind of situate the Christian Reformed Church within this broader, you know, tradition, and I was Protestant, and that was helpful, I wasn't Catholic, so I was Protestant, and then it's kind of like Presbyterian, and usually somebody had some reference point to that, and that's as far as we could get really, which was fine, you know, so it really helped me understand my own positioning, but then in terms of attending this very conservative, Southern Orthodox Presbyterian Church, where there were signs on the doors of the Sunday school rooms, if a man is present, a woman may not speak. For a time, some of the women in my church ended up wearing head coverings because they read that passage and decided they could be more faithful by covering their heads in church, so it was, we were ruled by the session, the ruling elders, you know, very hierarchical. One of the leading families in the small church, their sons went to the citadel, so this kind of Southern military history, so I guess you could see some of these connections in my book, but I was utterly unaware of this. To me, these weren't even religious distinctions so much as they were just massive cultural distinctions, and we were only visitors, we knew we were only going to be there for a couple of years. We were always seen as, you know, the Yankees from the North, but you know, we were embraced as that, we were not trying to change anything, we were just visitors who were welcomed. Now, I will say, in that school, homeschooling was the standard approach to education, and so- For Christians? For Christians, yes, in the church, in the Orthodox Presbyterian Church, so we were seen as these real renegades to be attending the local public high school. Everybody else in the church was either part of a tiny Christian school or homeschooled. Homeschooled really was the preferred mode of education, so many of my church friends were homeschooled. So, this gets so Dutch bingo-y. What church did you go to in Iowa? First Christian Reformed Church, through Center, Iowa. And you didn't have signs on there about, you know, once boys get to be 13, you can't have a woman Sunday school teacher? No, I guess I just didn't age through that system, but you know, I guess I just didn't age through that system, but you know, my church was also patriarchal. All offices were closed to women. Elders, deacons, pastor remains to this day, so a woman could be a Sunday school teacher, but you know, we didn't even have female ushers back then. It was just the way things were. It was biblical obedience. It was just, it was standard Christianity as I grew up, and I really didn't question that at all. Looking back, I can see that in all likelihood, given my interest in religion, that, and my deep faithfulness really growing up, that I would have likely been drawn to the ministry if I had been male, but that just never occurred to me as an option, even though technically it was an option by then within the CRC in my home community, you know, I certainly didn't see it as an option for myself. So I didn't want to, you know, kind of make waves, or I just, that wasn't the path that was set out for me at all, and so it's kind of, I guess I became a religious historian instead, and ended up preaching through history and through writing instead of standing behind a pulpit. Okay. When you were growing up, I mean, I'm quite a bit older than you, and when you were growing up, these, I mean, these were the years of fierce wars in the Christian Reformed Church over what women were and weren't, let me say it this way, what offices women were and weren't permitted to enter. Laura Smith was just ahead of me in seminary, and I'm really curious now, often what happened in Christian Reformed Churches at that point was that people would choose their CRC based on which side of that fight they were on. So your parents were going to a church that was not pushing those boundaries, where your parents sort of, where your parents in alignment with it, and I'm going to use two terms that are, I have to, I really try to be careful about some of these in-house terms. There's the complementarian and the egalitarian. The egalitarian are generally open to women serving in all offices of the church. The complementarian are against it. Where were your parents in that? So in Sioux Center, there was only one of the four Christian Reformed Churches at the time that, for which this was even an issue, and that was the Covenant Christian Reformed Church. So that's where, if there was going to be a fight, if there was going to be an issue, and it took them a long time. First they voted to approve women as deacons, but then there wasn't enough of a majority within the congregation to actually nominate women to serve as deacons, and so I think that church over on that part of town was where that happened. In my church, as far as I was concerned, it was never, in my experience, I'm sure maybe in the all-male, I want to say session, but that's the Presbyterian word, consistory. Maybe it came up. It certainly never filtered down to me that this was a topic for discussion, but my dad, again, was a theology professor and ordained minister, and so I really deferred to his views on this, and as a theology professor at DORC, he trained women who went on to the ministry, but he himself was not supportive of that in terms of our church or the denomination generally, but he was not kind of militant in that, and again, he really mentored students who went on, female students who went on to serve in the ministry, but for me, I grew up, so I was born in 1976, that can kind of date me, but I was aware of these debates when I was in high school. They didn't really affect me at all, and I found them, frankly, quite dull. It seemed to me that there were entrenched views you were either for or you were against, and that was that, so I just found them tiresome, and it wasn't until I actually got to graduate school at the University of Notre Dame to study American religious history that I suddenly discovered, first of all, women's history. On my first semester there, I read a book about women's history, and I was just blown away. It was a study of changing ideas of masculinity and femininity in early America and how these ideas intersected with economic changes and with racial identity, so that says a lot, right? Gender history. I was astounded, and I went to visit my professor, a prominent women's historian, and I just said, you know, this is amazing. I really thought that when we talk about gender, what we're really just talking about is women in office, and I had no idea that there was so much more to this, and she looked at me and she said, in what office, Kristen? That just shows how narrow my understanding. I had not had a female professor at Dort. I think I read one book by a woman in four years at Dort, and that was Mary Stewart Van Lewen's book, Gender and Grace, and that was it. It was really in graduate school where my eyes were opened to the history of women and to understanding gender, and so maybe that'll get us closer to my book because it's a bit of a stretch to go back to my upbringing to see how I got to where I did. Oh, but I think it's an important, and so you discovered this at Notre Dame, and Notre Dame is a very interesting place, especially among, it's reputation amongst many of the Catholics I speak with. So why did, why this particular, so you decided at this point that this wanted to be a focus of yours in terms of your historical work? Yeah, so I went to Notre Dame to study religious history, religious and intellectual history, because I thought that was the history that really mattered. That was my own formation. It was your religion and intellectual history, and that's what I wanted to study, and I went to work with George Marsden, who is a prominent Christian scholar, and so it was kind of continuity. He was the Christian historian that you wanted to work with, and so that's how I ended up at Notre Dame, and it was that first semester when I was introduced to women's history that I added an emphasis on women and gender to my study of American religious history. Okay, and I... Notre Dame was, I mean, it has a reputation among Catholics, but the Notre Dame history department, because of George Marsden's presence there, and then later Mark Knoll came, it actually was a magnet for conservative evangelical students within this larger Catholic context, and it was actually a bit of a, cost some rifts in the department. We had Catholic students, and then we had this whole cohort of almost all male students, conservative evangelicals, including for a short time Bob Jones IV, so that kind of tells you, and many of the students, yes, at Notre Dame, you know what that means. So many of my classmates were coming from Moody and from Wheaton, and that's where I really started to understand American evangelicalism, and that's when I understood that even though I might share many theological beliefs with my classmates, there was a whole cultural history that I only participated in in very limited ways, and that they were all talking a language that I had to listen in on and then learn. Wow, that's interesting. I had had Marsden when he was still at, I was able to get him at Calvin for a course. Now you left, what happened? Did you go right to Calvin College after there, or did you, or did you go into wilderness somewhere? Yeah, back when the job market was better. So I, while I was finishing my dissertation, I'd gotten married to a guy I had known at Dort, but we kind of remet later. He had finished a degree at Marquette, and so we both went to Catholic institutions, and then we got married, and while I was finishing my dissertation, I took, I taught at Williams College out in western Massachusetts for a semester, and then I had a residency with the Five College Women's Studies Research Center out at Smith, Mount Holyoke. So I was really kind of immersed in gender studies, women's history, and it was a great learning experience because I felt so kind of sheltered still. Despite my graduate education, I knew I was coming from this little Christian enclave, and here I was in this world of gender studies, and you know, was I going to say the wrong word or say the wrong thing? And it was just a really great experience where I could understand how my own training and upbringing could be brought into conversation with women and scholars of gender from very different backgrounds. So that was a great experience, but then yes, the first year I went up on the market, the job at Kelvin was open, and it was a job in recent American history and women's history, and that's where I ended up. And now I, you know, it kind of seems like it was predestined or something, but at that time I had many different job options, and Kelvin was way down on my list. I didn't want to go back to the culture I came from. I thought my mission was to be this Christian witness in secular academia. That was my goal. I really thought, you know, that was my role, and then it was after the interviews at all of the schools, I just fell in love with the people who became my colleagues. They were so fabulous, and I thought these are the guys, and they were almost all guys, these are the guys I want to work with. These are, they were so wise and witty and deeply kind and very smart, and I just wanted to work with them. Ron Well's still there? He was still there at the time. David Deephouse, Ron Wells, Jim Bratt, you know them. Yeah, well let's, I think we're, let's, let's, let's talk about the book. We're up to the book, because the first thing that jumped out at me was actually the subtitle. Yeah. Is that subtitle from you or the publisher? Oh, okay. It was a joint project. It took us about three months to land on it. Okay. And part of the problem, and I'll just say I love it, so I will defend it, I will own it, and we can talk about that. Okay. But, but it was a process. I certainly did not start out to write a book called Jesus and John Wayne or to subtitle it How White Evangelicals Corrupted a Faith and Fractured a Nation. I wrote the book, I really wanted to write a book on white evangelical masculinity and militarism. That, that's the thread that I pulled through. That was my original question. I kind of started this research 15 years ago, back in the early 2000s. There's a story, but I, when it came to landing on the title, we agreed at a certain point, it's a cultural history. If you read the book, it makes a lot of sense. You can see the kind of cultural influences on evangelical ideals of masculinity, and it was fun. But the subtitle, they rejected, my publisher rejected the use of the word masculinity and militarism. So I was kind of hamstrung in that I couldn't use the words I've always used to describe this project. They said that they were too big, and this is a trade book, right? It's a book for general audiences, not for academics. And so we started the process, went back and forth and back and forth. And at a couple points, my editor was amazing. We agreed on everything except the subtitle. We went back and forth so many times. And finally, he and I found one that we liked. I don't even remember what it was. We were so relieved because we were running out of time. And we were celebrating. And then a week later, the sales team said, it's a no-go. So we had to start from scratch. And then in the end, they gave me, they needed white evangelicals in the title, and they wanted the how white evangelicals blank and blank. And they left that up to us. So it came down to either transform the faith and fractured a nation because we wanted to get the kind of larger political framing in there with the second part. And then I made the final call between transformed a faith and corrupted a faith. I said, in the end, transformation can be a good thing. And I am writing as a Christian, and I am writing there is a normative claim that runs right underneath this book. Very strong. As much as it's a history, it's also a critique. And I think to be honest and clear, I want to go with corrupted because I am making a claim that this kind of militant masculinity and all that it entails is, in fact, a distortion of biblical Christianity, as I and many other people in Christian history have understood it. So the subtitle carries a lot of weight. And one of the reasons I really like it is because it opens up precisely this conversation with many readers. Because the title, the subtitle grabbed me right away. And the reason it grabbed me was, to me, it asked the question, what was this faith prior to white evangelicals that, and supposedly this uncorrupted faith that united the nation. And so I had, you know, I got my degree in history, and I've always obviously given my history been very interested in religious history, and knowing a bit about American religious history. And actually, in preparation for this, I've done some additional reading and study. It's, in many ways, we're going to have to grapple with this, the white aspect we're going to have to grapple with, but very much the evangelical aspect. Because I read Worthen's book a few years ago, which I thought was a tremendous book. It was very helpful for me. And of course, George Marsden, who is, probably both of us would agree, sort of the definitive scholar on the history of fundamentalism. And so let's talk first about evangelicals. Who are you talking about? That is the question of the hour, right, in the US media right now, and also among historians, I will say. And I had no desire when I started this project to get involved in these debates. I thought I was going to do what most historians of evangelicalism end up doing, which is very early in the book, drop in the Bevington definition, this four part definition of evangelicalism. They're conversionists. They uphold the authority of the scriptures. They're activists, right? This was, and the centrality of Christ. That was going to be it. And then there, I've done that. Now, let me tell the story I'm going to tell. As I was doing this research, I began to realize that that was insufficient. That was not, a kind of theological rubric was not sufficient to explain what we were seeing and to really capture the movement that I was observing, the people that I wanted to talk about. And I think this gets back to my own encounter with evangelicals in graduate school, right? Where I thought, now, wait a minute, I could check those boxes, right? I mean, the conversion is maybe a little iffy. You know, we don't talk about being born again so much in the Christian reform tradition, but come on, authority of the scriptures and, you know, like, help me in here. But there was always this distance. And where that distance was diminished really was when I could relate in terms of popular culture. I had listened to Dobson growing up and to focus on the family. I had shopped at a Christian bookstore. I listened to only CCM, Christian contemporary music, growing up, right? I thought secular music was evil. And so those were my points of contact with the evangelicals that I met who had grown up and gone to Wheaton and to Moody or even to Bob Jones, right? And so I think I've just always, and then I studied cultural history. I got trained in, you know, thinking about cultures, thinking about how meaning is constructed, how identity is formed, how communities, how boundaries are drawn around communities, and who exercises power in that process, who gets defined outside, and who gets to do the defining. These are all the things that really came through my academic training, and that really, I think, is reflected in my understanding of who evangelicals are. So it's not that I say that theology is unimportant, but we have to understand evangelicalism also as frankly a consumer culture. And so you might not attend a quote unquote evangelical church, and what is even that anymore? But if your religious formation is coming through, whatever you're buying at your local Christian bookstore, back when there were Christian bookstores, you know, the distribution channels, if you're listening to Dobson's Focus on the Family every single day in your home, if your minister is going to John Piper's, you know, pastor's conference, right, these are the kind of influences that I want to think about when we think about what it means to be an evangelical. And I will say, this book has been out for six weeks now. I think I've received more than 150 letters in those six weeks from people who are sharing their own stories with me and showing all of the places where their own stories intersect with the story told in Jesus and John Wayne, that there's something about, you know, I love Molly Wortham's book, a kind of intellectual history of evangelical thought, very important. I don't see my work as displacing hers. I want to bring it alongside. What did this look like for the people in the pews? You know, what was evangelicalism? What is it as a lived religion? And then I saw also, frankly, my students coming into Calvin, some of them traditional Christian reform students, many of them now coming from broader evangelical backgrounds, and, you know, frankly, brilliant students, but for many of them, highly theologically illiterate, illiterate, right? And so if, and surveys that are coming out to testify to just within evangelicalism, high degrees of theological illiteracy, in fact, many evangelicals hold views that, you know, would count as heresies. So if that's the case, you know, can we say that to be an evangelical is really about adhering to certain theological doctrines? Or is it something else? And so that's, again, where I look at this, at evangelicalism as a cultural and religious movement and an identity. And that's really fundamental to this project. I think it's, I think you're right. And I've often told people evangelicalism really isn't an ecclesiastical movement. It's an economic market. That's what it really is. It's not a, it's not a church. It's a marketplace. And especially, now this gets complicated too, but especially in, in the, you know, in the time of the rise, and again, I'm old enough to remember the rise of the moral majority. Of course, Jerry Falwell Senior, you know, Jerry Falwell Junior. Part of what I would have liked to have seen, now I'm going to be the old man who critiques your book. Part of, part of what I would have liked to have seen in there would have been more of an, more of a recognition of the dichotomy of sort of churched and unchurched evangelical culture. Because I think one of the things that we saw in the Trump election, where you had some, you know, you had some pretty high profile never Trumpers who were out there. I forget his name. He was, you know, pretty high up in the Southern Baptist who, you know, really, yeah, yeah. You know, and even, even some, you know, we can, we can talk about Rod Dreher. I mean, Rod Dreher is a, is an almost never Trumper, if you read his blog enough. But the, you know, a lot of the history here is, is not happening within churches. Now, a good bit of it is, and there certainly are churches that are, you know, participating in this. And part of my, you know, part of my concern, pastoring a church in Sacramento, which is obviously a fairly political town, being a state capital, is I have always, I have always really tried to pastor a church where, which is not defined by your political party. That is, that has been very important for me. And so in, in my church, I'm sure I don't ask people who they voted for, but I'm, you know, and this, this gets into the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, through the Bio correctly through accordance most of the times by some of the churchmen that least likely voted for. But, you know, and this, this gets into, this is part of the reason, I wanted to talk about CRC history because Christian Reformed Church is probably, I dunno 70, 75%, Republican voting. And, and I, my sense is northwest Iowa, even more so. on Voices this morning, a piece of a, I think it's a wife of a Calvin prof who's running for just a master's seat. Yeah, Hillary Bolton and the political article called the Christian Reformed Church progressive evangelical denomination, which I mean it's hard to characterize the CRC, but you know there's some quibbles there. It is. So talk to me a little bit about this, the dynamics of folk religion within this, because to me that's a huge part of this story. It is, it is. Yeah, and you're right, I'm pushing back against a narrative which wants to separate kind of true evangelicalism as a kind of respectable, churchly, high church attending, you know, kind of Christianity today Wheaton circle, respectable evangelicalism from American evangelicalism as a cultural movement. And we saw a lot of evangelical leaders like Russell Moore trying to do precisely that in 2016 and since 2016, saying no, no, no, no, you know all these quote unquote white evangelical Trump supporters, those aren't real evangelicals. When's the last time they've been to church? You know, not since Seinfeld was in, you know, first-run episodes kind of thing. And this is a narrative that white evangelical leaders keep telling themselves. And I'm absolutely pushing back against that in a variety of ways. First of all, there was kind of one survey early on that suggested that this might be the case, but that's been debunked by numerous surveys since that show that white evangelical levels of support for Trump are actually highest among those who are regular church attenders. So there's that. But I really wanted, when I looked at and watching the campaign underway in 2015 already, the evangelical support for Trump did not start from the top, right? It was not the leaders themselves who were leading. It was grassroots, which is why, again, I'm looking to popular culture. I'm looking at what has formed in the faith of these individuals so that they were leading the movement, not their pastors. Their pastors felt powerless. You know, pastors who said voting for Trump is a bad thing were punished and silenced. Just ask Russell Moore how that went for him, right? And so I really wanted to look at what was forming people through their lived religion at the popular grassroots level. And then I look at culture and consumer culture. But then I will also say that what I want to do or wanted to do was identify what then kind of bonded evangelicals, cultural evangelicals, by which I mean cultural and religious evangelicals, with maybe secular conservatives or with God and country conservatives. And you see all kinds of overlap between churchgoing conservative white evangelicals who are reared on Christian contemporary music, Christian publishing, Christian radio, and this kind of God and country faction. And in terms of cultural identity, they are united in an identity and political identity far more than, say, conservative white evangelical would be with a progressive evangelical. And so, yes, as a cultural historian, I'm drawing my categories in different ways. Let's talk about the God and country aspect because that's surely a big piece of this. I recently did a video on, oh shoot, now I forget his name. Really, I thought it was an excellent book about the faiths of the founding fathers. And he laid out basically deists and then sort of, so pure deist might be Thomas Jefferson. Christian deist would be George Washington, never confirmed, avoided Lord Supper. Even John Adams really in that category. And then others who were pretty stridently, often Puritans who were Christian. I mean, this is where sort of I get into the the Jordan Peterson thing because part of what I first noticed in Peterson, well, obviously, the his obstinacy about just his general obstinacy. Well, you know, part of one of the things that I learned when I moved west was that in American culture, there's north and south and west. And west is different. So I grew up just outside of New York City, went to school in Grand Rapids, did some time in the Dominican Republic outside the country, and then out here to California. And so part of what's important to understand about Jordan Peterson is his northern Albertan roots, because there's something very west about Jordan Peterson. Anyway, Peterson comes on the stage as someone who wants to categorize himself as a classical liberal, in which he sort of differentiates himself from when I was growing up in the CRC, because of the tradition of the CRC being against theological liberalism, people who were for women in office called themselves progressive within the CRC, and called themselves liberal, because if you use the word liberal, you lose the fight in the CRC. So, but Peterson and others in this IDW movement very much identified as classical liberal, and two others that actually the person who coined the term, the intellectual dark web, I don't know how well you know some of these cats, but Eric Weinstein, who is, so Eric and his brother Brett, Brett was sort of lost his place at Evergreen College in Washington State. I mean, both Eric and Brett were Bernie supporters. And so, in a lot of ways, I think part of what we've seen, and you could tell this with Trump coming into office, is that in many ways some of these, some of these traditional labels of liberal and conservatives have been breaking down over the last four years. And you have somebody like David French, who is PCA out of Nashville, who's a never Trumper, you know, maintains his presence in the PCA. So, in a lot of ways, this Reagan-era framework that we've been living in since Reagan has sort of been breaking down with Trump, and you know, it's going to be very interesting to see what happens in 2021, if Trump doesn't get re-elected, what this looks like. But I think you're right in paying closer attention to the to the deeper cultural and, dare I say, archetypal elements of this. And this is very much where we get into Jordan Peterson, because this God and country stuff, I mean, there's been this deep movement to baptize Washington, particularly. It's harder to do with Jefferson, obviously. And that's been a long tradition of God and country. And of course, in our growing up, this was something that, as Dutch Calvinists, we had a lot of resistance to. Yes, exactly. And, you know, even a CRC offshoot of, you know, Herman Hoeksema, who took on some CRC fame during the First World War over his obstinacy of resisting the impulse by many CRC churches to plaster it with flags, because Deutsch and Dutch sound a whole lot alike. They do. So, what, why, I mean, what are the roots? What are the roots of this, of this God and country ethos that is, and why is this so deep, particularly? Well, see, it's really hard to talk about, because again, my mother from New England, that God and country stuff is in New England. It's different in New England than it is in Tallahassee. And it's different there in LA too. So maybe you can frame some of that for us. Yeah. I mean, you can, if you look to American history, you can see different manifestations and, you know, it can be easy to just say, look, continuity, we see the same thing. But as soon as you dig into the historical context, just a bit, you see that there's a lot of kind of change over time, a lot of differences across these different contexts as well. So I would say the story that I tell, and one of the real problems with this book, which we may have chatted about briefly before, was where to start. Right? This is a trade book. It's already, you know, contains a pretty, pretty big swath of American history. And we're talking religion and politics. So there's a lot in there. But where do you start a book like this? And I knew I really wanted, you know, the 60s and 70s, absolutely critical, but you can't start there. You at least need the 40s with the rise of the National Association of the Evangelicals, of Billy Graham, World War I, leading into the Cold War. And the Cold War is such a critical backdrop for precisely what we're talking about. Right here, we have a communist threat. And communism is anti-God, anti-family, anti-American, and it's a very real existential threat. So that, I mean, you really cannot understand the rise of the religious right without placing it just securely in that Cold War context, and then particularly against the backdrop of the Vietnam War. And that's going increasingly poorly. That said, you also can't really start there. Right? And so what I tried to do is just drop some hints for some continuity and change in earlier American history. One of the points that I wanted to touch on, because it'll be important for understanding more recent history, very briefly ideas of Southern masculinity and Southern evangelicalism. Because initially when evangelicalism came to the American South, it had some real egalitarian impulses. It was disrupting existing social hierarchies, as evangelicalism has a tendency to do, right? Where we're all responsible to God and can respond to the Spirit's call. And so there are very real egalitarian impulses there. Over time, Southern evangelicals found a way to kind of resist those and instead embrace this kind of masculine culture of honor, white patriarchy, and to baptize that as properly Christian, properly evangelical. So that's one, you know, I think I spend maybe a page on that. But then if you follow migration patterns in US history, you can see how that Southern evangelicalism ends up becoming Sun belt evangelicalism by the mid-century and by the 1970s with the rise of the religious right and what some historians have called the Southernization of American religion, that kind of goes national. So that's one of the strands that I follow. Another moment would be, you know, I talk about Teddy Roosevelt briefly and the American cowboy ideal. And I wanted to do that simply because the writers of on evangelical masculinity that I surveyed, they talk about Roosevelt and they talk about cowboys. And I wanted to show where that's coming from, where that mythology came from, how it then dovetailed with Southern ideals of masculine honor and militancy so that we have something kind of in the North and the South uniting American Protestants. Even then, it's not like it's a done deal, right? There's a lot of change that happens. And that's where I give a little mention to World War I as well, which is a really interesting moment because many very conservative Protestants were not the God and country faction in the first World War. They were still separatists and feeling that, you know, to be truly Christian, no country could be Christian because to be Christian means to have, you know, your to be converted to Christ and to be sanctified through this individual process. And it's ridiculous to talk about a country being Christian, right? And so you have this resistance among fundamentalists, you know, very conservative Protestants in the first World War to patriotism, to kind of sanctifying American militarism, when in fact, you had liberal Christians who are the most, you know, raw, raw war. Of course, you had Billy Sunday too. So you have to, it's a little messy, but the arrangements that we have today were liberal Christians are much more reticent to support militarism or to talk about patriotism or Christian nationalism. And you already have conservative Protestants who are all in God and country. That is a relatively recent historical development. And that you see that shifting by World War II, but really coming into its current arrangement during the Cold War. So that's a long answer to a question. Yeah. That's why I do a channel where to our interviews. All right. Answers are better. I mean, I don't have you read Philip Jenkins, the great and holy war? Oh, no, but I should. I mean, I've read about it and I've read blogs because I blog with Phil Jenkins. So, oh, you should read it. It's an important, I was really busy writing this, but yes. No, because to me, I mean, this history is incredibly complex, partly because there are elements of the progressive movement that, as you say, the second great awakening, so you have these European churches on the East. Mark Knoll, it's no longer up on bio logos. I'm glad that I saved it offline. Mark Knoll wrote a terrific piece for bio logos once about the Bible and evolution and why that lays out the way it does. Because part of the point that he made is that in the frontier, and when we get to this, the question of why, which is the other thing I want to bring up, part of the frontier movement was post second grade awakening, you've got Methodist circuit writers, you've got people going out West, and what is the only thing around which they can agree, which is the Bible, and separated from the history of interpretation, and now we're going to have to bring the Roman Catholics in at some point too, but separated from the history of interpretation out there on the frontier. Also in terms of the history of philosophy, after the Reformation, sort of in the Reformation books, in the wake of the Renaissance, books sort of take place. We get our return to the sources where Luther and Erasmus read the Bible, and now we're using the Bible to critique Roman Catholic tradition, but then also in terms of, with the breakdown of this authority in Europe, you have the rise of empiricism, so now we're not getting physics from Aristotle, we're getting physics from the world, so by the time you get to the American frontier, we're getting morality from the Bible, and we're getting the rest of our knowledge from empiricism. And of course you've got the modernist fundamentalist, which, you know, this history is just enormously complex, and I thought Mark Nolan, that paper, did a nice job of talking about how the Bible became to be read as it was in this, what basically becomes, you've got the history of anti-intellectualism in American history, basically, you know, the Bible in the book of people who don't really have the equipment to be self-reflective in thinking about philosophically what it is to read a book, and you know, that as opposed to what's happening out east with everything going on, I mean, certainly this is a part of the story, and I think deeply rooted, let's call it, you mentioned students coming to Calvin with low levels of biblical literacy. It's not just biblical literacy, it's illiteracy in terms of deep questions about what the Bible is. Yeah, yeah, yeah, so yes, this deeper history is is fascinating and relevant, and I would add one other kind of twist and turn in the early 20th century. I'm not sure if you've read Tim Glenn's book Guaranteed Pure on Moody Bible Institute, but it's not just a book on the Moody Bible Institute. I think you would love this book, and he, Glenn is also a former student of Marston's, so we were classmates back in the day, but he wrote this really brilliant study of early 20th century evangelicalism, where he demonstrates how it was deeply influenced by modern marketing and modern advertising, and so this idea of, especially with the decline of denominational loyalty and the longer history of the democratization of American Christianity, the orthodox Christianity gets kind of repackaged through the fundamentals and through borrowing from modern advertising techniques like from Quaker Oats, it's a beautiful example, where you can kind of have the trusted purveyor of biblical truth, and it will be guaranteed to be pure, to be trustworthy, and these impulses of purity and of marketing really do start to take hold within early 20th century evangelicalism, and what Glenn does so smartly is to demonstrate how this is a fundamentally new way of understanding church and understanding authority, and really understanding Christianity in America, and so he really pushes back against using the term conservative for what we would generally call conservative Protestant, that they were incredibly innovative and in fact revolutionary in how they understood their faith, how they understood the Bible even, and what they were doing to modern Christianity, even though if we follow one of the main things that they did was to brand their own innovative Christianity as traditional, as old-time Christianity, and so this is a part of the story as well, and a lot of historians are really thinking about how does the market shape and market economy shape American religion? Yeah, well that's, I mean part of the, and you didn't go into it much in your book, but of course the history of dispensationalism, because many of these groups become deeply dispensational, and you know for us in the Christian Reformed Church, I mean Christian Reformed Church history also has some of these elements of you know what Christian Smith calls biblicism, partly because of I mean the particular history of the church in the Netherlands, the ofskiting, and the doliance, and some of that, and then of course when CRC people come to America, you have this assimilation process, and part of obviously what's been deeply impacting Christian Reformed Church history has been basically the CRC has been pulled apart by the tectonic plates of the main line and then the evangelical, but and now increasingly also sort of what I call the Reformed Catholic, which CRS is part of that faction really, because it's a neo-sacramentalism, which actually I think ties into Jordan Peterson more, you know part of what I also, one of my critiques of the books would be, I think you let some of the mainliners off the hook here, because the you know a lot of this, the mainline church, that the way the mainline plays in this history is integral. I often tell the story, just if you know if you read Chuck Colson's Born Again, you know there's this moment when Colson after he's you know he's going through all this travail because he's in deep water over Watergate and everything, you know he basically comes home and says to his wife, honey you know I'm a Christian, and she's like I thought we were Episcopalian. And this, I mean part of the reason that, and I've just been reading Jenkins book on you know his new book out on the religious left, I mean part of the reason the moral majority sort of took over, and we're seeing this played out in the Reformed Church of America right now, is the basically after the Cold War, the near complete collapse of the mainline as a vibrant religious force in America today. Yeah so if it makes you feel any better, my next book is kind of tracking that history just a bit. So there was only so much I could do in this book, and I was picking a strand and running with it, and more interested actually in, I think even our categories of evangelical and mainline are largely artificial. I mean there's a reality that we're getting at there, there's a denominational identity, but again if you think of evangelicalism for example as a kind of consumer movement, I mean look at the the Bible studies that many mainline churches are holding. You know what's, where's their literature coming from, where's their Sunday school material coming from, especially in more rural areas. Many mainline churches are thoroughly evangelical. So I mean I understand that our social scientists need to use different categories and they're not going to deviate because that'll throw off all of their you know the historical comparisons, but again as a cultural historian I hold those rather loosely. But you're absolutely right, so my next book is a book on essentially the religious history of Hillary Clinton, and so I trace this kind of fate of the mainline and of progressive Christianity through her own life experience. And on the one hand, I mean yes you can see this kind of collapse not immediately after World War II, but by the 1960s increasingly, but you also see this like what the period that's that really fascinates me is this vibrant progressive Christian theology in the 1960s. That is that they are saying that the mainline church is you know a kind of stale and has sold out to American culture and you know there's no truth there. You have kind of evangelicals, conservative evangelicals pursuing this rightward direction, but for a good 10 years you do really have, I've read all of the issues of motive magazines for example, and looked at the Methodist Student Movement during this time, and it is stunning theology, like meaty theology grappling with the big questions of the age. And for me the question that I really want to explore in this research for my next book is what happened? What happened in the 70s and 80s? How much of this is a story that's internal to mainline churches, and how much of this is also the story that I tell in Jesus and John Wayne? I mean because we can also look at say you know the Southern Baptist Convention and test out these theories there. You know is that mainline? Is that evangelical? What even is that? And up until the the 1970s really you know you can make an argument for both, but certainly by the end of the 80s it's very clear, but there's a lot of kind of it doesn't just happen naturally right? This is not just the collapse, but it is the conservative takeover if you want to use that terminology or resurgence that we see happening internally within this denomination. And then one of the things that I do track in Jesus and John Wayne is the ways in which religious authority and power is wielded in often very powerful ways, but ways that are more difficult to perceive because we are outside of denominational structures for the most part. So you know what happens to Christians who hold views that are more progressive, whether evangelicals or not? Are they allowed to voice those views? Are they going to be defined out of certain communities? And how is power wielded in a variety of different ways through you know who gets invited to this conference? Who gets ordained or not? Whose books are sold through LifeWay Christian stores? And whose books are you know just totally banned and in which case they can't make a living anymore? These are the kinds of questions that really fascinated me as I tried to make sense of this kind of cultural understanding of religion. So yes, we need to look at the main line absolutely and that has been understudied and hopefully I can do that more myself, but bringing into conversation with what we see happening in the evangelical community, which for understandable reasons has been the topic of a lot more scholarship. Well it's going to be interesting a hundred years from now to you know I think the I mean right now we're seeing an enormous religious movement that isn't self-consciously religious. And you know what's I think and that that get that deeply gets into the main line. I've often said to people I say churches split right and leak left because there seems to be you know we get into some of the some of the deeper issues that there seem to be some ideals that are not necessarily some ideals that are capable of affording cohesion with respect to communities and others which aren't. You know one of the things if you look at let's say the the seeker movement in the 80s and 90s which you know Bill Hybels son of the Christian Reformed Church, oh okay it was my computer good I gotta reform. Bill Hybels is where I where we broke up. So you know the seeker movement is I mean there's just so much here. The seeker movement was an incredibly important thing because now for example if you look at big box evangelicals within a couple of decades most of that liturgy and you know marketing dynamics I remember when I came back to the U.S. after the Dominican Republic one of the churches I was talking to a Christian Reformed Church in particular one of the first questions they asked me was do you believe business method should be used to grow the church? And I've just been a missionary in the Dominican Republic it was like what I don't know I've never thought of that. I grew up in the Christian Reformed Church. But Bill Hybels of course son of a business person who pioneered some of that. And now we have this and you know I'm going to be very interested to read what you have to say about Hillary Clinton. My daughter went to Wellesley College. You know this the the takeover of parts of the main line by what is you know the current culture war over wokeism and and one of the things in your book that you know you use a lot of the trigger words patriarchy white I mean these are these trigger words have all taken on valence and resonance currently and and so that's sort of where we get to the Jordan Peterson stuff because of course Peterson rose and and I think you know that your only mention of Peterson if I recall correctly was was quite rightly I mean we really have to see Peterson in the tradition of Robert Bly, Richard Rohr who's Roman Catholic, you know Promise Keepers Movement. You know why you know where did Peterson come into this story for you and why didn't you pursue the guy? Yeah no I've been I was watching him as I was writing this book so I started writing the book in earnest in 2017 or researching the book and then really 2018 is when I started writing and I had a fabulous team of research assistants and you know Calvin students who were in various ways part of the culture that I was studying although I had no idea when I hired them I just hired them because they seemed smart and they were good writers and they ended up being a fabulous team whose personal experiences intersected in interesting ways and so I had had my students also keeping an eye on Peterson and what I found fascinating about him as I was watching him he seemed to me to come out of nowhere at a certain point and get big really fast and the point of connection for me that most intrigued me with Peterson was the fact that he was not a you know orthodox professing Christian and I know there's a lot that's been you know kind of written around that or discussed around that and yet was really grabbing hold of the imaginations of many conservative Christians right and and so what I was really interested in given my own research in terms of this cultural history I mean getting back to my title right the the kind of embrace of the secular and it happens in different ways by the way in conservative evangelicalism that does in mainline and in fact the research I've done thus far on Hillary Clinton's era and particularly the 60s and the 70s one of the key problems that I see is this progressive utter embrace of the secular Harvey Cox style Harvey Cox 1960s style right where at a certain point then as you say what is the basis for this community if our arms are wide open and in that to me on the other hand then what we can see is even this recent book by Jack Jenkins on the religious left American prophets argues that you know don't say the religious left has not been influential they are behind every major reform you know progressive reform in the 20th century you're just not recognizing them as properly religious because you know they've embraced the secular right so that's that's kind of on the one side but on the conservative evangelical side we've got something else happening which is the purported rejection of the secular you know we will have our own we have our Christian music we will have our Christian publishing we will do everything or we will have our Christian media do not trust the mainstream media right it all has to end there's a reformed version of this that's where we started in fact though what fascinated me you know taking them at their word initially I was shocked when I actually started reading their books that their models for quote unquote Christian manhood were largely not taken from the pages of the scriptures their models for Christian manhood were Teddy Roosevelt were you know Douglas MacArthur Mel Gibson's William Wallace huge mommy cannot be overstated John Wayne right fill in the blank and so that's actually what what really intrigued me you know what what affinities are there between conservative evangelical pastors say and the teachings of somebody like Jordan Peterson particularly when pastors if you let them talk and they will you know they will expound on the importance of biblical literalism and you know orthodox Christianity and yet in some ways embrace a quote unquote secular figure such as Peterson so to me that was really fascinating why I didn't delve further into that is as I was really starting to grapple with what do I do with Peterson he really kind of disappeared all right as you know I had a hard time so I was talking with my students who were listening to him you know YouTubers and so on and I was I was like what is he doing what is he in the end partly the structure of the book didn't allow me because of the chronology of where he really pops up by that point I'm winding things down I have my mulligans chapter right so there was a structural issue but as you see I name dropped him and I went back to my editor twice and the in the final stretch and like I can I even do this I don't talk about Peterson at all but here's why I have him because I he still has an open question to me and then he disappeared and if he comes back I really want I want to continue this you know he's like oh yeah absolutely put him in there just to to ask this question of how do we make sense of Jordan Peterson and for readers who had no idea who Jordan Peterson was they would just you know go to the next name on the list kind of thing so that was my interaction with Jordan Peterson and I found I was kind of unable to fully tease that out in part because he disappeared from view right at the point that I was I was really starting to pay attention and wonder what all of that meant well I it's I it's probably you could not Peterson is seen as playing into this story in a way that he doesn't because if you if you if so while Peterson was invited to Liberty University I was in Australia leading a conference about Jordan Peterson when I get a message from someone he's asking a question about Jordan Peterson and I was like what is he doing? I mean I get a message from someone he's at Liberty University and some young man rusts the stage I thought what and um but Peterson I mean the difficulty you have with Peterson is that he would be he would be a hero because really it's not so much John Wayne it's Jung it's um it's um Joseph Campbell it's Star Wars it's um and so I will say is you know so it's not John Wayne but evangelicals aren't John Wayne for the sake of John Wayne but they love their heroes right and in particular type of of the heroic and so what I saw um again listening to my students who are fans um what I saw Peterson doing for them was this kind of toughen up um the um kind of liberal uh world in which we're moving this political correctness is softening us this is not really um what this is not good for our masculinity for our identity for our humanity and um those were the points of affinity that I was seeing in the circles that I saw um you know but but actually Peterson is not part of the story precisely because he is kind of on the fringes a dynamic that I have not seen fully played out at this point um so and then he's Canadian right um and but but the heroic ideal I think that there is there is an affinity there what what that turns out to look like um you know is is an open question conservative evangelicals have been remarkably consistent as they seek out heroes and you know I traced that in this story their manly heroes fit of a pretty similar mold all the way through and so even John Wayne isn't the you know fully embodied John Wayne it's a mythical understanding of John Wayne taken from a few of his greatest hits and it's more the cultural appropriation of John Wayne right you know so so this is the kind of mythology that we're we're dealing with here um but it is then um conflated with or it stands in as kind of um uh god ordained masculinity this idea that um that that men are drawn to these mythical heroes reveals the blueprint that god designed them according to right that's very much through the literature that I read um and you know frankly as a as a Calvinist I think I've got some some questions about that about how we understand god's design through perhaps you know human impulses um of that sort if that makes any sense we could do a whole nother couple I am fully convinced you and I can talk a long time um well that because that is you know oh boy okay because I didn't I mean I didn't set out to become an expert on Jordan Peterson that that you know I was very see I was very interested in him because I I originally was wrestling with um a lot of the a lot of the stuff that C.S. Lewis wrote about in his book Miracles which is sort of his longest apologetic work and I was wrestling with the question of how can how can people who how can people go to church read the book of Genesis which pretty clearly is a picture of a a a disk with a dome with waters above and waters below and yet when we go to church as I was being asked to give these little lectures sometimes at different schools out there little short introduction to Christianity and I was asked questions like how many believe how many of you believe the world is round and then they'd all raise their hand I'd say how do you know this and they'd all kind of stop or we saw that picture well what what makes you so sure that's not a fake and you know and so I got into Peterson you know very much in another realm because you know when you look at when you look at what is his his most important contribution which is maps of meaning I mean these are these are deep questions that that I mean he's no he's no literalist of the Bible by no means no no no and um so nor the nor the men that I study actually although they will claim to be which is a difference well there's another conversation and you know and we could talk quite a bit too about let's say the difference between John Piper and Mark Driscoll yeah and then the contrast between Mark Driscoll and um and Rob Bell because you know one of what we're part of what we're seeing right now let's say in the rise of in the rise of woke religiosity in the rise of Oprah-esque religiosity that is just as much that is just as deeply connected to um the American marketplace in fact if you had to line up everyone sporting Black Lives Matter rainbow flags versus let's say Hobby Lobby Chick-fil-A faction um there's no question who's got the bigger audience here no this is exactly I totally agree absolutely and this is how we should be thinking about religion it really is uh you know whatever the terms you know if if you're using woke pejoratively or not you know I I've used the term Hobby Lobby Christianity um I don't intend it to be pejorative but you know this is what we're talking about right and so people's identities are wrapped up in this and when you take on the identity you kind of take on the whole package and it becomes very difficult to extricate yourself from one part of that package and that would be true for the woke religiosity that you're talking about absolutely just talk about Christians and the Democratic Party right if you um that politico piece that we were just talking about um and then and then yeah that we've got this Oprah Christianity or religiosity right celebrity culture which overlaps with each of these but it's is is not entirely overlapping and yeah these are the ways that I think we need to productively think about Christianity not as Biblisist or liberal or you know that that these are these these categories are not irrelevant but they are not the sole explanatory factors and and now with Kanye I mean there's another book for you in the future yes yes you know I think there's another cultural historian who is who is taking on the Kardashians and I cannot wait and that is not my calling well um let me be a good um um this is the book and um I you know I don't know some of my people like my mother would love this book my this book is exactly where my mother is at some of the other people only about half of the people who watch my channel are in the U.S. so that's that's part of it too and this is a very American history but I um uh I sure am grateful that you came on my channel and indulged my complete you know I'm so nosy about people I can sit in front of a person and just keep them asking questions because and and again partly because of your background and my background and some of the things we have in common and and some of the interest mutual interest that we have in terms of these issues um you and I can talk forever um but any any questions you have for me that you wanted to get in because I you know I these videos are long and that's the way my channel goes but if you have any questions for me I don't want to cut those off oh oh no I just want to thank you for your your engagement with the work I know we're coming at the topic from different perspectives different places even as we do have quite a bit of overlap so I really enjoyed this conversation I'll also say that you know this is a very American history at the same time there's been pretty interesting global um um I guess interest in the in the book I was on German public radio on Deutschlandfunk and also um next week I think it is I'll be on ABC radio Australia talking about the book in a in a pretty lengthy segment I've done some work in the UK as well so I think that the world right now is trying to understand American politics and American religion and you know if you can talk about cowboys and John Wayne that just that only helps well that is that is true wow yeah Australia and Germany when I talk to Europeans I mean and maybe you know this whole question about why you know why the the frontier mythology continues to captivate not only American minds but the world's imagination about America yes exactly and and how those things how those things play so well I'll I'll I'll end the recording and and and um and just close out but again I just want to say thank you Kristen so much for coming on the channel for giving me your time for giving me all this time because I know often these little book blurbs a little book blurbs but I you know I I want um when I read your book of course I I knew who you were a little bit but then I you know it's knowing the author is always especially if you're a historian you got to know the author if you're going to understand the book because the book flows out of you so yeah well and you know for anybody else who has any questions about who I am or where I came from I'm going to send them right here so they can get everything they ever wanted to know right here this will be the only interview of its kind on your book I promise you that the only two are absolutely yes so all right I'm going to end the recording right now but again thank you for being here thank you