https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=mBQ9czFZQUY

 All right. All right. Well, Preston, it's I was on your podcast a while ago. And so I really appreciate you taking the time to jump on my channel. We're still getting ready. That's cool. Yeah, yeah. And I've got a you probably can't. Oh, yeah, you can kind of see it. I've got my coffee dripping right here. So I'll be if I do stuff over here. I'm just getting my coffee ready. And you've got the the obligatory bookshelves behind Yeah, yeah. Yeah, I've been reading out a lot of books. I just, you know, I've moved around quite a bit. I found myself lugging around books that I haven't read again and probably will never read some. Yeah, I try to weed out stuff. It's a comment. It's a comment that a lot of people make about when I have when I talk with pastors and Always in front of the bookshelf. What's with the bookshelf. It's just if you're a pastor, you've read a lot of books. You got a lot of books and Well, probably many people who watch my channel don't have any idea who you are. So why don't you give us but we'll dive into your story a little bit later, but just kind of give us your, your little CV nuts and bolts. Okay, so I'm 43 was became a Christian and Raised in a Christian home, but kind of nominal for a little bit and then Became a Christian like a full fledged Jesus follower, however you want to word it at 19 and wasn't naturally academic at all. I didn't read a book until I think 17 years old. Cover to cover book I read, which tells you and I got like a 3.7 which tells you about the California school system. Where were you raised. I was raised in Fresno. So just a couple hours south of you. Fresno. Fresno. A city, a city that gets no love. And this read. Yeah, there's not a lot of reasons to love The armpit of California. So yeah, I at the age of 19 when I became a Christian just almost overnight. Just absolutely fell in love with studying the Bible. I would lock myself in the closet and just study for eight hours a day ended up going to Christian college Well, talk about that love of the Bible. I mean, where did how did that. I mean, tell me about your conversion. So you grew up in a Christian home, but Yeah, so you know it was a Christian friend. I was a baseball player. So I was playing baseball down in San Diego. And teammate who was a Christian made an offhanded comment. He doesn't remember making it to this day, but he said, you know, you call yourself a Christian, but you don't act like it. So it's typical, you know, I would say as a Christian, but just partying and doing whatever. And I was like, man, I don't, I don't want to be a hypocrite. If I'm going to live like a non Christian, let's just be a non Christian. But I want to say I'm a Christian. Let's live like it and You know, at 19, you know, and in San Diego's party central, but it gets old really fast. You know, I'm like, okay, I'm 19 We're just, where am I gonna be at 2325 when we might be the creeper that's still going to college parties. After a while, it's like It doesn't have that fulfillment that, you know, that it used to have. I get older, but the girls stay the same age. I didn't even realize that was Matthew McConaughey in that mood. I just realized after the day, I was like, oh my word. That line is etched. Yeah. So that's Yeah. So, you know, I said, you know what, I'm just gonna just live out this Christian thing, you know, and there's a verse and I don't, this isn't typical of me. You know, but I, there's a verse in James one that says if anybody lacks wisdom, let them ask God and God gives it generously. So I prayed that prayer thinking I literally thought I'd wake up the next day like smart. All of a sudden I woke up and I was still I was still stupid. But God, I don't want to process. I want instant But I almost and I only I use the word miracle. I probably use that maybe twice in my life. Like I don't I use that. I think that really is a Miracle, but there was some real decisive divine interruption because I went within a week of Hating to read like it was, it was so is agonizing to read more than half hour to like all I want to do is sit in a room and just study the Bible. It was just weird. Well, that's a good point. I want to slow down on this conversion thing. So, okay, so this this Christian this Christian on your ball club who who acted like he believed in God. Kind of shamed you and then you're like, Oh, yeah, you know, who cares about this Christian thing. So then you're so then you're partying and then you realize that that gets old and that's going nowhere. Was there an interruption? Or a conversation or you just kind of a realization that and then you and then you ask God for wisdom, you start to read So that that when that Christian kind of confronted me that was that that was right when there was already just kind of like it was starting to plateau. I was getting worn out. I was like, You know, I started kind of show up at church every month. I was like, I'm going to go to church every month. I was like, I'm going to go to church every month. I was like, I'm going to go to church every month. You know, I started kind of show up at church every month and like Every month and seem like they just have something there and joy and I already intellectually knew enough about the God. We kind of know what What they had. And it was it. So is that kind of like that, you know, you call yourself a Christian, but you're not acting like it just kind of like awakens something that was already kind of stirring stirring me. So you start reading the Bible and what did you find. Well, so I moved back home to Fresno and my mom had the shoe box filled with sermon cassettes and you're going to appreciate that. Well, maybe you will. There was, you know, Charles Stanley, you know, Andy's dad. D James Kennedy Chuck Swindoll john MacArthur. Okay. Maybe a few others. Chuck Missler. If these are names that Greatest hits of preaching in the 80s. Exactly what it is. Greatest hits of my mom's shoe box. And so, you know, I'd listen to all of them and I just for some reason really resonated with john MacArthur he was He made studying the Bible exciting and he went deep. I just had so many questions and he made me fall in love with studying the Bible and I'd sit there every night just listen to sermons and listen to them over and over and over and You know, now if anybody does know me. That they keep going. We'll sort out john MacArthur later but Fascinating. So I ended up going to john McCarty masters. It's called Masters University. Now, he's the president of majored in Bible. I was a kid in a candy shop. I was like, wait a minute. The first day of class, I got done at noon and I had, you know, homework for the next week to be do the next week I went home or in my dorm room turned off the lights to not a little lamp and I Took me seven or eight hours banged out all my week long homework and it was a joy. I was like, I can't wait till I get more homework was the kind of thing, you know, And that honestly, Paul, that was 1997 I was 19 years old, about the turn 20 and that really didn't stop. I mean, I so that was two years of Masters College and then I went to Israel for a semester and studied and that was just unbelievable to be in the land for a whole semester to be in the land for a whole semester. And it was there that I had a professor in it again. This is a very, this is a very conservative Christian college. Okay, like you can't wear jeans kind of thing. I had a college And, but it was at that it was in Israel when one of my professors, again, all the professors are very conservative,isini the And, any other or anyone that's like that, you know, is like in the Int 1997 Superman of any And then I had a professor I met up with, and I was like, support your, this grape and no one had more to contact for that and the professor was just, it was just seventh grade, you know, And, but it was at the, it was in Israel when one of my professors, again, all the professors are very conservative, but he had us read a lot of like liberal scholars. And I was like, why do we keep reading like liberal archaeologists and stuff? He's like, well, because evangelicals don't do good scholarship, basically, is what he said. I was like, and right then I was like, why, why? I was like, that's crazy. Like, why can't we be a capital E evangelical and a capital S scholar? Why can't we be a world renowned scholar? Oh, who happens to be evangelical, but his scholarship is, and so that, that was almost a second, like an academic conversion experience for me that I was like, you know what? I want to be a capital, like a gospel preaching Christian, but I want to be a, I did, I wanted to be like a world renowned scholar and write articles that nobody reads, you know, read the Bible in all original languages. And so that I went on to go to seminary for three and a half years and then did a Ph.D. at Aberdeen University in first century Judaism and the New Testament for three and a half years. So I know I fast forward through a lot of stuff, but I. What seminary did you go to? I went to Master Seminary. Back to Master Seminary. Wow. And it was about halfway through the seminary when I, I never quite drank the punch, but I was sipping on it. But and I'll tell this story and I don't mean this in a, well, I don't, I don't mean this in a shaming way or even a negative way towards the seminary. Let me just say this with any seminary experience, there's pros and cons. That's right. I had a great, I had a good time. I had a great time at the college and I would say I had a good time at the seminary. There's godly men there. They are some are extremely conservative. I mean, I can give you examples of how conservative, but just ultra, ultra conservative. But they also woke up every day and prayed for four hours. Like, you know, they were generous with their time and money and they're just so there is. And I went through kind of a anti fundamentalist stage and there's still no one would, if you Google fundamentalist and precedent, you're not going to get probably too many hits. But, you know, there's still, I still there are, there is like any sub branch of Christianity, there's always some beauty. Well, in most branch, I mean, there's going to be some beauty there. So, but halfway through, and again, so this is why that's all kind of background. But so I was having a good experience, but one of the assignments and you know, it's a dispensational school. If anybody knows. It's reformed dispensational. If you can put those two things together. Yes. We don't dunk babies. That's right. We are five point Calvinist. And secessionists. So I mean, it's just. Oh yeah. If you believe the sign gifts are for today, then you might not even be a Christian to probably, you know, there's this chance it might be demonically possessed. So you have very anti charismatic, anti kind of anti everybody, honestly. Yeah. It wasn't them. And one of the quotes that I heard over and over is there is only one seminary. There's a one cent, there's master seminary and everybody else is kind of on a slippery slope to liberalism. Wow. If you know the way, if you know the name Wayne Grudem. Oh yeah. He came out and taught a winner. Um, and he was seen as kind of like, uh, it's kind of liberal. I don't know about this guy. Not to know anything about Wayne Grudem. He is off the chart. Can I mean, he would be a self-proclaimed fundamentalist. I mean, very, very, very conservative Christian. Yeah. And because he does believe in the sign gifts and he didn't believe in a pre tribulation or rapture is like, well, I'm not sure about them. Um, but in seminary, I wrote the assignment in Greek exegesis two was to write an eschatology. It's a study of the last things and eschatology paper on the book of first Thessalonians. Now, you know what's going on here, Paul. Some of your listeners might know what's going on here. First Thessalonians chapter four is the main passage that some people say teaches a pre tribulation or rapture where at some point in the immediate future, um, all Christians will be raptured up to heaven. We'll avoid the seven year period of tribulation and then Jesus kind of returns. Okay. Um, and so they want us to write an eschatology paper on first Thessalonians and the goal of course, it didn't say this, but the goal is that so you would see that the pre tribulation or rapture is correct. So I wrote an eschatology on first Thessalonians and they taught us to read the text as if it was first written. So I'm like, okay, I'm sitting in Thessalonica, a letter carrier shows up and reads these now we'll call them chapters, you know, but it's just a scroll and they hear what Paul says in this letter. And I'm like, well, we don't get a pre-tribulational rapture from this letter alone. Like the, the Thessalonians wouldn't have been a pre-tribulational rapture. And I'm using their exegetical method to get to that conclusion. I'm like, well, yeah, you read the Bible in its historical context. How did the original readers hear it? So I said, obviously this book alone doesn't teach. I'm not saying it doesn't, isn't true. I'm just saying this book alone doesn't teach it. And that didn't really go well. I learned that the assignment in the next year, they changed it to not write a eschatology on first Thessalonians, but write a pre-tribulational eschatology on first Thessalonians. That was the new assignment. That was when it kind of like, when I stopped sipping the punch, I was like, that's, that's academically dishonest. That's exegetically dishonest. You can't say here's the conclusion. Now go find it in the text. They taught us all along and I'll interpret it like you go to the text first. And you draw your theology from the text. But I was starting to see like, and we're all guilty of this. Like, I'm not just, this isn't just picking on masters at all, but I mean, don't say you're just going to the text to form your views and then tell me here's the view, you must go to the text to prove. So that's what I kind of backed away and said, I just want to study the Bible. And I want to let the Bible dictate my beliefs. So that was 1990. No, that was probably 2002. And that's been my mission ever since is what does the Bible actually say? Even if it gets me fired from my job, because I hold a certain view, even if I lose friends, whatever, like my friends didn't die for me, my jobs didn't die for me, tradition didn't die for me. So I am like, you know, I have a classic kind of reformed and always reforming. Like the Bible is, you know, and I've come to value tradition way more than I did before. Yeah, so that's been my shtick ever since then was like, I'm just going to study the Bible as well and fairly as I can and try to form my beliefs from that. And even if it, if I go liberal, whatever, if I go conservative, whatever, like I don't care about those labels. I just want to be as honest with the text as I possibly can. So you got a PhD in Aberdeen on first century Judaism. Pretty, pretty popular for those people who don't know and why would just about anybody listening to us know. But, you know, I mean, Americans, American evangelicals that get their degrees in the States, it's like, I'm going to go to Europe and get, you know, in first, you know, second temple Judaism, very hot space right now in terms to study. And so, so you get out, you get your newly minted PhD and did you look around for a seminary job to teach in and discovered that they're minting way more PhDs than they have jobs for? I applied for 37 jobs and I got shortlisted at four of them and denied from all four. And I, I, I only got a job because, well, I got a job at Cedarville University because Cedarville is a very conservative school too, but they were going through a lot of internal kind of tension. So they ended up firing two tenured professors over the Christmas break. So they had one position open in the fall. I was one of seven candidates, didn't get it. And then they fired two tenured professors. So they needed to kind of hire two more people. And my good friend, a guy named Tim Gombas, who's actually teaches at Cornerstone or Grand Rapids Seminary, where you'd be familiar with. He was teaching at Cedarville and he kind of said, hey, you know, let's get this guy in here, you know. So I got hired on there at kind of last second to teach Old Testament actually at Cedarville University. I was the only one out of my graduating class that got a job directly out of my PhD. It is honestly, I mean, when people say they want to do a PhD, they want to teach. You got to be. Yes. It's like, like just no. I mean, for every job application, for every job opening, there's 120 to 150 applications. 90% have PhDs, 50% have like peer reviewed publications. Now in my experience, because I've been on the other side where I've been on the hiring side now, I will be, I will say that on the hiring side, it's kind of hard because most schools are looking for, you know, they want to prioritize diversity, especially gender diversity, ethnic diversity. They want somebody who can teach. Someone whose students will like to hear. Yeah, he's not weird. Just, and I hate to say it, but among those 150 candidates, that gets small pretty quickly. There's a lot of just social awkwardity in academia. They want to teach, you know, I want to teach. I specialize in the ending of Mark. So I'll teach all your classes on, you know, Mark 16, you know, versus eight. I was like, no, we need you to do like old the teach the Bible. Old Testament survey. Something any old M.D.I.V. can probably do a better job on because they're more fun to listen to. That's right. That's right. Yeah. So anyway, that's my story in a nutshell. So, okay, so you taught at that school and at some point while you're not teaching there now, I mean, you didn't, I mean, you're I don't know a lot about your career. I know you've written some books. I know. And we'll get into some of the areas that you're probably a little bit better known for now. But so you taught for a little while. You didn't stay there. What happened? So yeah. So when I got done with my Ph.D., I still wanted to be an academic, like a capital A academic. Like I really still wanted to be a Christian scholar, but I was a little bit burnt out and I still had this this kind of growing desire to help the church understand controversial issues. And so taught there for two years and then ended up getting a job at a it was during that time when my views on well, and this may be come up later, but my views on nonviolence started to form and also my my my views on just God's heart for the poor and marginalized started to really take shape. And, you know, Cedarville University has loads of money. It's a really like just I remember, you know, we had a 19 million dollar, 17 million dollar Bible building built just for the Bible faculty. And I remember teaching through like the gospel of Luke and talking about, you know, every passage in Luke is Jesus's heart for the poor. It confronting the rich and those in power and students were like looking around, living this stuff out. And, you know, students can take, you know, they can become overly critical sometimes. Anyway, there was a job opening at a rinky-dink little Bible college in California, in Simi Valley, California. It was started by Francis Chan and the whole desire was providing debt free education. Like it was just breaking the whole system of like, why does Bible education have to be so expensive? Why can we just teach the Bible? And how much does it cost to teach the Bible? You know, like do it well. And actually go with a text lead. So this Bible college, eternity Bible college was driven by exegesis. And it was driven by a passion to teach the Bible to those who didn't have wealthy parents or didn't want to go into debt for Bible education. I'm like, man, that that really resonates with me. Yeah, that sounds great. It is. And it's still there. The school's amazing. So I left Cedarville University. It's kind of really cush like, you know, big Christian University job to go teach at a Bible college with a hundred plus students and loved it. Did that for five years, but it was there when I was still writing academic books. I have two academic books, several academic articles, but that was in 2011 when Rob Bell's book, Love Wins came out, which, you know, just stirred the pot. Yeah. And I was so the Bible college was associated with the church that Francis Chan was the pastor of at the time. So, you know, we were on staff together and he was getting questions about the book. I was getting questions about the book. We got together and said, why don't we? Well, I actually told I said, Hey, I think you should write a book response to this. I mean, and he's like, well, I don't have time to do that. I'm like, well, I mean, I could, I could write it for you and you just put your name on it. Your career as a ghostwriter. Yeah. He goes, no, let's co-write it together and I want your name on it and let's just give it away for free. I'm like, okay, we can do that. Totally. But then, oh, sorry, there's another missing piece here and it's, this is giving maybe too much information, but no, no, I love it. Okay. Okay. Good. Well, he, he, a few months before he had told me, he's like, man, I think you need to be preaching more because he heard it be preach a sermon. He's like, man, you need to be on stage more preaching. I was like, well, I just don't have time. I'm teaching all these online classes and teaching this teaching that little did he know that I was paying off $120,000 school debt. Yeah. It was growing like wildfire every year. So I was teaching full time. Then I would go home at night and teach online classes from seven to one in the morning, do that three nights a week. And if I did that for five years straight, I would have, I will have paid off my $120,000 debt. So he says, Hey, let's just do this. Write this book, give it away for free. I said, dude, I'm all for that, especially with my huge heart for the poor. I said, I just, but I want you, I don't know if you know this, but I've got like six figures of school debt. You know, he's like, he kind of looked at me and said, why didn't you tell us before? He's like, hold on a second. I'm gonna make a call. Makes a call to the publisher and calls me back says, all right, we're going to get $150,000 advance for the book and it's all going to go to you so you can pay off your debt and pay taxes and everything. Wow. So that, you know, and it did, I got a check for $150,000, signed it off to the loan and my debt was cleared. So I just, Francis has never told anybody that, but just to, people may like or not like or whatever Francis, but I guess one thing I know about him is he is the, probably the only Christian I've been around whose stage presence is exactly who he is behind the scenes. There is no gap between the stage person and, you know, cause I mean, I have a gap. You probably have, you know, I can play better on stage and I go home like, if they only follow me around, at least the people that at least the projection they're putting on me. Yeah. Yeah. There you go. No matter how honest you try to, yeah, that's right. I mean, yeah. And the YouTube hasn't done anything to help that. But it's funny because I know, I mean, all these names from Southern California, John MacArthur, Francis Chan, I've lived for the most part in kind of ignorance of all of these people. You hear their names, you know, they're famous, you know, very low resolution sketch. So, and I know that Francis Chan then took a pretty big turn and, you know, obviously decided to get off the big stage and do other things, which is something I deeply respect. So, you wrote a book, you got out of school, Dad, and you're teaching at this place. And so it sounds very much like formation is happening in you all along the way that Yeah. Your desire for scholarship, your desire for serious biblical engagement, your desire for real life engagement. Yeah. So that book was called Erasing Hell. It was kind of like, and you know, what does the Bible say about hell? Because both Francis and I looked at each other and said, I don't know what I grew up believing, but like I've never studied the Bible. So let's just look at what does the Bible say about hell specifically. Is there, if there is a hell and if people go there, is it irreversible? That was the main question, like universalism versus not the inverse. So we concluded, you know, on the traditional side of that question, it was more complicated than both of us realized. And I tell people often I say, you know, the word hell isn't in the Bible and they look at me and as well, it's not in the Greek. Well, what do you mean it's not in the Greek? Well, you know, you got Gehenna and you got Hades. So, right. Those are two different things. That's right. So what that book crystallized something in me because the language of that book was so just conversational and yet the end notes, because in popular books you don't do end notes, not footnotes. I'm quoting Jewish texts, literature, I'm quoting scholarships. So the notes look, read like an academic book, but the language reads like a conversation. And I fell in love with that, you know, we call bridging the gap between academia and the average person talking about something without, I mean, we all have presuppositions, but giving a fair, honest shake of what does the Bible actually say about this or that controversial topic? And I was like, this is what I want to do for the rest of my life. I want to, I want to, I fell in love with writing, just the art of writing, you know, I just, it's like nails in a chalkboard when I read Christian writers who are Christians who have a platform and they write a book, but I'm like, but you're not a, like, you're not a writer. Like you're not, you don't, there's 57 different ways to say something. And one of them might be the beautiful way. And you just, the first thing that comes, you know, so I fell in love with just the art of language and even punctuation. I just, I love reading books on punctuation. I love reading books on, I just, the craft of writing. So, yeah, so that's been what I saw. I've written several books since then on controversial topics with a more conversational tone, but you know, reading every academic book on the topic. So if you're reading the book, you don't know it's an academic book, but if you're an academic, you go to the footnotes, you're like, oh yeah, this guy's done his academic work. So now, so now you're, you're fairly well known for stewarding the sexuality conversation. Was there, did, how, how did you get into that? Was there another thing that you were stewarding before that and you just kind of wound up in there or, or? Yeah, so I started in 2011. I was the hell guy for a couple of years. Okay. Then I wrote a book on nonviolence. Okay. Well, I was writing a book on what does the Bible say about warfare and violence and landed on the side of nonviolence. I don't like the term pacifist, but basically for lack of better terms, I would endorse a brand of pacifism. And then right at the tail end of that book, I started to write about the, the, the homosex relationship. And I started doing a lot of research and blogging on sexuality and found out, whoa, this conversation is way more complex than I thought. You know, one of my early discoveries was since 1980, there has been about 30 books written on an academic level on what the Bible says about homosexuality and about 27 of those books say that God doesn't condemn same sex relationships. I'm like, wow. I'm like, I don't think any Christian even knows that, you know, people found out I was writing a book on it. They're like, aren't there are already tons of books on it? Like, yeah, they all argue for the affirming view and maybe the affirming view is correct, but I just thought that it's interesting that we have this assumption that the traditional view is correct when most of scholarship biblical scholarship is saying no. So anyway, that took me down a big path. I mean, I think it's a, it's a, it's a, it's a, it's a, it's a, it's a, it's a, it's a So anyway, that took me down a big path. But my, so my unique journey in sexuality has been a blend of deep theological study, but then also like a relational thing. I remember meeting several LGBT people early on and the common response I would get was I've never met a Christian that was kind to me. Like, oh my wow. That look, I don't care how fundamentalist you are. You should be upset at that statement. You should like, if you actually follow Jesus, that should bother you. If it doesn't bother you, then go read the gospels again. I mean, you know, Jesus encountered all kinds of people that weren't living out an ethic that he would endorse and nobody walked away saying he was unkind to them. You know, so, so that, that sent me in this, this really tailspin of a, of a journey of just figuring out, okay, what does the Bible actually say about sexuality and marriage? And how do we, if the traditional view is correct, how do we live this out in a way that's much, much, much better than has been done? And then I kept hearing the Christians talk about the topic and I'm like, so much we're just saying is filled with so much ignorance, so much ignorance, the language you're using, the things you're saying, the stuff you're the, the posts, your, I mean, it's just like, you haven't really taken an honest look at this topic. So much year driving this. So yeah, that was, that's been my life. I mean, so right now my full-time, my full-time job in the last three years is running an organization called the Center for Faith, Sexuality and Gender, where my full-time, plus full-time job is helping church leaders engage this question with theological faithfulness and courageous love is our kind of tagline. So, so this is a center. What does that mean? You're kind of consultant, you go to places to consult or you produce materials. I mean, what does that mean? It's all of the above. Yeah. So some of the big things we do is produce resources, web-based resources, written resources, video resources. That would be half of what we do. Some are like small group curriculum. We have an eight hour online class. We do testimonial videos. We have kind of white papers called pastoral papers on various questions. Can the Christian attend the same sex wedding ceremony? So we have that whole site with loads of resources. And then the other half of what we do is we train leaders and pastors and how to engage this conversation. So I travel quite a bit. And our bread and butter thing is a one day, we call it a leaders forum on faith, sexuality and gender. It's a 830 to 330 all day training thing on, on faith, sexuality and gender all around the country. So we do about 14 of those a year. We also do like two and a half hour evening session for kind of more lay people the night before. And then, you know, on top of that, I do speaking at colleges and other church, you know, church will have me come in, you know, especially churches with larger staff come in and do like a staff training or whatever. But, okay. Yeah, that's, that's, uh, okay. Yeah, that's what I do. Now, now if it, obviously, if anybody wants to find out your positions and what you're doing, there's tons of stuff on the web. They can Google you and can find all that and I'll have notes and stuff here. What, doing this kind of work, what have you learned? What are your top impressions? I mean, not even just on the subject, but what have you learned about the church, the world, the engagement between the church and the world? Oh, gosh, that's, oh man, in no particular order. So early on, so yeah, so I wrote a book called People to Be Loved, Why Homosexuality Is Not Just an Issue. It's about 70% Bible going through all the passages and then about 30, 35% kind of relationships, pastoral questions. Leading up to that, I did a lot of blogging on various passages, just as honest, honestly and innocently as I could. And I was finding that some of these passages that I've been reading, I've been reading as innocently as I could. And I was finding that some of these passages that Christians go to, I'm like, I don't think this passage is saying that. You know, the classic one is like the story of Sodom and Gomorrah where the entire city was trying to gang rape two angels. And then I go talk to some gay people. I'm like, hey, question, you ever, so these struggle with wanting to gang rape angels? Like, no, not my orientation, you know? I'm like, okay, cool, you know? And yet people still keep like so quickly and haphazardly quoting this passage and just making a direct line Sodom and Gomorrah, gay people. And then I saw the trauma in just formed in 13, 14, 15 year old kids who are being told, go look at this passage, see what God says. And then they read this passage about attempted gang rape. They're like, oh my gosh, am I a monster? Am I sick? Like, is that me? And I'm seeing just how the misuse of the Bible, it can be so destructive. You know, gay people have a phrase for these five or six verses that say no to same-sex relationships. They call them clobber passages, as you know, because gay people have been beaten over the head with them. And so one, I guess, to answer your question, one thing I learned, well, sorry, let me finish. So when I was blogging, I was blogging my way through the Bible and I was like, you know, I just want to blog honestly about what the whole Bible says about this topic without having a, you know, right. But how having to come to an application conclusion that everybody is waiting for, because they say Preston Sprinkle is here on this issue. Right. And I've already so I didn't mention this. I wrote the book on hell and then I became an annihilationist. I wrote a book on violence and became a pacifist. I'm going to study on homosexuality. So he's like, oh, here he goes again. You're going to be gang raping angels before we know it. Oh, my gosh. I hate to laugh, but that's hilarious. So people are, you know, really freaking out. Like, well, where do you stand? And I'd like, you know, relatives like Preston, where do you stand? I'm like, I don't know. I'm halfway through Genesis. I'll let you know when I get the revelation, you know, because I was taught by John McArthur that you begin with the text and go with the text leads. So what to answer your question, Paul, is I learned that, quote unquote, biblical Christians can be so scared of studying the Bible. I taught at Nottingham University for a semester. I was the only evangelical on faculty there. And the head of the theology department said, no joke, and he wasn't joking. You know, I asked him about, would you ever hire like an evangelical, like for a 10 year track position? He says, you know what? Yes, I would. I can't do a British accent. I won't try. But he's like, yes, I wouldn't mind. We wouldn't mind hiring an evangelical. They would just, you know, stick to the text. And I was like, I wanted to jump in and say, whoa, no, like even, I see what you mean. Like, you have, especially American evangelicals have this reputation of using the text to defend a political point of view or a pet doctrine. And I was like, if I'm honest, that's what I experienced growing up in American. Like we're known for not a liberal would hire an evangelical, but he's doubtful that they would actually just stick to the text. Like, so I learned in all these kinds of topics I've learned, I'm like, man, I don't even like the phrase biblical anymore. People all want to like, I'm like, because it's just been kind of used by people who aren't really daring to go where the text leads. They just use that phrase as a, you know, the slap on their pet doctrines and they're not, they don't have the courage to go to the text leads. And I'm just have no space for that. So that's one big thing I learned is people are, especially in sexuality, if you start saying, let's just study the Bible and let's just go where it leads. And they start, it's like, what if it leads us to the wrong view? I'm like, well, if it's the biblical view, then it's not the wrong view. It might be not the view you want it to be, but. No, I've seen that over and over. I've told the story a number of times. My mother-in-law has passed now, but there was a big controversy at Calvin College over Genesis and science. And there was a conservative named Leo Peters who was putting out ads in the Grand Rapids Press. And I was at Calvin College and seminary at the time. And my mother-in-law, who was a fundamentalist Baptist was, you know, reading this stuff in the press. And, you know, she wasn't really happy that her daughter, who's now my wife, was going to Calvin College. And because she would rather she had gone to maybe Wheaton or, or Grisboeum or, you know, Baptist College, whatever, and Grand Rapids. Grisboeum? I've never. Grisboeum. Grand Rapids School of Bible and Music. Oh, gosh. Okay. Okay. They. It's cornerstone now, right? It's cornerstone now. But they used to be Grisboeum. They used to occupy the old, the campus that my parents and my grandfather, my parents went to on Franklin Street and Grand Rapids. I mean, so I'm steeped in that community. But so then, so then I'm talking about, you know, I'm learning Hebrew and I'm reading Genesis 1. And it's like you start reading that text and you start studying a little bit like, whoa, there's, this is, this is from a different world. There's, there's, this is a conversation that I didn't know much about. And so then I'm talking to my mother-in-law, I'm talking about the firmament and what is that firmament? And so then I said, well, get your Bible, you know, off the shelf. So she took her Bible. She was a deeply devoted woman, studied the Bible. It was a King James Version. I opened the book and I discovered right there. In Genesis 2, she had penciled in some corrections to the text in order to harmonize Genesis 1 and 2. I said, now, mom, you're not supposed to change it like this. Well, but it, you know, it, but it's exactly, she was correcting the Bible to fit, you know, what she had been taught. And obviously, you know, she did it explicitly in pencil in her Bible, but we all do this mentally because we're all dealing with the dissonance. And just the astounding thing that the Bible is that this library really written, most of which by people, we have no idea who they were. And it's hotly debated when the pieces of it were made and then when they were put together. I mean, that this would be the most popular book in all of human history by far. You know, the whole thing is to me just astounding. So, and what you say, I have often found to be true in the church. And I think you and I, I got to a point and thought about doing a PhD, but then I began to look at things and said, why would I want to do that? I'm going to go tens of thousand dollars into debt in order to be qualified for a job I can't get paid less than a pastor of most churches. You know, you got to be called for, I mean, in the real sense of the term, the academia to do that. Yeah, it's not enough to stay hearted. So go ahead. Well, just even that, the view of the Bible, I just let what if we let the Bible define what the Bible is, you know, you know, and I taught Old Testament survey for years and, you know, I just see people who have an overly conservative view of the text. They get themselves into trouble because if you have an overly literalistic understanding of the text, and then when there's problems that face that view of the text and you're forced to like kind of manipulate science or manipulate whatever, you know, I, people ask me, well, do you think Joan is literal? I'm like, if the author intended to be literal, then sure. But if he didn't, if he intended to be a parable, then it would do, you're actually going against the text of scripture if you interpret it not as a parable, if that's what the author intended. Job, you know, was Job a real person? Probably. I know probably that those conversations that make up 90% of Job aren't historical because people don't talk in Hebrew prose. Like, roses are red violets are red. We don't talk like that. That is an author dressing up the story. And so it doesn't seem like the author intends it to be, let's just say, as literal as say, first kings or something, you know, and same with Genesis. I don't think Genesis one is a poem, like some people say, but it's certainly not prose. And the same, you know, I think it's like a poetic prose. I don't think the intention in Genesis one and two is to give us as airtight of a literal description as some people make it out to be, or maybe it is, but there's some flexibility here. You can have different views on the age of the earth and you're not necessarily selling your soul to the devil on, you know, abandoning scripture. But anyway, that had to open up a whole nother. There'll be comments. There'll be comments on Preston just for those that little. You learn as a preacher that it's almost always the little asides that come off. Those are the things that get you and it's like, oh, I probably shouldn't have said that. Let me repeat the point though. It's what the author intent, what's what the inspired author intended this text to mean. Nobody can argue with that. No, I mean, KJV only literalist six day creation, 4004 BC, whatever. You can't argue with that. Like you have to agree with that statement. So we're on the same page. We might disagree on what the author's intention is. Okay. And I'm not even saying I don't know where I'm at on Jonah. I decide on a more literal view until I discover otherwise. Well, and even authorial intent, you get to, let's say the New Testament's modulation of the Old Testament where, well, even just even within the book of Genesis, look at, you know, look at Joseph's, you know, finale speech to his brothers. You meant it for evil and God meant it for good. You know, I mean, the Bible, you know, our first conversation, we talked a lot about Jordan Peterson, but, you know, part of what, you know, part of why I was a trap, I was interested in what Jordan, what was happening around Jordan Peterson and what he was doing was because. You know, all of us read the Bible. And so there's always the two parts. It's us reading the Bible and, and the Bible, you know, every, so my background was in, I got my undergraduate degree in history. And one of the things you quickly figure out about history is that, you know, when Tom Holland writes a book, Dominion about, you know, the history of Christianity here in, in 2019. Well, there's a lot of 2019 in that view of the past because that's how history has worked. And obviously there are events back there behind the, the record of those events. And I mean, this, this, this whole question is enormously complex when you pour in the, the philosophy, the phenomenology and all of this stuff. So, and, and again, when I know a lot of, a lot of Christians of a certain stripe get terribly anxious when you start talking like this. And it's essentially saying, I am, I am just not, I, I can't, and I won't think about these things. I just want to stay in this, this certain lane in the certain frame. And that's fine. You know, we all have, we all inhabit a frame and even the opening up of these questions and habits frame. So it's, it just is what it is. Well, what I used to teach Old Testament survey, the number one, I'd say day one was telling students when you're reading biblical history, it's not like you're reading like the evening news, like they're just raw disconnected reporting of events. It's, it's, it's a narrative. There's a theological point that's trying to be made by the retelling of history. So don't just go looking to, you know, you know, the, don't just try to, you know, read the flood account and say, we need to make sure that this actually happened. You need to read what's the theological point being made here by the way the story is being retold. So, which even the retelling of the news is very slow, you know, but anytime, anytime a reporter or writer is reporting history, you're, you're by nature being selective because you're trying to craft a certain point. That's right. Well, I was just recently, I've seen almost none of the impeachment hearings, but I just caught just, just to, just to spike our clickbait and provoke some comments, but I just caught a little bit of the ambassador to Ukraine and I was watching her and I was just listening to her and I thought, wow, she just seems deeply credible to me in terms of a, a, a professional, you know, a professional, someone, but basically a professional who's just telling her story so on and so forth. And then later I was watching to be the only television news I can actually stomach, which is, which is PBS news hour. And I was watching that and I noted the tiny little clip that they present is the point when she gets emotional. And I thought, well, this is the case about all tellings of history. I was just talking to, I was just talking to a person at church and I pay very colorful attention about how, how people tell their stories because you can't tell a story without shaping that story for what you think is relevant to the context of the telling of the story. And that's, you know, get into John Verbecki's worth, the combinatorial explosiveness of reality and all this stuff. So, so anyway, all of that is there. And, and so it is, it is incumbent upon Christian leaders to do this work for the church and for the sake of the church and to do it honestly and well, and, and to come back to some of the questions about, you know, sexuality. You know, when I watched, you know, a bunch of this stuff start to blow up in the church, it's like, okay, you know, I've read the Bible most of my life and I, you know, for a while, all the talk was about, you know, biblical values and family values. And it's like, show me one non dysfunctional family in the Bible. They're all a mess. And you talk about, well, this is, this is, this is God's plan for sexuality. And it's like, well, I read about Jacob and, you know, he married sisters, which later is prohibited in the Mosaic code. I mean, the whole context is enormously complex. And then you look at just, at just historical, you know, situations, look at Augustine's life, you know, he dismissed his concubine and you look at the wave of celibacy that goes through, you know, the period that Augustine was living and, and Anselm where, where these Roman families were horribly disturbed at the fact that their daughters who had had long-term arranged marriages with families, which would continue to up the social status, decide they're going to be celibate. This is a, this is an economic and familial catastrophe for the family. And, you know, I mean, the, the history around this stuff, I mean, any, any person who pays any attention at all to their own sexuality should have a, should have a certain degree of appreciation for the complexity of it just from one person. But over time, over history, over populations, good grief. Oh, yeah. It's just a whole history of marriage. I just read it. This is a great book. I think it's called the history or marriage, a short history or something by Coons. I think it's the author. Oh yeah. Yeah. It's a great book. Yeah. I mean, just showing that our Western modern understanding of marriage as a romantic union between two adults that fall in love. That's so new on this, on this. It's like 150 years old, you know? And also by the way, because we think that that's what that's we have arrived at the, this is what marriage is in its essence. It's about romance and falling in love and your life partner, your soulmate. It's very new on the scene of history. And oh, by the way, we also have the highest divorce rate in the history of human civilization. Now that's not to glorify any other, you know, there's two loads of misogyny and, you know, all kinds of stuff in the past. But I mean, there is no, you know, kind of like, yeah, I think just being aware that so much of our understanding of marriage is driven by culture and is very recent on the scene of human history. People would often ask me, you know, we had Prop 8 here in California and all kinds of stuff going through and people would ask me questions about, you know, where I stand on this stuff. And I usually just, there's a reason I pastor a small church. I'd say, well, I'll tell you what, why don't you tell me what marriage is for? And I'll tell you what my position is. And well, what marriage is for? What do you mean? Well, what is marriage for? I mean, we're at, we're having this big debate about who should be allowed to marriage and marriages that the government will recognize and so on and so forth. Well, tell me what, tell me what marriage is for. And if you, you know, and I found that very quickly people realized that, you know, it's custom and habit that they were simply following along and depending on their tribe. And so people over on the left were saying, well, of course this, and people on the right were saying, and especially as this is happening so fast in real time. And then I would make statements like, well, you remember in that Hillary Clinton didn't embrace same sex marriage until 2013. So, you know, anyway, I didn't want to maybe sometime I actually, it would be really cool to have to compare notes at some point on, on some of these issues that you've written about, but I don't usually like doing that until I actually get a chance to look at your stuff. So let's not do that. Let me just ask you right now. Do you have any hard stop times that you have to be aware of? No, I don't. No, today's a pretty lazy day. Okay, cool. So, you know, I've done a lot of pestering you and I really appreciate you telling your story. And part of the reason I do that a lot in my conversations on my channel is because, you know, obviously just like a seats in Laban, your story really contextualizes you. And now every time I'm definitely going to look up that, that hell book and, and some of your other work, because now I have a much better understanding. My resolution of your work was just so low because there's so many people in the world. How much time do we have to find out about anybody else? So I really appreciate you kind of walking through your story. And obviously I'll send the recording of this to you. And if you want to use it on your podcast, it's likely that some people who listen to your podcast don't even know your story. You know what? That's true. Because I don't like talking about myself unless somebody asks. And since I'm the host, nobody's. That's right. Every now and then I'll, you know, so I do have a Patreon account. And so I released two Patreon podcasts every month just to my supporters. So sometimes there I get real personal, you know, and yeah, I don't think I've told my story as in depth as I did earlier with you in a long time. And, you know, that was my sermon for several years when I first became a Christian, you know, the testimony, whatever. That's the evangelical thing. I know, right. Which is itself a very telling with a purpose. Totally, right? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. So where do you want to go? I would love to. Yeah. What are you thinking about? Well, you know, we had talked about the Joker movie a little bit. But, you know, there's the Jordan Peterson stuff out there. And I don't know wherever you'd like to pursue. Yeah. So I just actually did a podcast with Luke Thompson. I think you know Luke. Oh, yeah. On the Joker, we released it yesterday. Really? On your channel? Yeah, it just came out yesterday. Yeah. Okay. So that would be Monday, I don't know what the 18th or something. Yeah. So we were actually, I was speaking out in Minneapolis and I had a gap of time between speaking engagements. So we went out in the two in the afternoon on a Monday and saw a movie. I had a huge bucket of popcorn, big old coke, you know. I felt like such a slob. I mean, he was crazy. But then that night, we went out to a pub and had a couple drinks and just I set up my computer on the bar and we just talked about the movie. And, you know, Luke made a comment to me that this is one of the most culturally significant films. And so that, and one of the most artistically beautiful films. And he's a pretty intuitive guy when it comes to this stuff. So I was intrigued by it. So I was looking forward to watching it. So yeah, I, you know, I, we don't need to spend a lot of time here, but honestly, I mean, your take on the Joker, your, your podcast now, so I listened to your podcast before I saw the movie and now looking back, I mean, I don't remember every word you said, but I just, I don't remember most of the words I say, so don't worry about it. The main takeaway that I saw and I think you saw is it doesn't fit any kind of ideological or propaganda kind of box. And I think that's why some people who are for lack of better terms on the far left, far right, who are in the kind of echo chamber, they, it was kind of disruptive because it didn't, it was the Solstjenitsyn thing of the line between good and evil goes right through the heart of every person. There was no clear line between good and evil. And it also showed the, the madness of the crowds to, you know, Douglas Murray. And I just really appreciated that, that it didn't, it wasn't like, you know, I didn't see the movie, but the shape of water just seems so predictable in terms of the ideology or whatever, which, you know, whatever. But I just love that it, it wasn't, it was just a disturbing, disruptive movie. That was so just thoughtful. Anyway, I mean, well, I, you know, and so this is the first R rated movie, apparently to top a billion dollars in ticket sales. Wow. Which, and this, you know, so one of the guys that I speak with on my channel, I really enjoy talking to Burn Powers, who lives in Tbilisi, Georgia, who is a little bit older than I am. And he's one of these guys that has just studied, he just studied film and culture and music his whole life. And so he's, you could just talk to him, kind of pull the string and they'll run through narratives over the last 50 years, a lot of which he's lived. But, you know, one of the things that, you know, why this movie now? And I think, again, a lot of the stuff that Jonathan Pujo is doing is really helpful in this. You know, we are at a point, I mean, the election of Donald Trump was, I forget the name of the, it's a big time Hollywood writer, you know, wrote right after Trump was elected. And I would have to Google it a little bit, but wrote to his daughters basically saying, you know, this ought never to have happened. But don't worry, this is the last hiccup on the way to, and it's like, on the way to what? On the way to utopia? On the way to, now we've got, you know, and so we have this. So I also do meetups at my church and, you know, it's called the Jordan Peterson meetup, even though we don't talk about Jordan Peterson that much because he hasn't done much for a while. It's just a group that has continued to go and we talk about whatever's going on. And we had this, at our last meetup, we had this amazing conversation among millennials. One of the people said basically, you know, I was let down by my family, by my school, and by my government because, you know, broken home is parents split up. And, you know, school people said, just do this education thing and everything will be great. And he's struggling with employment, he's driving for Uber and 9-11. And another, it was just amazing listening to everyone hear the fact that as a culture, we have made promises and tied them to institutions. And what we're realizing is that these promises are hollow. That education will not offer to you what sometimes subliminally it has said it can. There's a bridge just right down the street on Florin Road here, right next to a high school, which is a long time been a struggling high school. And write big letters across the bridge. If you can dream it, you can do it. And it's like, you know, this neighborhood here, I know what goes on in, this is a neighborhood of mostly poor folks. There's no ethnic majority, but it's black, Hispanic, struggling Asian, struggling whites. You just keep bombarding them with that idea that, you know, and it's Disney, it's all these kind of things. And Joker comes into this and says, what if all of our remedies for the things that ail us are insufficient? And what will you do with the people who at some point in their life realize they have been fed lies? Because that's what Joker has been fed lies, lies by his mother, lies about who his father is, lies about who he is. And, you know, of course, the climax of the movie when he shoots the talk show host, and then mayhem ensues. You know, one of the things that I learned from Jordan Peterson is that most of our knowledge is not tacit. Most of our knowledge we cannot articulate, but we recognize things. And I just figured this out the other day because I was listening to someone talk who was just absolutely inscrutable, and I was begging mentally that they would give an illustration. And then I thought, what are illustrations? Why do illustrations work? It's because we can't see things until they're made flesh. And maybe by view of an illustration, we can begin to detect the patterns that are underneath. But we live with this underneath knowledge. We have to represent them some way. And of course, Peterson says we represent them in stories. So when Richard Dawkins and Joe Rogan say, why is the world so full of religion? It's like, well, why don't you listen to Jordan Peterson? He just told you. That was the most bizarre podcast. I've never heard Richard Dawkins before. And I was shocked how unintelligent he was. Yes. How his understanding of Christianity after all these years. Like they were talking about Christianity like, oh, you just go to heaven when you die. And like, like, do you know any Christians? Do you know anything about the religion? Have you ever read like a actual Christian Scott? Like it was a strength of my faith, like crazy. I feel a doubt and everything. I'm like, wait a minute. This is the brilliant atheist and that's his art. Like, and yeah, some of the questions like that, like, where do all these religions come from? And no, just the smug pride and confidence and just, I'm like, gosh, you know, I, you know, Christians get a bad rap for all that stuff. I'm like, such virtue signaling, you know, it's like, anyway, I walked away. I was like, that was, oh, I'm a much better Christian after listening. Should send my thank you note. Dear Richard, I'm a better Christian after listening to you. So yeah, I was a little disappointed Rogan. I mean, he's got relationships with Peterson and Shapiro and religious people. And I don't know. I was like, he just seemed to, and I know he's not religious, doesn't matter, whatever. But I mean, I don't know. I thought he would at least defended saying that there are some intelligent Christians out there or something. You know, I just felt like he kind of played into it. Yeah. So Rogan, yeah. So with the Joker, here's, you know, and Luke and I kind of go back and forth on whether there is one message or a point. It seemed like, because we live in polarizing, bordering on cataclysmic societal times in the post Trump world. We're not post Trump yet. We're not post Trump yet. We're talking about the post election of Trump, which I think, I mean, I would agree with, I think Shapiro's made this point and others that Trump is a result, not a cause of everything. There's so much building that he's just part of the building of it. But things keep getting more and more extreme. And I don't want to just come back to the sexuality, but I do think that the trans transgender gender sex and gender conversation is really a symbol of so much of what we're going on. We're deconstructing the very fundamental nature of what it means to be human in ways that are, I mean, I'll just say it again, we can go here or not. We don't need to. But I mean, in ways that are very unscientific, I mean, the sheer number of liberal anti-Christian scientists who are calling foul on stuff going on is it's shocking that and still there's a dominant narrative that's challenging that. I mean, I literally picked up Orwell's 1984 just to get a better perspective on where we're at. And it's almost like some of the stuff being promoted is quoting from that book. The whole group thing and two plus two equals five. And it's like, there's stuff going on like biological sex doesn't exist and all these things. And scientists, again, anti-Christian, non-conservative, pro-transitioning, pro-whatever. Like, are we going mad? We're reaching the time when I think things are going to start caving in on itself, cannibalizing itself. And I just, so here's my question. I guess this is an actual question. Do you think that if you agree with kind of that maybe general take on society where we are, do you think the joker is almost giving like, here's where this is going to lead. You have the madness of the crowds. You have the rich and the poor, you know, and it just erupts and even the police can't stop it. And the joker is kind of laughing and crying. And just when two kind of polarizing perspectives come together, it's just going to lead to disaster and chaos. Do you think it was thinking along those lines? Like thinking really specifically of our cultural moment and kind of the building chaos that seems to be happening? Or do you think I'm reading into it? No, no, no. The hardest things for us to see are the things that we see all the time. And I think our society has been feeding a narrative that basically says, you know, so we went from Obama who was, you know, scandal free, the dude, you know, faithful to his wife, good father. I mean, Obama who, you know, the conservatives will say, well, you know, opened with Title IX and everything, opened the door to this libertine chaos. But a living Puritan to, you know, Christians lining up to support, you know, a guy who, you know, sleeps with porn stars for money. And so, okay, we're in cloud world now. But in many ways, the dominant theme in the culture is Obama-esque, because that is the American dream. So here's this man, he was, you know, parents were unmarried, father was African, mother was a white woman, smart, capable, industrious, disciplined, and except for the cigarette thing, and, you know, makes it all the way. If you can dream it, you can do it. Barack Obama is the American dream. He really is. And Puritanical, and I don't mean that in the negative sense, but faithful to his wife, faithful to his children, good father. I mean, especially in contrast to, I mean, if Trump is in contrast to evangelical Puritanism, Obama is in contrast to the struggles in the Black community. Okay, so here you have these contrasts. But the American dream is, get your education, you know, get as much education as you can, be industrious, be good, you will succeed, and you will have wealth, you will have fame. Obama is the story. And Trump is sort of that, but Trump is the dirty little opposite of the Obama story. So here's a guy who only got $1 million from his father to start his business. You know, that's, surely everybody got that. You got that from your father, didn't you, Preston? Yeah. And so here with Trump, everything is inverted. And so with the Joker, now it's important to remember too, movie makers are just as, you know, again, in the Jordan Peterson-esque, they're the artists. Artists, just like, you know, if you've ever tried to shoot foul shots well, if you play bat or hit a baseball, you turn off, you know, you turn off a certain part of your brain and it's just, you know, we have various words for it. Artists are that way. Artists can't tell you everything. And people say, well, what does your film mean? Well, watch the film. You know, if I didn't, and it feels that way in sermons. People say, well, summarize your sermon for me. It's like, I clearly failed as a preacher if I have to summarize my sermon for you, because that's the sermon. So I think what he's recognizing is again, the lie behind the propaganda. The lie behind the dream. On both sides. That's right. Yeah. And I appreciate it so much. As somebody, I think we would very much resonate with kind of a centrist perspective on probably a myriad of things, right? And we see the, you know, the problems with kind of both right, left, whatever extremes. And that maybe that's why I appreciate the film is it, is it showed that there is no one, there's no path to utopia. And there is, it's interesting you said that. So like in, in society, there is this assumption that you can be you, you follow your desires. If you do everything right, then you will achieve happiness. And if you can't do that, then it's everybody else's problem. And then it's society's problem that you can't fulfill your desires, you know? And as long as you're not hurting anybody and everything you do is consensual, then you should walk the path to utopia. And if you can't get there, it's everybody else's preventing you from that. And the movie just blows that apart, you know? It shows the complexity of good and evil, but there is no good. There is no good in that movie. No, that's what's so disturbing about it. Batman is not there. And there's little Bruce Wayne, but glimpses of goodness in some people. At the end of the day, everybody is really bad. That's right. Theologically sound movie. That's right. It's very, it's very Augustinian. And no, I think that's, I think that's exactly right because on one hand, we want to play these easy narratives that you might even play it. Well, the Joker, the Joker is a victim of bad parenting. Yeah, he is. And the Joker is a victim of a societal safety net that has failed. Remember that the budget is cut and so we can no longer see his counselor. Yeah, that's true. And his counselor is worthless. Yeah, that's true. And he's taking all of these meds and he wants more meds and the meds don't do anything. Yeah, that's true. And the criminal justice. Yeah, that's true. And so you could, you would be tempted to just make Joker a cipher where he's simply, you know, the some product of all the influences in him. But no, that's not true either. He, he actually, he, his, his, I mean, the crazy thing about Joker is he finds himself in, well, again, long kind of a Russoian theme. We find ourselves ever since the 60s, we find ourselves in the rebellion. We find ourselves in like the Steve Jobs, Stanford University commencement address of Don't buy anybody's dogma except the one I'm giving you right now. So go out and blaze a trail and, and create your own gender, your own gender that is uniquely you and blaze that trail. And Joker's like, yeah, he's blazing that trail. He's and that's because before I was dead, but boy, I felt alive when I shot up those Donald Trump wannabes on the subway. I felt alive when, when I watched the city burn. I feel alive for the first time in my life. I'm off the psych meds. You know, we had one of the, one of the things that what it look, look, I mean, just pay attention. How many people, how many millennials now have been on psych meds for how many years? Yeah. There's a movie out a few years ago. I don't remember what it was, but basically it was the story of a guy somewhere in his mid twenties finally gets off Prozac and it's like, you know, the, the, the movie is deeply disturbing because it suggests that all of the remedies at hand are insufficient. So then where will you go? And not just personally, but societally. And I think that's what we feel. We're in a, you know, I don't know if Star Trek would be made today because it's really hard for us to not make dystopian visions of the future because, you know, I, I've talked to, I talked to my kids and people, you know, people their age and well, I'm not going to have, I'm not going to have kids because, you know, 12 years and climate change and, and, and, and, and people are facing this wall and they realize that there's, there's no answer. Okay. So let's, let's say we, we impeach Trump and Elizabeth Warren takes office and we get and we have a green new deal and, and, and, and, and, okay. So the U S you know, carbs, you know, carbon emission, how are you going to get the Chinese and the Indians and the Africans to not, there's no answers to any of these questions and, and people know it deep down. Yeah. And they're, they're deeply anxious about all of it. What do you make of on that note? Are you, you've read Stephen Pinker's stuff? I haven't read much of it, but I've heard him a few times. So his, his recent book, enlightenment. Now it looks at 25 different categories of violence, warfare, poverty, safety, homicide, I mean, just all these categories and basically apart from climate change, we are the safest, richest, least racist, most equal, least misogynistic civilizations that the world has ever seen. Yep. Even things like poverty, like we're actually conquering global poverty at a faster rate than we even predicted. Like back in the seventies or like maybe by, you know, 2050 and now we're like, man, maybe by 2030, like most of humanity will be lifted out of extreme poverty and, and all these things and just the safety of like airplane flight and cars and even homicide. The only thing that has taken a slightly turn up is like mass shootings, you know, which is interesting, but the overarching violence and homicide rate and danger is actually still at a lowest point ever. So, and yet we live in a society where there's much, so much more fear. Yeah. Yeah. Everything. So why is that just because you have dying news outlets that the only way they can get attention is click baiting, you know, trauma and tragedy happening in the world. I mean, is that really it or social media? Everything's, you know, or you hit, you know, have, you know, AOC, every other word is about harm and safety and everybody's being harmed and we're not safe. It's like, we're the safest. We're the safest time in the history of the world. Like, yeah, but what about that mass shooting? I'm like, yeah, no denying that it's, we're not in utopia. We never will be by the way, but we're as close as we've ever been. So why is, why is that? Again, the question is why, despite the fact that we are in this most progress, progressed utopian ish place in society, why are we so scared than we ever have been in the past? So, so who would, who would you rather be the, the young ball player who's showing promise and you're, you know, you're, you're improving in your skills and you're, you know, you've got minor league scouts looking at you and every day something new and you're, you're, you just, you don't have it yet, but this is Jordan Peterson asked, your life is full of meaning because there's a goal out in front of you and you're, you're building towards it and everything. Or the 35 year old pitcher who's got a multimillion dollar contract and you know that your arm is wearing out and you suspect that your wife really only loves you because she gets all that money and, and, and once you get to the top, you're anxious because you know you could lose it in a minute. And so, you know, why the meaning crisis? Well, I, and again, I look at, I think about my experience with, with people in the third world, their lives are full of meaning, full of struggle, full of pain, living on the edge, but it's meaningful. You know, a couple of days ago or a couple of months ago when I was doing a, you know, I make videos partly because it just helps me think, you know, I realized, so you have all these homeless people. I think, I think a lot of these homeless people, not consciously, but subconsciously choose homelessness because it's the only way they could stay alive because the alternative for them would be staying on a huge regiment of psych meds in some crappy group home watching TV all the time. And at least if they're homeless, they're, you know, I've got Daniel's drumsticks up there and they're, they're, they're ducking the gangs and they're fighting the cold and their life is a, is a meaningful struggle for existence rather than the slow gray numb of, and then the anxiety of when, when is, when is the money going to run out? When, when is, when is the debt going to get piled too high? So no, that's, that's right. And these things, but, but I think it unmasks the, the antrop, the anthropos, the anthropological assumptions of our culture, which say happiness is attainment of comfort and security. But once we attain that comfort and security, what do we do? We distract ourselves to death. And, and this is, this is the realm we, we tell people you will be happy once you get a million dollars in the bank. That's a bourbon home, that spouse that you desire and you get to, you get to retire early and spend all of your time at the beach. And that's what we tell people. It's a lie. Absolute lie. And then it's just that same population that has arrived, that has gotten comfort, that it has the highest level of suicidality, anxiety, depression. They're on more meds than anybody else. I'm part of it. Okay. We live in the West. We can get them, but yeah, it's just coming full circle. I mean, it's, there's something to the biblical narrative that says that, you know, that there is joy and service. There is happiness and suffering that we live in this upside down kingdom where, you know, don't just pursue comfort. Like that's not actually going to bring human flourishing. And this is, again, this is something that I just love about Christianity. I don't know. You know, rather than the list of do's and don'ts, it is, you know, that if you follow the creator's design for humanity, it will lead to human flourishing. Even if it doesn't seem, even if it doesn't feel like it in the moment, you know, I feel like that when I go all week and I eat out several times and have rich foods and, you know, drink a couple of rich beers or, you know, sleep in or whatever. It's like, I don't feel happy. I feel like a little numb, kind of numb. But when I'm like, if I ever fast, which I rarely do, or sometimes I do it for, you know, health reasons, which I did it more for prayer. But I mean, I'm like, man, just life has, there's an energy there. There's more, there's life. There's a realness to life when you don't have everything handed to you. When you have to make your own lunch and not just go out to eat. So I once, I once had, this was a period when, so Daniel, the homeless guy was sleeping against my door that lasted about five, six years until he attacked a member of my church and went to jail. And but so, but I, so it was, it was in the middle of winter and the weather was bad, as bad as it gets in Sacramento. And I was at home in my bed, you know, with heat and covers and electricity and locked doors and all of those things that, oh, we very much want, we want them for our kids. I felt in my heart, a bit of envy for my friend, Daniel, sleeping outside against my cold, my cold office door. I felt that. And I thought, well, that's interesting. Where's that from? And I think it has everything to do with this, this dynamic that meaning is, is always reaching for this thing. And if you look at the narrative of Christianity, I don't, I don't think. I mean, why the book of Hebrews talks about the, you know, why, why the incarnation? Why would, you know, again, for those, for those who aren't Christians, who will listen to this play along with me. Why, why would the God of the universe, who has everything that in our minds, when you ask people, so, so you wrote a book about hell, that's a lot easier than actually writing books about the age to come, because that's really hard. So, but let's imagine, you know, most people conceive of hell is maybe Fresno and heaven is Santa Barbara. And, and so it's all of your creature comforts. It's complete security. It's all of these things. Okay. Why would, why would God give that up to live in a situation which was far less secure than probably any slum in America, you know, be born to a poor family in first century Palestine in the middle of a raging culture war. And, and then create this whole narrative where once you, again, by faith, your, your destiny is secured. The path you then take is down. And we've seen this repeated. It's, it's the story of Christ. We see it repeated in the likes of let's say St. Francis, who was the son of a wealthy, you know, the son of a wealthy cloth merchant who, you know, gives everything away to live amongst the poor. You even see it in Martin Luther story. You know, Luther had this, this gripping anxiety about the torments of hell, but his father wanted him to be a lawyer and his father was an increasingly successful miner. And, you know, he had mines. And so the Christianity is this continual. And I even see it in your story because you're you out of the very few people land a job in an institution that has enough money to put up a building like that and to pay you and offer you benefits. And you give that up to go teach with Francis Chan in a little Bible college that wants to make Bible learning affordable. And, and by the way, I'm not going to talk about my student debt, but which gets saved by grace just whoo, you know, your debt is free. How does it feel to be a Christian now? You have any experiential sense of, of, of, you know, unmerited grace? So I mean, incarnation, we often just, you know, it's God revealing God to us, but it's also God revealing what it means to be human. I mean, you have more statements that the phrase image of God, you know, you have a Genesis one, a couple of, a couple of other times in Genesis, really. But most statements that were that phrases used describes Jesus. Like he is the ultimate revelation of what it means to bear God's image. And so, so yeah, why did God leave, I don't know, comfort security as if we even know what. Right. But, you know, he, why did he take on suffering? Why did he take on kind of the drudgery of humanity from our perspective? Well, he didn't. He actually took on the full flourishing of what it means to be human. Then he reveals to us, you know, what the path of humanity is. Yeah. It is not just chasing after comfort and security and, you know, retirement or whatever. And, and, and so then what we as a society say we would like to do is offer everybody that the thing which we all sort of strive for and we all really want because, hey, you know, security feels a lot better than insecurity and prosperity sure is a lot more comfortable than poverty, you know, and, and, and so on one hand, we want all these things and we want our children to have all these things. Yet at the same time, we know there's a poison there. I do. I mean, even no matter, no matter what, everything I've said here, I still pursue comfort and everything else. Me too. Eat sushi. I mean, we just, yeah, we're creatures, creatures of habit and there's always going to be that push and pull. But this is, and this is what I do appreciate about Jordan Peterson. You know, I mean, I, you know, I, I just, I'm just so not interested in people debating whether he's an actual Christian or not, you know, but he just, he, he so much of what he says, and I think practices as a person embodies the Christian, the way of Jesus more than most Christians I know. Okay. He's just, he's just, he's just, he's just, he's just, he's just, he's just, he's just so not interested in people. Is he fuzzy on the resurrection or maybe he doesn't believe whatever, but like he just the stuff he says about, about human flourishing and the nature of humanity is just in my, I just think it's so spot on. And so you said, I haven't really paid attention to him much. Is he not doing much in the last like six months or whatever? Is he done with his big, huge world tour? So it really begins at C this latest thing really begins at C 16 and ends with his hospitalization. Oh, I didn't know he's hospitalized. What happened? So he, you know, so he, you know, so he ran his book tour forever and he and his wife, Tammy, by all accounts are like this. She, she traveled with him everywhere. I mean, it's almost Billy Graham ask here in terms of, you know, Jordan Peterson and his wife, Tammy, they go everywhere. And then of course, she, she got kidney, she got kidney cancer and that first looked like it was to be treatable, but then not was a, it was a more difficult one. And then, and then things got very serious and it looked like she might die. And that's that period of sort of end of end of 2018 through the summer of 2019 where he couldn't do it. He couldn't do a presentation without getting weepy and cry. I mean, his emotions are always sort of on the edge. But all of that stuff and, and sometime, sometime in that point, he got a prescription for clonopin from a doctor with his antianxiety to try to help him function while basically it was an intense emotional distress over the health of his wife. And then his wife, you know, his blog post has basically cured, you know, sort of not exactly miraculously, but kind of, and, and she's fine. She's good. So then he tried to get off the clonopin and that crashed his mood. And if you were his pastor and you'd sit and chart his last that, that three years of his life and a guy who's always struggled with, with mood stability, you know, so then he went into a hospital basically to, to do the withdrawal off the clonopin. And we really haven't heard much from him since then. And a lot of that's a, that's a, so I've had a couple of conversations, I had a conversation on my channel about that with a guy from my meetup who as a PhD in neuropsychology and teaches at a community college here, but clonopin is, it's a, it's an anti-seizure medication that they discovered had some anti-anxiety qualities. And so it's given to people to control anxiety, but it's a bad drug to get off. And once you get off it, your, you know, your moods can really vary. And this is a guy who bear in mind over the last year or so before that was stabilizing his mood by eating beef, salt, and water. So I think it, I think I would not be at all surprised if it's going to take a while for him to get healthy again to the point where he can do what he was doing before. So we'll have to see. Isn't he on another book? His second book was supposed to be released in January, but that assumed he could get all of his writing done. And he was going to do, start Exodus in the biblical series, maybe in November. There's really been very little word out since his daughter did a video explaining this clonopin thing a little bit. So, so in terms of Jordan, you know, we're just going to have to wait and see what happens with respect to all of this. Which is too bad. I haven't engaged in Jordan Peterson conversations hardly at all. It's just been, you know, I'd try to pay attention to what's going on. What is the general evangelical Christian response to Jordan Peterson? Is it all the way from like, I've seen blips here and there. People really like him or people like, no, you know, he's not good or whatever. And, I don't know. The dominant, unfortunately, a lot of the hot takes on Jordan Peterson says much more about whether people are politically conservative or politically progressive. Oh, really? Okay. And so- The progressives think he's all right, right? And then the conservatives probably think he's too liberal. So in the evangelical world, that split holds. So most evangelicals who kind of lean progressive-ish, and you know, I could name names and you'd know exactly the lane I'm talking about. Progressives who lean kind of not all the way, not all the way over to Peter Enns and Rachel Held Evans, but more- Kind of woke evangelicals. Woke-ish evangelicals, not all the way, but they hear Jordan Peterson. When I'll talk to people, because I very seldom try to get people on my channel who have any kind of status at all. And when I try and I explain how my channel grew, once I mentioned the name Jordan Peterson, it's like bang. Don't want to go there. Don't want to go there. Jordan Peterson, too close to misogyny, too close to racism, because he's not saying the right words in this group. Now, it's completely opposite on sort of conservative element. He sort of became a conservative hero. And it's really weird for a guy who politically is, you know, although, yeah. So it's really a mess and it's a shame because the aspect of his contribution that I think is enormously valuable doesn't really necessarily trend in that spectrum. Yeah. You know, in most of those concerns, I just, I'm such a huge fan. I wonder the reasons why I left fundamentalism was because I was tired of, you know, all these assumptions about those evil charismatics or those evil all millennials, you know, stuff. Then I would go read the actual people. I'm like, that's not what they believe at all. Like this, they've been so misrepresented. And even today, I see that just all the time. People, you know, I'll make a comment about somebody and then some people say, yeah, well, they believe like, have you ever read anything by this? I remember in the way, and I rarely touch politics just because not because I'm scared to just because I've got enough controversy on my plate. I don't need to invite more. With what you talk about. I don't need to start tweeting Jordan Peterson and get that, you know, whatever. But I remember I did, I sent out a tweet once in the wake of the whole Mueller report. And I said, hey, encourage everybody to read, you know, listen to, you know, both sides, you know, the conservatives and progressives I recommend. I recommended on the conservative side, Ben Shapiro on the progressive side, Pod Save America. And I thought they both fit, you know, and I listened to both sides and I was like, man, don't just listen to one or the other. Listen, listen to both takes. And I got a lot of flak from people that really like me and follow me on how could you recommend Ben Shapiro? He and they list off all this stuff. I'm like, look, I again, I listen to, I purposely listen to people on all sides. I listen to a lot of Ben Shapiro. I listened to a lot of, you know, Pod Save America and Joe Rogan and wherever he's at. And I'm like, I don't think you've ever actually heard a single podcast by Ben Shapiro. Like him or don't like him, but what you're saying about him just isn't true. It's like you created somebody else and it's like they're because they're listening to the critics. And I hear stuff, what people say, I believe. And it's like, not only have I never said that, but I've actually critiqued that publicly. Like one of the things with the, with the whole homosexuality conversation, I really don't like the phrase love the center, hate the sin. I have publicly denounced that phrase. I mean, so many times where I don't even do any more, because it's like, you know, people hurt it so much. And I still have people say, press the sprinkle. Oh, love the center, hate this thing. I'm like, okay, I've got to know what, you know, two plus two equals five, I guess, you know, but it does seem like some of these polarizing figures. If you actually listen to them extensively with the sole goal of just understanding what they're saying, I just, I think people would be not as critical or shouldn't be as critical as they are. But again, that's the spirit of fundamentalism that swings both left and right. That's right. Like, I'm going to begin with that person's bad, evil and wrong. And then I'm going to just do some quick work to find out where and why and how to disprove them. But I'm not actually going to try to understand what they're, what they're saying. Right. Well, and I often remind people that Jesus was killed because he was soft, you know, Jesus was killed for different reasons. But the tribe that he should have aligned in some ways with most, which were the Pharisees and kind of the moderate conservatives in their culture war, because he wasn't living in a cave, and he wasn't knifing Romans. He, but the tribe that hated him most was the tribe he was closest to because he was soft on all the little things that they thought he should align with them on. I mean, he did things like healed on the Sabbath and didn't require his disciples to do the ceremonial washing before. If you read the Gospels, you will see in fact that they hated him because he was soft on all the issues that they thought were critical in their culture war against the Romans. And so they set him up to die. And that, that dynamic we are very much currently living in. Well, he didn't fit their, I mean, yeah, if he did a study of first century Pharisees, now we're getting into my world here, first century Pharisees and the teachings of Jesus, there's a tremendous amount of overlap. There is. Oh, gosh. I mean, they were one of the only Jewish sexes, I can hardly pronounce. Say that word carefully. They were longing for a Davidic Messiah. You know, the Maccabees had this whole like Messiah from the tribe of Levi thing. And then the Zealots were like, I'll take up the sword and I'll, this sword is my Messiah, you know, and but it was the Pharisees that were like, no, we're still longing for a Davidic Messiah. They believe in the resurrection. They were, you know, their sexual ethics would line up, you know, Jesus a little more strict on divorce and other things. But yeah, there was a lot of, but if it's because he didn't toe the party line, like he, that's what tribalism does, right? You have these, this echo chamber, this airtight, you belong to our tribe, but make sure you dot, you cross every T and dot every I and he did, he crossed most of them, but he did all of them. Yeah. Sometimes how I feel around, I don't know, shall I even go there? You probably don't have too many, I don't know, like sometimes with like a. Say it, say it. Well, just like, I mean, like a gospel coalition crowd, you know, I, I, or Southern Baptist, you know, I do a lot of speaking events, whatever, do a lot of stuff. I've never, I've been more, I've been disinvited by Southern Baptist more than I've been invited. I mean, I've been invited to this and it's like, you know, and, and, and some of the differences are so mine, like, man, you guys, sometimes I'll go to conferences and give a paper and they're, they're all like, we, I kid you not. I've been invited to give a perspective on like transgender or homosexuality and they expected me to be kind of the progressive. And then I presented my view and they're like, oh, we were hoping, you know, we kind of agree with much of what you said. Like, what'd you think? Like I, I just because I'm a pacifist, therefore now I'm liberal and homosexual here. But yeah, it's that if you don't line up with this tribe, that a tribalistic spirit, it's like the movie, the village, you know, have you seen the village? No. Oh, it's so theological. You know, I won't spoil it. It's, it's read it through a theological, read it through a moral majority, 1980, nineties, evangelical lens that is brilliant. But just like, you have to form walls and just keep people in. And, you know, you're either in or you're out. If you start wandering too close to the edge, then that's, you know, you got to step out side. Well, I, you know, and I'll often say, tell people to, you know, part of the reason they were angry at Jesus was he was soft on sex trafficking. Or if I say it that way, people are like, you know, how, how could Jesus be soft on sex trafficking? Well, he, you know, I do have a small church. Some sex trafficking goes outside my door sometimes. But, but, but when you think about, well, what, what was their objection to his, his contact with prostitutes, who were these prostitutes? Well, they were young women of the Jewish community who likely, you know, got swept into prostitution, probably with Gentiles and Roman soldiers. And like, you know, tax collectors and prostitutes are a pair because it's money and sex with respect to the larger culture war. And so the way to be, the way to be really against sex trafficking was to be, you know, was to basically shun those girls that went into the business, just like you shun the men who went into the tax farming. And, and so, and, and this, and so Jesus is soft on that. And you'd be, and you say it that way and people are like, well, but then the other side, of course, is like, yeah, Jesus, Jesus loved everyone. It's like, well, you really, you didn't read that. You didn't read the Bible either. You know, look at, look at how he talks to his disciples sometimes. It's pretty rough. Look at how he talks to the people again, who should be closest to him. Whitewashed tombs, you know, outside you look pretty, but inside you're full of, you know, unclean dead things. I mean, this is Jesus. And, and, and this again is the difference between an idol and a God, because an idol is something we can wield. And so when Nicodemus, I just spent the last 10 weeks going through the first part of John three in my adult Sunday school class, Nicodemus comes to Jesus at night, probably in the hopes of wielding him. Can we recruit Jesus into our coalition in order to make these, to make this progress in our culture and our resistance against the Romans, you know, and, and what Jesus shows at the beginning of, of John three is he cannot be wielded. No one wields him. He wields us and, and that's a narrative that is so completely un-American because I'm going to be the decider of my own destiny. Yeah. Right. Do you think, is it, so I've always heard that he went at night because he was kind of, he knew he was stepping outside his tribe and he was a little bit scared. Is that almost like, you know, I'm going to, I'll retweet Jordan Peterson, but under a different count, because I don't want that. No, I think that's, I think that's right. It's also deeply into the whole theme and in the, in the gospel of John of night and day. And so, and then you read the epistles of John, you know, so I read I Howard Marshall's commentary on the epistles of John. He says, you want to start to John go second, John, third, John, first, John, and then the gospel of John. So I went in that order and it's actually been quite fruitful because we can talk to you, but it's, it's, but, but that's Jesus. And, and again, you, you begin to realize, I don't know, I mean, Tom Holland has, you know, wrote this book dominion, which I'm having a lot of fun with, but he did, you know, he, he made the point in a podcast that it's an astounding literary accomplishment to, to write a, to write a, what, what in a sense is a first century biography before biography had ever really been written, you know, compared to, let's say Julius Caesar writes his own. To write a first century biography that would not only be salient and transformative to the people in the first century, but continue to be such for every century since across the breadth of human diversity. And four authors did it at the same time. Wow. And to me that says the reason four authors could do it at the same time is because they were writing about the same person. And that person was that transformative and explosive. And that person is no one's idol. No one wields him. And, and if you read the gospels in that context, again, I challenge Christians, read your dang Bible. You say it's the word of God, pay attention to the thing. And, and, and if you, you know, well, I'm scared to study around it. No, study everything around it. And, but, but really study it. Don't just quickly buy someone's, you know, someone's journey through it. And I, I find, you know, I've had nothing but these last two years of my life on YouTube and doing the podcast and all of this has, has made me nothing, nothing, you know, has made me far more Christian than and far more convinced of the faith than, than ever before. I just love, I mean, and I feel like my podcast is like this too, just these free flowing open conversations and you're not scared to, there's no, I don't know. It doesn't sound like, it's not like we're very much the same. There's no fear of like, Hey, let's talk about this. Let's just talk about this. Let's wander here and explore that. And that's how you sharpen your thinking. You don't sharpen your thinking by being scared to ask this question or God forbid, I would conclude this answer to the wrong, you know, I don't know why that is. There's just so, there is so much fear that drives traditional and I'll say tribalistic evangelical, not that every evangelical is tribalistic, but those, those who are, it's so fear driven and it stifles not only biblical interpretation, but cultural engagement in a mission, a miss missional theology. But well, I pastor a small church. If I pastored a mega church, could I do this? And could I speak freely? You, you have your, you have your little outfit. What's it, what's it called? What's the name of your organization? Center for faith, sexuality and gender. Well, you already know you're going to get shellacked by all kinds of sides with it. With it. I mean, you're not going to be, you're not going to be woke enough for the wokes and you're not going to be strict enough for the, for other people. And you're, you just, you pre-bought the scorn against you. So at that point, what are you going to do? You know what, in, in, as volatile as this conversation is, in my experience, and maybe it's just the audience that, you know, invites me to speak, but in my experience, in my experience, there's a loud minority on both sides, but there's a hungry, kind of more silent and scared majority, I think that, that is looking for something a little more Jesus-like that, that is okay admitting that the church has a lot of repenting to do to the LGBT community. And yeah, I still want to follow scripture and I've just not seen the affirming arguments here. Am I out to lunch? Do I have to be affirming to love? And, and, you know, that real genuine kind of posture, I think. I see it in more evangelicals than I think people would assume. And that's probably because the loud voices on either end gives the impression that that's how the majority are thinking, but it's not, it's just not. Well, and God seems to find his way, you know, I think the Jordan Peterson moment and phenomenon that we saw, you know, I, I gravitated to that because I thought, well, God is doing something really amazing here and using someone that none of us would have expected. And, you know, we'll see what happens with Kanye, but watching that too, it's like God, God's doing something, don't know what he's doing. And, and, you know, his pastor from masters, I, I saw this little thing at his pastor. I thought this just keeps getting stranger. And then he shows up at Joel Osteen's church and he goes and does prison. It's like, I love this. This is so Joker-esque boy. He is flipping all the scripts. He tells his wife, Kim Kardashian, you know, the way you dress, I don't want my, I don't want our daughter watching how you dress and parade yourself before other men. And it's like, who did you think you married? Wait, did you mention his, his pastor went to masters? No. Yes. What? Go, go to YouTube and Google Kanye's pastor and you will see him. He's from a mega church in Southern California, right there in the John MacArthur tribe. And that's Kanye's pastor. But it's so funny because I'm thinking there, I'm thinking, yeah, you're Kanye's pastor, but you're, you're not going to, you're not going to put him under church discipline for the kind of things you might put other people on. You're not going to, you're not going to rain, you're not going to rain Kanye in. It ain't going to happen. So, and it's just the, the strange, you know, okay. So, so, so Kanye comes to his pastor said, I kind of like to go to Joel Osteen's church. How does, how does, how does John, what does John MacArthur think of Joel Osteen? Let's, let's play that little tape. Yeah. It's all just nuts, but it's. We're going to need a healthy dose of James too, when it comes to Kanye. The rich, wealthy man, the celebrity coming in and like, Ooh, here's, here's the good seat for you. And the no name poor person, you know? Yep. Yeah. I haven't kept up with the whole Kanye. I mean, is it, I guess it's worth it. I mean, does this conversion experience seem genuine? I mean, I know Justin Bieber had something similar recently. And, and I mean, I've appreciated Connie just for again, they just, they can't put them in a certain box, you know, he doesn't seem to care what the majority is doing, which I really appreciate it, but I've not, I haven't been like following it closely. So he, in my, I, I think he is sorting out, I think he is sorting out his story. And I think he got, I think he got to a point which, you know, neither of us have ever experienced, but where you have again, in a sense, he arrived at the American dream. So you have, you know, you have limitless money, you have access to, you know, any and all the sex you want, you have any and all the attention you want, you can say anything and do anything. And what you are is in a context where your basis desires will simply run wild. And so you let them run. And so you let them run. And then you begin to realize this isn't, you know, okay, I've been to Disneyland, now what? And then he has a daughter and his daughter's turning 10. And so his Sunday service has kind of been like chapel for his daughter, only with world-class celebrities and thousands of people curious and, you know, a gospel choir that, you know, that you're buying and paying for. So who knows what's going to happen with this thing? But it's something and it'll be, you know, will Kanye settle down and begin to look like, oh, I don't know, I don't know, Denzel Washington? So it's, we don't know. But, you know, it's in some ways the same thing with Jordan Peterson. So Jordan Peterson does this crazy thing. And Jordan, what does Jordan think about all these things? You know, is Jordan going to settle down and go to church somewhere? Probably not. Where's this all going? We don't know. But don't count God out. You study Christian history and again and again and again it looks like that Christianity is in a corner, it can't break out. And something happens and boom, you know, out it comes in unexpected ways, you know, all this missionary, all this 18th and 19th century missionary activity in China and Africa leading to rice Christians and so on and so forth. And the missionaries have to leave and these new indigenous movements turn up and they're heretical and wrong and, you know, prosperity gospel and all this stuff. But along the way, God does his work. I got a question and I'm going to have to go. I got to go. When we reflect on history, let's just say Christian history, but just history, like you have these cataclysmic moments. You have the conversion of Constantine. You have the, was it 1054 split between East and West? You've got the printing press. You have the Reformation. You've got the, even more recently, some of the Great Awakening or Azusa Street Revival or just these kind of discovery of America. Whatever, when we look back on 2019-ish, what's going to be the description? Are we in one of those kind of cataclysmic kicking up dust moments? I mean, it certainly feels like that, but maybe it's just because we're in it. Maybe this will be like, you know, 1832, which I've known nothing about 1832. You know, it's like, I know about, you know, 1865. What will people, how would they describe our cultural moment? And again, just not the prophet or the son of a prophet, but I mean, from your, I mean, you got a really good, you got a really good pulse on cultural movements. You know, what do you think we'll say about this in like a hundred years from now? When Jesus was executed in 30 AD, his disciples were cowering in an upper room. Only women and the young men like John could be around the cross. And when Jesus rose on Sunday, he didn't walk up to Pilate, knock on the door and say, how do you like me now? I, God, what God is doing now, I don't know, but I do have a sense that we are in a point. Well, you know, the sixties were an inversion period and the seventies were. We are at a point where the assumed positions of people are changing and where this will go and what fruit it will bear, we don't know. But we are living in interesting times and I think we are going to see. I suspect a lot of atheists imagine that, well, ever since World War I, well, religious, you know, religion is just on a downward trajectory. I really don't think so. And I think we are going to see the church change dramatically over the next 20 years. We're going to see lots of churches like mine die. And but I, you know, with my meetup on Sunday, my meetup often on Sunday nights, most of those people aren't Christians. I wonder what the next phase of church is going to look like. I don't think we have any idea. None of us is smart enough to to manage it. So we follow. Yeah, and maybe this is my Francis Chan influence coming out. But I, you know, our traditional Western church model, which has been around, let's just say generously since the Reformation, you know, very pulpit centered, very whatever, like worship service gathering. I just I think it still is a residue from a pre-internet world. And I think, you know, the church typically lags behind culture, takes a couple of generations for it to kind of catch up. And so I do think that our traditional church model is, it worked. It worked really well in a pre-internet world. And I think there's, you know, I think it'll keep going the way it is, but I think it's going to, I think we do need to reimagine what it means to be the community of God's people in a post-internet world. Because I see the internet, you know, like again, conversion of Constantine, printing press and internet, you know, like these explosive, you know, cataclysmic changes in the church's relationship to society going from a position of weakness, the power and Constantine and then the spread of literacy and information to the printing press. And then times that by 10 with the internet. And yet the church still looks very similar now that it did, you know, pre-internet. And I just think it's just, you know, I just think it's going to, yeah, I agree. And I don't know what, I don't even know what it should look like, whatever. I just think we can only do what we're doing so much longer before we kind of wake up and see, like, yeah, it doesn't, you know, this isn't really, working sounds pragmatic, but you know what I'm saying. I mean, yeah. I think we need to be more in tune and honest with the cataclysmic changes that are happening around us. I think honesty and courage are two of the virtues we're really going to need. Yeah. Yeah. That's good. Yeah. And we'll see where it, and again, I mean, if track record is any predictor, those who are most honest and courageous will probably suffer the most for it, but the church is always propelled by its suffering. That's good. That's a good word. So good word to end on. Yeah. Well, thank you so much, Preston. This has been, this has been too much fun. Yeah, we should do this again. We should do this again. I'll look forward. I don't think I've ever read a YouTube comment in my life. It's not, I read Twitter and stuff, but maybe I'll pop on and see what people, or maybe I shouldn't. I don't know. No, you should. The comment, the comment group on my channel is amazing. I hate using that word because it's threadbare today, but the people in my comment section, it's not at all YouTube comments. Oh, cool. Awesome. And I'll send you the MP3 and the video version of this, and you can do with it as you will as well. Sounds good, man. Thanks, Preston. All right. Take care. Bye-bye.