https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=1ZLidAa7ul8

 Sure. Hi, this is Paul and I have a special guest today with me, Dr. Gordon Menzies. He is a professor at school in Sydney, Australia, correct? That's right, the University of Technology Sydney. University of Technology Sydney. And we are going to be discussing your latest book, Western Fundamentalism. Correct. So let's, why don't we begin, why don't you tell me a little bit about yourself, where you grew up, how you grew up, and then we'll eventually migrate to, you know, how this book came about. Alright, that's a fairly broad question, Paul. Thanks very much for having me. It's a great honour to be here. I grew up in lots of different places. My dad was a research doctor and that took him around a bunch of different areas. Visited the North American continent for a little while in Canada. I believe that because he was an epidemiologist, that's someone who studies diseases, that he was actually looking at nuclear bomb shelters. So when there's a nuclear war, everyone's hiding in the shelters, lots of dead stuff on the surface, dead people, dead animals. And so he was, he was looking at all that. I went to university in a small town, about halfway between Sydney and Brisbane called Armidale, did a degree in economics, and then joined the Central Bank. I really enjoyed my time there. It was a great place to work. But central banks tend to be concerned with day to day issues and I had more of a philosophical deeper kind of interest in some things, although I enjoyed the day to day stuff too. And so when the opportunity came, I was supported to do a master's degree at the Australian National University in Canberra. I did well enough there for them to support me for a scholarship to do a PhD at Oxford. So that was, that was a great honour. I worked with a guy there, well, I had two supervisors, but one of them was a Christian economist called Donald Hay. And his book on economics and Christianity was a very good book. And I really enjoyed reading it. So I was attracted to go and study there. And then I came back and joined academia. And my, I guess my interest in the deeper issues, deeper side of things comes out in my lectures. I've won a number of teaching awards. And I guess in a way the book grew out of my teaching. But it also grew out of a strange experience I had at Oxford University, if you'd like me to talk about that. Yeah, go ahead into that. Yeah. So while I was in Oxford, I thought I would join the debating societies. That's a very famous debating group called the Oxford Union. And I didn't enjoy it as much as I thought I would, Paul, which is disappointing. I got there and I found myself getting a little bit, well, to be frank, bored. And what I found was that people would tend to very quickly get onto political pragmatics. Now, I shared with you earlier that one of the reasons I left central banking and wanted to become an academic was because, you know, the day to day running of things in politics is interesting, but there are other things to be interested in. And so I went and saw one of the leaders and I explained what I observed. And straight away he said, yes, he said, everybody who comes here believes uncritically in three things, democracy, free market liberalism, that's a market based economic system, and sexual freedom. And these things cannot be questioned. They're sort of celebrated and looked and regarded quite uncritically. And then everything else you debate is on top of that. Well, I thought the union was a place where people could talk about anything. And so that's where I got the idea that actually a lot of Western people believe things quite uncritically down at a deep level. And so I called that phenomenon, Western fundamentalism. That's what inspired the book. So I picked up your book. We chatted a little bit just to get the Zoom stuff straight yesterday. And so I picked up your book and I started reading it. And, you know, that story is there. And I really liked how you told the story in the book. I think a lot of people have experiences of this when they, well, for example, I, my father was a minister in the Christian Reformed Church in Patterson, New Jersey, but he mostly ministered to African Americans who had migrated up into Patterson in the middle of the 20th century. And so that was my church life and my school life was Christian Reformed churches had a big emphasis on Christian education for day schools. So I had my school days amongst a bunch of Dutch immigrant kids or two, three generations in. And then my weekends with a lot of Black folks and where I lived with a lot of Black folks. And then after college, I was a missionary in the Dominican Republic. And so part of being able to see some of these fundamentals has a lot to do with when you step out of them, you begin to have experiences and other places and times where you realize, oh, human beings have a lot of presuppositional beliefs that they sometimes some individuals, some people, particularly if they stay sort of in a monoculture, have a very difficult time in seeing them at all. And that then creates for, as you said, some things that aren't questioned. And I think it's very true that, you know, your experience in Oxford that, well, here's here are these people and, you know, none of them, none of them can doubt that. In fact, if you would begin to doubt it, you find that people begin to get very upset with you and angry with you. So I don't know if you tried any of that at the Oxford Union and what happened with that? Well, that's interesting. You should say that. So there was one debate where you get randomly assigned to sides of debates. And so one debate that I had was fascinating because almost everybody at the Oxford Union would be very much in favor of LGBT rights. And the debate was about gay adoptions. And so I found myself randomly assigned onto the side that was posed to them. And one after another of our side kind of got up and did their thing. And one fellow got up and gave an enormously impressive speech where he went through comparing heterosexual couples and gay couples. And he alleged there was all this instability in gay couples and gave names and dates for the studies. And as I'd lost the debate, we kind of had to, that was a foregone conclusion. But afterwards I said to him, that was absolutely amazing. How did you know all those studies and remember the dates? And he said, oh, I made it up. And so I realized at that point that the Oxford Union was not a great place necessarily to look for truth. And I didn't spend a lot of time engaging with people there. I went to some of the debates, I spoke in one of them, one of the main debates and some of the minor debates. But yeah, I didn't actually, I didn't do what you said. I didn't get into many conversations because I came to the conclusion that in some ways it was a great debating training ground. But yeah, I had the impression that sometimes people weren't that interested in the truth of things. Now, did you, just one thing I wanted to drop in before I get to my next question. C.S. Lewis made an observation that when he read back over history, and of course he read a lot of history, he noted that you'd find these terribly fierce combative situations, and of course in history these things could be bloody. But he often found that the competing sides held so much in common that they didn't debate that we now separated from history would greatly disagree with them on. And he just made this observation that I think speaks a lot to your book in that so often we simply can't see ourselves. Our eyes point outwards and we don't understand our presuppositions. So before we, who titled this book? You or your publishers? Because it's, I did, it's always, it's always just been in my head to be called this. I think you're right about what you said. People often say that travel and reading are good ways to get outside of your own presuppositions, and I think that's true. Often the assumptions made in the contemporary environment that if you disagree, if you find yourself in a nasty disagreement with somebody it's because of vested interests. So you know they're supporting the patriarchy or economic exploitation or something. You rarely accuse yourself of vested interests, it's always the other person. But the go-to framework is that when people have strong disagreements it's because of their vested interests. But then if you read, if you travel, or sometimes in ordinary life, you find yourself in disagreements with people of goodwill who are arguing well. And I think that's the moment when you really ought to question whether what's going on is that you have different presuppositions. That it's not necessarily because people are supporting their position in whatever power game they're into. That can happen of course, but it's not necessarily true. And so I think rather than look at the surface of arguments all the time, it's sometimes really good to look underneath them at presuppositions. Have you gotten, I don't know, have you gotten much pushback? Because fundamentalist has really become a dirty word. That's it. If you call someone a fundamentalist, you are in many contexts, you are essentially saying you have been, of course as you mentioned before, that they're vested interests. C.S. Lewis had a little story, he talked about his bulverisms, he talked about that. That oh, you only think this about marriage because you're a man, or you only think this about economics because you're wealthy, or the other way around, you only think this about economics because you're poor, or you know something like that. And I think you're right that so often it's presuppositions, but yet fundamentalists are often imagined to be, and I don't think we pause often to think about what exactly the insult is behind calling someone a fundamentalist. It seems to be an insult of willful blindness that here's all of this evidence making our conclusions and the rightness of our positions self-evident, but you are somehow deluded or hoodwinked or willfully blind to this because of some religious conviction, perhaps again because of some vested interest or some emotional weakness. Where do you, I mean to use this word in your title, obviously in a little bit of a provocative manner, what are your thoughts on how this word is going to play because you're clearly playing on it throughout the whole book. Yeah, you've raised a good question about the definition of fundamentalist. So originally, the term was used as you'd be well aware by a group of Christians in the early 20th century who wrote a set of pamphlets called the Fundamentals of Testament into the Truth, and that was basically saying that Christians ought to base their beliefs and lives on a set of core beliefs, which actually most Christians would hold to. So it began at that point with the idea of a foundation, what foundations do you use? Interestingly enough, some of the causes that people we might call modern fundamentalists advocate would not have been supported by those people. So James Orr wrote a pamphlet on Genesis, and although contemporary fundamentalists are famous for their opposition to evolution, James Orr said that he thought that the language of the Bible in Genesis was neither, it was pre-scientific, it wasn't pro or anti-scientific. And so I think that if you go back to the original usage of the word, the fairest meaning of it is stating a set of, I guess, unprovable presuppositions and then building something on top of it. Now, at the time that that was said, that was thought to be ridiculous and anti-idelectual because people believed at that stage that there were self-evident truths and then from that, everybody could build up every sane, rational man, and it usually was a man, could build up from that foundation, could build up a system which would be clearly the truth. Now, we don't believe that anymore. So in philosophy, there's been a real turn away from that position which was called various things, but I'll call it modernism, which is this tremendous optimism about human knowledge and progress. And now we live in a so- called postmodern age which has cut back some of the pretensions of modernism, I think to a degree fairly. And so really, we're all in the position of building our lives on presuppositions which at some point we can't prove. That doesn't mean you can't have rational discussions about them, but it does mean that calling somebody a fundamentalist is a form of, I guess, anti-religious prejudice in my view. It's saying that because you're religious, you have biases and you build your position on these biases, but we don't. We're rational people. We start with self-evident truths and everything we build can be proved by science and so on. And I just think that's a wrong way of looking at knowledge. And I think, and I'm not just saying that, that's the history of philosophy in the 20th century. So I think it's a word that's now used as a mask for anti-religious prejudice. And there are already words for saying somebody is bigoted or anti-intellectual. It's those words, bigger than anti-intellectual. Use them instead of fundamentalist. And I'll say one more thing. It's a very good example of the fallacy of the special problem, what I call the fallacy of the special problem, which is you find some problem in knowledge or in practice of somebody's worldview and then you observe it in religious people. And you say, ah, that's a problem of religious people. That proves religion is crazy. But you're choosing to pin it on to religious people when in fact it's a general problem. So this problem of not being able to prove everything we believe is a common problem that everybody faces, atheists face it too. And so it's committing the fallacy of the special problem to pin it on religious people and use the term fundamentalist. So where do you think these, we can go through them one by one or if you have comments about all three of them in general, where do you think these fundamentalisms in our culture come from? I think in many respects they represent a yearning for freedom. So democracy is, the three fundamental, so I talk about in the book, I talk about fundamentalism in general. And then I, so I say that everybody, no matter what their worldview is, builds their lives on certain unprovable things. And then I say as a subgroup of that, that people in the West have a very high and uncritical regard for democracy, free market liberalism and sexual freedom. I think they represent in many ways a yearning for freedom. So democracy wants to be free from dictators and the abuse of power. Economic freedom is about being able to do what people perceive to be advantageous trades amongst themselves without the interference of government and so on. And sexual freedom, I would say, is actually transferring the metaphor of economic freedom onto relationships. I know that's a controversial view, but that's how I see it. So I think they're all attempting to get at freedom, but they differ in an interesting way, which is I think that economic freedom and sexual freedom draws a lot of its inspiration from a strand of philosophy which says that if you're powerful, beautiful, strong, you kind of have this aesthetic right to marginalise everybody else. Whereas democracy, at least at voting time, maybe not at other times, really proclaims the equality of all people. And so it's quite, they're quite different actually in these ways, I think. That's interesting. Now when you say a yearning for freedom, you're I think implying freedom from in this case, obviously. And that tension between freedom from and freedom to, when you get into all three of them, will obviously be, will come into, will get engaged because markets are not only, I think when I think about these three and how they've developed, a lot of it seems tied to sort of what Charles Taylor calls the subtraction story, which is a dominant thing in the West, which would say, well, in the bad old days when the Roman Catholic Church had hegemonic power over Europe, and well, that was never, their hegemony was never quite, you know, they were, if you actually read the history, the popes and the kings were often sort of wrestling for power and should, let's say, civil authorities be free to grant bishoprics and post people in ecclesiastical office and so on and so forth. But the low resolution subtraction story basically says, well, in the past, everything was locked down by the Roman Catholic Church and if you differed from them, you would get burned at the stake, and whereas people were, you know, burned at the stake and whereas, you know, people were burned at the stake and the Roman Catholic Church did have tremendous power, but usually it was sort of a collusion between the church and the civil authorities because the kings also had power and so obviously the story of the Protestant Reformation where Luther's, you know, where Luther's prince basically, you know, kidnaps Luther and locks him in a castle and says, I don't really know if I want you to burn my professor and then of course, you know, war will break out, you know, the piece of Augsburg that essentially gives to the state, you know, the power of religion beneath it. Now the state can choose, well, we're going to be Lutheran or we're going to be Roman Catholic, you know, and on and but yet the subtraction story still lingers that religion is the cause of all of this tyranny and so if we can get rid of religion and let people in a very libertarian way do what they want to do, well then we'll arrive at, well, in some ways the words of the American Declaration of Independence, life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness and then we say maybe look at, well, the place that started this at first was the United States and kind of a forefront in religious liberty and all of this and look how well that turned out. So of course these three things are, are, you know, it's self-evident says of course John Locke and Thomas Jefferson. So, and you're saying, well, so these things we sort of grow up assuming and off we go. Yeah and I think that, well, that's what you say is very true and I think of course religious wars and religious violence are a terrible thing. They're not necessarily, there's a danger of committing the fallacy of the special problem again and if you, if you look at the first chapter in my book, I actually assembled the top 10 violent episodes in history and counted by the number of people who were killed in them and you find that religion is not very highly represented there and certainly as terrible and reprehensible as religious violence and murder is in today's world and was in the late 20th century, you'd never even find those incidents on the top 10 biggest killers in history. Now I don't mean by that at all to trivialise events like September 11 because the violent death of anybody is an irreducible tragedy but it is an example of the fallacy of the special problem to somehow pin violence and wars onto religion especially. That I think is a mistake. Of course it's true for particular incidents but with, you know, for example, communism, an ideology which is avowedly atheist with all the deaths that communism has under its belt, it seems rather odd to say that deaths, violent deaths are especially the product of religion and so as you say the narrative of liberation from religion leading to some kind of paradise without violent deaths just seems misguided to me. Yeah, I think that, I think that the, I mean I'm a fan of freedom and I'm actually a fan of democracy but I think that it's a matter of being aware of what it's actually very good at and what it's not very good at. So what it's good at is stopping a small group of people oppressing a whole country against their will and that is a really good thing. So it's a small oligarchy or something can't oppress a huge majority of people that won't work in democracy but it's naive to think that the majority is always right and that's the premise of democracy and it's a good system and so we have to put up with the bad as well as the good but you have to call the bad out for what it is and so if you have a country like South Africa in 1948 constructed a racist state or Germany in 1932 giving a lot of political power to the Nazis through a democratic process or ancient Greece some of their ideas about how adolescents should be treated sexually and that was a democracy as well. If the majority is wrong about something democracy actually helps the majority wrongness become law and work in society so I think it's just a matter of realizing what it's good for and what it's not good for. It won't necessarily stop mass delusions becoming policy and being lived out. So let's get into these three. Part of the bargain of democracy is either we say that there is wisdom in the mob or we say that perhaps in a more skeptical view well if we can't know the more skeptical view well if we can't know the truth at least the mob will make its own bed to lie in and that will afford a degree of stability and because the West has had you know there's of course Churchill's famous quote and I think other people have rift on it as well that it's maybe the worst form of government except all the other ones. In your book so in looking at these fundamentals why do you want to do this? Do you want to disavow people of these fundamentals? Do you want people to be more aware of them so that they can see their biases? I mean what's I mean I haven't read the book so I don't know so I mean kind of what's the thinking behind it for you? Why do you want people to see this about themselves if they can? I think it's important to understand anything that you believe and so understanding democracy well means that you'll know what its strengths and weaknesses are and that's always a good thing. You use something better if you understand its strengths. I think it also helps in conversation with others not to be quite as sure as yourself or arrogant. I think if you if you're aware of the strengths and weaknesses of what you think then it gives a bit of humility and humility is something that is in short supply in contemporary discussion so I think I think that's a good speaking as an economist I think that's a good reason for for reflecting on these things. What you said about democracy I'll just pick up something there. There's a famous theorem called Condorcet's jury theorem which says that groups make better decisions than individuals and this is the way the story goes. If you select one person in in the population and they have a really good and the probability of anybody you select in the population having a really good idea or a really good policy is 70% and if you just select one woman or man and and make them king or dictator then there's a 70% chance that the good thing will happen but if you select groups of three so you select this group of three then another or you just randomly select a group of three they vote on it and majority voting wins so so two out of three or three out of three will win then the chance that the good thing will happen goes up to 80% and so the conclusion is that democracy taps into the wisdom of the crowds groups make better decisions than individuals but of course the math works exactly the same for delusions and lies so if there's a 70% chance that you pick one person and they'll reintroduce foot binding for girls that horrible Chinese practice that crippled lots of teenage girls and young girls there's a 70% chance that one person will introduce that if you group select groups of three and they vote on majority voting wins that goes up to 80% so all majority does all democracy does is it taps into the so-called wisdom of the crowds and if the crowds are deluded about something well then then it'll just make it easier to introduce foot bonding yeah yeah yeah so so again now now we talked a little bit democracy is a very interesting thing so I as a pastor one of the interesting things about democracy is let's say for American for for certain kinds of American Christians that have in some ways strongly associated American democracy with their particular brand of Christianity I'm always a little bit amazed to watch many of them so blithely assert that well the Bible is clearly pro-democracy when actually the the Bible seems often at least the on the surface its language is a whole lot about monarchy you have the kingdom of God you have the kingdom of Israel I mean just historically the Bible's you know the Bible's fairly blind to democracy it doesn't just appear in its pages too often how I'd put that as a as a Christian is that Christians have recognized the legitimacy of all forms all sorts of forms of government and then I don't know how you feel about this but I feel that Paul's description of the ruling authorities having the responsibility to do justice and to in his words bear the sword to make sure that justice happens that's applied to a something that's perhaps not a dictatorship it's somewhere between a dictatorship and a monarchy in the ancient world the Roman emperor so I think that the scriptures recognize that any form of government has certain God-given responsibilities as the ruling authorities so in that sense all the systems are recognized but that doesn't mean that certain systems are better fulfilling God's purpose for them than other systems and I do tend to think that the republican model of democracy not not republican in the political sense but going back to Aristotle I do think that that separation of powers and making a set of laws which the king or the president or whoever can't tamper with is does help promote justice that that's my view but yeah I agree with you that just because something is in the democracy it doesn't make it an illegitimate government there might be such a thing as an illegitimate government that's an interesting question but I think because it's not a democracy that doesn't make it an illegitimate government in the eyes of the scriptures now now moving on to the second one the second one is is you know we're few people so when I watch Americans let's say a generation or a couple generations younger than myself who it seems at least in our contemporary context older people older people seem to have at hand an idea of well things are the way they are because we've tried a bunch of things and and these things seem to be working maybe not ideally but sort of okay younger folks tend to have a question more of well you know can't we do things differently I'm sure if we apply some fresh creative thinking things will go better and one of the hot spaces right now at least on the American political scene and the whole rest of the world gets to watch without voting on the American political scene and even though some of what we decide everyone else has to live with is the un is the is the seeming resurgence of a of a more of interest in a more socialist idea especially about economics income inequality is a is seen as a as a very negative thing I regularly hear people you know complain about capitalism they seldom define it much further than that yet I also find people not so much turning down raises or failing to play the lottery or wishing they had less money more often I hear them just wishing they were more in the club of people with more money so you know the the question of and even the even the definition of what a what a free market is is is not a very simple one yet that's one of the fundamentals so so what do you think people are at heart assuming in terms of what is right or just or correct and towards what end with respect to this the second category yeah well you've you've um you've not given me um you've given not given me a shortage of things to talk about there Paul there's so many things including American politics I'm not going to comment on actually it's not my country and um you know I don't want to you know I don't want to don't want to talk from outside um yeah look uh that of course there's always different definitions but I mean I I think for what it's worth um you could define capitalism as something like um the means of production or the the capital of things that's used to produce things whether that's land or factors or that that's largely in the hands of private individuals rather than the state owning and that's that's probably not a bad definition of capitalism free market liberalism that just means that um the institution of the market ideally with a large number of buyers and sellers because things get problematic when there's small numbers of buyers and sellers but uh the institution of the market is sort of center stage for you know the way that the economy runs I know those two things are not actually identical it could be that you could have a society where the state owns um the the means of production but markets are relatively unregulated it often turns out that the two things go together and and that's that's the case in the western world at the moment um yeah well I think um what's being assumed I think I think that the reason people like markets is because they do have a lot of very nice properties about dealing with shortages or gluts so it's a very on a kind of outcomes basis you know getting good outcomes out of a system it does have a lot to commend it so if there's a shortage in something the price will go up that will tend to make consumers shy away from it and it will intend it tend to encourage producers to produce more of it and of course if there's a shortage you do want people to want less and producers to produce more so that's the idea of free market liberalism that if you leave the prices in free market liberalism to move around responding to shortages and gluts then you you can get a system that works pretty well at sorting these things out so I think that's what's being assumed and by and large I agree with it I think that where there's nothing moral at stake in the goods in question like a book or a table or something like that I think having an unregulated price is is fine for dealing with shortages and gluts um where it gets trickier is when you start to think of people so when you work your wage is a price and then there's the question of whether you want that price to be completely deregulated to fluctuate and there I start to get concerned because obviously someone's wage will determine on the their productivity and none of us is in in charge of our lives and we might all find ourselves in a situation where we just can't be productive and then you either have to let people perish on the vine or we have to do something about that and that's that's there is always a very good case for intervening in the economic system at that point but I think there's another thing that I pick up in my book about the free market liberalism system which is it's this mindset of everything is a mutually advantageous trade and again I think that's fine for tables but the question is is it really so great for people and relationships there's this cost benefit mindset that whenever you walk into a situation you have a kind of ruthless regard for your advantage and if the costs of doing anything are greater than the benefits you don't do it and if the benefits are greater than the cost where you have a fairly narrow view of what the benefits and costs are whether that kind of market mindset is okay for tables but it's not good for other things I think. So now a little bit later and we talked before you you you mentioned Nietzsche and and John Stewart Mills in this which of course Mills would come up in a conversation like this because in many ways the at least in the west the assumptions were were were set fairly deeply in this period. Nietzsche of course you know markets you know people get nervous about markets because markets respond to strength you know for example in the United States the new corporations that are dominating one of the more explosive areas of our economic and social transformation Amazon, Apple, Google, Facebook you know you might throw a few others in there these these corporations are exerting tremendous power and and and power not just with respect to you know Apple is a hardware company that wants to get as many people using their phones or using their products but Google and Facebook in particular are essentially you know advertising corporations that have different they have designs on us as it feels in some way cattle and and my the information that I generate and the market the ways that I engage in the market they wish to form the very world in which I live so that I will now respond in predictable ways that will be advantageous to their to their marketeers so you know the one of the markets are wonderful things in terms of responding to context but what happens when the context itself becomes a player in the market? Yeah that's a great that's a great comment Paul and one of the assumptions that's generally made by academic economists when they discuss things is they regard people's they call it preferences it just means what people want they regard people's preferences as a sort of fixed thing and then we design the economic system to meet people's preferences and that's a very actually it's something that taps very nicely into the spirit of the age because we all feel that at least with a kind of secular mindset we feel we can make whatever preferences we want in life and we we set them up and then it's the market's job to sort of meet those preferences so that's the way that analysis usually proceeds but of course the irony is that the irony is that we know we just know that that's not true we know that it's not true that what people's wishes and desires are unaffected by the economic system that they're in of course some some preferences and desires are not affected by that but some are so I always love to say to my economist friends that so economists have this way of responding to people when they criticise economics as a discipline they say well if this is true you go and make some money out of it and and the implication is that um uh you know if something's true you ought to be able to make money out of it and if you can't it's not true but on this issue of changing preferences if I say to somebody well look it's obviously true that preferences are not fixed things and if the response comes back well if you think that's right go and make some money out of it look at advertising it does make money out of it there's a whole science devoted to changing people's preferences so I think you're absolutely right and tapped into a very um unrecognized I guess part of economics which is that the economic system you're in does mold you and change you and so you can have a self-fulfilling cycle where um companies have some power not it's it's limited but they have some power to turn you into the kind of people who want the certain kinds of things that they provide um there's another few issues with the companies that you mentioned of course um which are well understood in mainstream economics one is when you have a few buyers and sellers of things things get complicated and the system doesn't work as well so in the case of monopolies or very few sellers it doesn't work so well and the other problem is joint goods so goods are not just parceled off as separate things whenever you respond to something um and you buy something on the internet you're producing another good which is information about you as a consumer and that can be on sold and so that makes things more complicated and and in some cases open to to exploitation yeah so some interesting issues well I think in you know in modernism and and I think you know as you rightly stated all three of these well we'll get into sex in a minute but at least the first two um are are sort of come out of a world in which there are certain presuppositions as we talked about um and and in my videos I talk I talk often about a monarchical vision and that monarchical vision asserts that we we have the capacity to see things from no place to see things objectively as they are and what the world is basically is a world of things and and part of what we see when we look at corporations like google or facebook is that they're not trading in things and and and we discover you know all of these conversations we're having about we're assuming we can know the good and we're assuming that we are a somehow a an un-reconstructed chooser who are out there in the market making rational decisions for our own good and good ends obviously these things start to break down when you get to things such as um tobacco cocaine um you know I you know some some of these types of things that that somehow here we are we are we are choosers who will choose the good so right there there's a rather non-augustinian anthropology about ourselves as choosers that we will choose the good for ourselves and not the ill um and that the world is somehow out there in front of us and we will make these rational choices and if everyone is free to make these rational choices then you know people will groove up and um cooperate in order to compete with each other and compete in order to cooperate both ways and and it'll all it'll all work out great and um but then of course when you get to the third one of of sexual freedom suddenly the the marketplace of sexuality isn't exactly the marketplace of cars or shovels or you know the the widget which is you know in many ways the widget is imagined to be a thing which the kind of thing it is imagined to be says everything about the modernistic perspective on the world so I never knew what a widget was can you tell me it isn't anything but it can be anything but not an idea okay and not a person yeah so a lot of the videos that I make a lot of the conversations that I've been having get into these questions of agency and personhood and what that is and now when we get to the question of sexual freedom well now we're really engaging in the economics of personal exchange and you know you're right in in that this is the presupposition behind all these threes is that democracy will yield good as if we're really clear on exactly what good is and that um free market economics will yield material good as if we're really clear on what good is and exactly the same thing for sexuality yeah I I think I think you're absolutely right so if you buy a car you buy the car until it's of no further use to you gets a bit expensive to maintain then you get rid of it um and uh if you start to treat people that way then you really have made a transfer of a market mindset onto your dealings with others and that's I think a great danger um I think if I can pick up a few things because you mentioned a lot of a lot of stuff about markets there so it's pretty well understood within economics and I think within society and well accepted that certain market transactions cause knock-on effects which are not reflected in the prices of the market transactions so a classic one is you know when you buy petrol and use it you are contributing to pollution um and and that's not reflected in the price generally so so that's well understood that has a technical name in economics I don't want to bore you but it's called an externality but it's well understood um something that's come up recently in some very interesting experiments is is the effects of markets on the social situation so we're not talking about people yet we're just talking about how we perceive interactions between people and this is this has come up quite uh recently and it's something called motivation crowding out and if if I can just say a little bit about that it's the idea that when a commercial mindset walks into a situation or when a commercial mindset takes over a situation it transforms it so a very famous example was an experiment where uh there were a bunch of daycare centers in Israel where people were turning up late to pick up their kids so they must have had an economist on staff they said let's put on a monetary fine for turning up late and lo and behold as you wouldn't expect the late coming increased now why could that be the case well the answer that the authors gave was this that prior to a fine a financial fine being in place turning up late was perceived as morally bad behavior it was thought of in a moral frame once a price was involved turning up late became like paying for babysitting and so if you had a really high-flying job your time is very valuable to you why not turn up a couple of hours late and pay this relatively cheap babysitting so the entry of an economic or a commercial mindset into the situation can transform it and transform the way people think in a moral frame to a commercial frame and we all know how commercial frame works you've got your own objectives you make them up you don't have to justify them to anybody and then you do ruthless cost benefit analysis on every occasion to get what you want and so that is also becoming better understood as a disadvantage of or a danger of the economic system but i think the last one is what's called commodification by some feminists and this is the idea that not just that there are knock-on effects whenever we buy and sell things or sometimes when we buy and sell things not just that a commercial mindset will change the way that people relate from a kind of social norms determining it to to cost benefit analysis not only those things but that the people themselves are shrunk and depersonalized and feminists call this commodification it's seeing people themselves as commodities and i think that these are the these are the three i guess dangers of the economic system i've spoken in favor of it i've said that it's very good at dealing with shortages and so on but it has these disadvantages knock-on effects distorting social situations and devaluing people well i think that if it's a relatively simple matter if you transfer this framework onto the sexual revolution i my strong conviction is that you start to see the same thing there if you give people unlimited freedom to do whatever they want with their preferences that they choose freely then what you can get is you can get knock-on effects generally for children and people who are harmed by relationship breakdown you can get the transforming of situate of social situations into a kind of market mentality and you can get depersonalization of of the parties themselves so one of the claims of my book is that although people think of the sexual revolution as a kind of triumph of the left the liberation of women and so on and i think there's some truth in that i don't wish to be misunderstood although it is motivated in many ways by that the outcomes have been a transfer of a market mentality into contemporary sexual ethics which actually makes it if i can use a hackney phrase here like neoliberalism just wanting to use markets everywhere in society for adoptive babies it that's the phenomena of neoliberalism and i think the sexual revolution shares a lot of neoliberalism's ethos that's really interesting you know again it occurs to me that so part of the package of modernity was democracy free markets but also part of the package of modernity was in a sense when the when the when the roman catholic church was called to account for stake burning and the like was the elevation of the person that even even the church does not have the authority to take the life of an individual and that of course sort of gets instantiated by that that reading of of romans 13 because in a very subtle way the state has the power of the sword at least in our modern democracies the church does not you know if if someone has been you know recalcitrant in their tithing or church attendance i don't have a church dungeon underneath living stones to lock them up or you know to do things to them to get to to correct their wayward souls that however the state has church now i wasn't going to before i was scared of the dungeon there's a story behind the living stones dungeon anyway i won't get into that and and it seems that the story behind the red crab behind you but that's another question for another time you have to look at george peterson for that one oh okay okay right the lobsters but it's interesting that the you know the the third the third of your friends you know the the third the third of your fundamentals is it seems to me a far newer addition than the first two that it it was in the you know it was in the counter culture and you know perhaps we can talk about technological disruptions here too because you know we might look at google and facebook as technological disruptions of the kinds of markets that we understood general motors or general electric in operating within yeah and suddenly with google and facebook technology has severely disrupted the kinds of things that we can attach dollars to not things so much but information now is information is power which means information is money and and then in the in the in the sexual revolution and the you know one of the things that jordan peterson was quite apt to bring up we don't probably have a very clear idea of exactly what inexpensive reliable birth control has done to the marketplace of sexuality there was a there's a video on youtube done a number of years ago by i think it was the austin institute i don't know who those people were but the the video was very much about um the economics of sexuality and their argument was that with pornography with cheap and effective birth control with the the uncoupling of the assumption of a a lifelong enduring commitment to you know heterosexual congress um suddenly the price of sex got very cheap and what's been really interesting to me since i've started doing jordan peterson meetups is talking to a generation beneath myself in which what i hear from them is that 20 of the men are sleeping with 80 of the women which would very much be an economic observation with respect to um sexual behavior understood through a market lens which which i think goes to your point but but you know the you know i want to highlight the technological disruptions of contraception pornography the social disruptions of the decoupling of you know let's say the shotgun wedding where the father walks in and says well now you've bought the cow you're gonna have to pay for the milk um so i don't know how to that fits into your picture here in the book yeah there's a lot of um a lot of uh interesting issues and a lot of work has been done on this so um um the noble prize-winning economist gary becker did a great deal on um how the economy affects people's um attitudes to marriage and and not so much sex he doesn't talk to in great detail but he does talk a lot about marriage and about the way that we view relationships um yeah i well there are so many there's so many things there to comment on that uh i don't know where to begin um look i would say that um one of the things that i learned from reading stephanie coons's book that i referred to in in my book is that um the 1950s was a particular um high point in the status of marriage in the world and and she in her view it's because coming out of years of decades of deprivation and a world war people were were very prepared to count their blessings rather than hope for a very idealized life and so um people were prepared to to stay in marriages and try and make them work and marriage was extremely popular in the 1950s as a social institution and then that started to unravel for for many of the reasons that you said after that um look as a as a christian um i um because i think that humankind is has uh has fallen short or is sinful i don't particularly like looking back to any kind of golden age of anything um and and that would be the same in the 1950s looking back at marriage so for example um sadly i think in that era there were situations where persistent emotional physical and sexual cruelty were tolerated when they shouldn't have been and i mean both for christians and and for other people um but i do ask the question in the book whether we've gone too far away from that um and i suppose a metaphor that i could use is let's think about driving for a second um when you drive uh you could have got it you could get stuck into a traffic jam or you could have an accident now most people don't plan to have an accident even though it's possible they do plan for traffic jams if you leave the play if you leave your house at 8 30 in the morning and it's a big city you know you're going to be stuck in traffic so you allow a bit more time you build it into your life but you never leave the house i don't think thinking oh i might have an accident today i better prepare for that in other words there's something that you know that's possible but because it's so unlikely you screen it off and you don't adjust your behavior well relationship instability is now so common that i think that it's moved from the accident category to the traffic jam category just to say i think that um there's been there have been other times when you could reasonably expect relationships to be stable enough to invest in them to bring up children to build careers where one person stays at home and one person works hard of their career and you could kind of rely on the relationship continuing and you knew in the back of your mind that that's that doesn't always work out the tragedies happen divorces happen and so on but you could kind of base your behavior like that you could treat it the same way that we treat car accidents we don't plan for them but now the relational environment is so unstable and um uh and it's harder to rely on um the continuation of relationships that actually people are starting to factor that into their thinking so you have pre-nuptial agreements have all sorts of things that are starting to be fed into the relational world and therefore people the danger is that people will be less prepared to invest in relationships and that will self-perpetuate itself and it will become even more unstable so i don't advocate for a world where um persistent emotional physical or sexual cruelty is sort of swept under the carpet in the way that it used to be but i do wonder whether we've gone too far the other way that's well i think um it's very very interesting and it and to me it's sort of because when we say okay the uh relation the relationship environment has become so unstable it's very especially when we look at that from the you know one of the questions we started at which is freedom from and freedom to what what afforded past generations the capacity to maintain a stable relationship for 20 30 40 50 years now not again Stephanie Koontz is right in that well with um with a lower life expectancy you know perhaps especially with respect to men men married later in life because they needed to accumulate a certain degree of wealth beforehand um you know that the there's a there's lots of moving parts and all of these and all of these matters and and and the affordance of the you know the a lot of people in looking at the divorce rates of the 70s and 80s had made the observation that the observation of marriage is breaking up then recalibrated people in terms of what their expectations could be with respect to relationships sure i'm sure that's right and and i didn't mean to um uh to sort of glide over what you said earlier the things that you mentioned such as um um you know the technologically the technological availability of a kind of sex in pornography and and contraceptives and the thing that gary becker emphasized was that um that this economist that as the female wage rose in the post-war era that it became more expensive in terms of foregone income for anybody to stay at home and rear a child and that was usually women and so as as female wages rose it became expensive for them to stay at home in terms of what their alternatives they could have and so the number of children dropped and that's a worldwide phenomena so it's not it's not a cultural thing it's not an american thing it's just a worldwide phenomena and so and so then the less children there are in a marriage the less um because children are one i wouldn't say all but they're one of the benefits of a marriage they're because children when i bet the fewer children there are the less is at stake in marriage breakup and all these kinds of things these are these are well um yeah i think you're right about these i think you're right about these effects they're definitely a lot of moving parts as you put it now here's a question so i've been ross douthat who's a opinion columnist in the new york times recently wrote a very interesting book um on decadence his argument his argument is in the book that a variety of variables um not the least of which is declining birth rates um is at least partly responsible for um and imagined stalling of progress basically from the 1970s forward till today um defined paul what's that how is progress defined yeah that's that's the tricky thing and so when i first heard this thesis i was quite doubtful of it um douthat in his book has a number of chapters that i found to be quite interesting um you know for example he laid out some things you know if you were to live in let's say i'd run let's say between 1860 and 1960 let's look at transportation economics uh technology many of these things and then let's say between 1960 and 2020 you know the obviously the information age has been a major change but you know your travel time from new york to london or new york to san francisco has you know hasn't changed much from let's say from 1920 to 1960 your travel time from new york to san francisco well you're going to take a train or an automobile perhaps probably a train but from from 1960 to today your travel time between these two distances not much has changed and so anyway it's a very interesting thesis and it's a very interesting argument and a lot of this he ties he ties to questions of birth rate um and and of course for me this gets into all kinds of very difficult questions to answer such as the good um but but what strikes me about your thesis and these fundamentals which i think i think you're very much right about them that these are in many ways the sort of the presuppositions um that are commonly shared and have in we would say that perhaps it's since the 60s that the third one comes online really before the 60s not as much um what will happen if these three um if especially the first two give way and you know because in the 20th century i think it's part you know so where where did we get these presuppositions from i think it's it's not too hard to assert that the western democracies that won both the second world war and the cold war well of course democracy is better than either communism or fascism because we won the war um of course free markets are better than a soviet style centrally planned economy in the 20th century however you know some of these you know especially in the 1920s and 30s some of these were very much up for grabs you know many intellectuals in the 20s and 30s imagined that well communism is clearly the way of the future because here our intentionality and our capacity to to wield these new technologies such as economics will yield prosperity and then it didn't um now a lot of the things knocking on the door when you read someone like let's say um uval harari is saying well democracy is what as as google and facebook continue to tinker with our definitions of good um you know maybe ai will be the new state and facebook as we speak is trying to set up its own supreme court to judge censorship on their platform so you know it's it's very interesting it's very interesting to wonder what kind of a society we will have with different fundamentals that's a great question um i i with the economic one you mentioned the soviet central planning and i am actually persuaded by that i have to say when i look at a country like um nor it's it's nice to take uh places that are in many respects similar culturally but they have different economic systems unfortunately they have different political systems as well so it's hard to to really pin it down but look at north and south korea you look at hong kong and mainland china uh you look at um east and west germany and at least you can say this i think that the combined system of marxism plus central planning was not as effective economically as as the kind of market system so you don't it's hard to get control experiments and these things but as far as they go i i find those fairly persuasive myself as far as you know the economy the central planning i mean it's interesting uh you never know what the future holds and and we are now at the stage where information technology is getting so sophisticated that maybe sometime in the future central planning quite differently to how the soviets envisage it might become feasible again and so that's an interesting question for the future but i don't think i don't think we're anywhere near that yet um so i'm kind of um persuaded about the pragmatic usefulness of the market system over and above those other things um with democracy i think a key question is does democracy um help vulnerable people or help the weak we might put it that way without meaning any patronizing um i mean it's a it's a tribute to niche nature that if you talk about the week it sounds patronizing i don't mean it that way i just mean that some people are more powerful than others in this world and that's that's just a fact um so i think a key thing about democracy is does it protect vulnerable people and i think i think it doesn't necessarily because if you have populist governments if you have a kind of social atmosphere which doesn't care about people who are who are weak or marginalized i don't i don't see anything in democracy that will necessarily make it care for the weak or the disadvantaged people in the world now historically it has done so it's had a better record than than kind of totalitarian states and um at least in some dimensions um and i think that's probably because democracy is is empowered to be what i'd call good democracy when it has an idea when this idea that people are fundamentally equal is not just not just at voting time but it actually it actually permeates the system that people have fundamentally equal value when that's in place i think democracy is a is a very good system um but as that wanes or as it um perishes through time i'm not so sure what that will mean for democracy i i have a really interesting tutorial um that i take my classes because i'd love to to talk about if if if i can do that yeah sure so what i do is um there was this great article about um fixing up um uh pollution in the world this was a serious proposition by some academics that we breed everybody to be half the size and we have patches on our hands to stop us like eating meat so if you were to shrink everybody into dwarfs and make everybody um eat plant-based food you would reduce the the environmental impact of every of the of the population of the world enormously maybe even harvard um because the the ecological footprint of us depends a lot on our mass and on our size so anyway this was suggested as a serious alternative to to other policies that they had in mind talking about global warming but the point stands even if you're just talking about pollution and um so i give this to my classes and i say who agrees with this being a compulsory policy that we breed people to be smaller and uh can you guess how many people support it paul almost nobody that's right nobody supports it so i then ask them who believes in breeding animals and as you know providing no cruelties involved it's just for breeding animals and you treat them pretty well and about half of the people do so i ask that half okay if you believe it's okay to to breed animals why don't you believe it's okay to breed people and they can't usually answer it they they fluff around for a while so eventually i just put it to them and i say look you think people are more valuable than animals don't you and and they say yes we do and then i say why and there are three answers that come up the first answer is some kind of spiritual or religious answer so as a christian this this is the one i would hold that people are a special creation by god so they have special dignity relative to animals animals are not um animals are important but people have a sort of supreme dignity and there are other religions or spiritual aspects which affirm that so that's one group of answers the next group of answers is that it's an illusion we're not actually more valuable than animals but because just like dogs might look after other dogs and preferences to cats or herd animals might look after each other in the herd we look after each other and part of that is the delusory belief that we're more valuable than animals but it's it's a lie and then the third belief and this is by far and away the most common one is that we are more valuable than animals because of our greater capacities so capacities for relationships dexterity creativity all these things even if you allow animals have certain amount of these it's clear i think self-evident that humans are far have a far greater abundance of many of these capacities and that i think is is the most popular view the one about it being an illusion runs into the problem of jean polsatry call bad faith where you you continue to believe something that people are more valuable than animals but you know the reason you have for believing it is a lie and that's a kind of corrosive of your own integrity really so the third answer is really the one that i think flies the best so i said okay we're more valuable than animals because of our greater capacities so i say what about applying that criteria that you've just acquired across species within species are people equal are they fundamentally equal and that's when the conversation gets very interesting and i think that ultimately clear thinking people if they reject any kind of spiritual notion or any kind of spiritual purpose for the human race will find it very difficult to not assert that people actually aren't equal or aren't equally valuable and some of my students actually say that they say oh on reflection i think people aren't aren't equal or aren't equally valuable and that i think is the big difference between democracy and sexual and market freedom i think democracy still holds on to that at least at voting time and maybe at other times it still holds on to that idea that people have fundamental equal value but i don't think market economics and sexual freedom has any pretensions that people are equal and i think that particularly and and perhaps we've always accepted that for markets but what's relatively new is in the sexual arena we don't think that people are all equally valuable and deserve equal treatment because because sexual sexual selection is all about preference i and in fact marriages i prefer i mean it's terribly uneconomic which you know if you read let's say brave new world well you're not allowed to have preference and another another book that it's less likely that you've read a book about the onita community at the end of the 19th century which is a fascinating book because here this little free sex egalitarian sort of christian sort of you know community that eventually went completely american mid-20th century economic selling flatware but the origins of it the the the founder of it did not permit what he called um you know sticky sticky love where once two people got too close he would you could have you could you could you know basically put in a request to have sexual relations with anyone in the commune but it was centrally planned so the sexual aspect was centrally planned and it eventually um wandered over into eugenics unsurprisingly now now i'm really curious because of course i was in i was in australia in in 20 gosh a few seems like forever ago because of this pandemic because i was in australia in 2019 and australia interestingly enough is this large land mass with you know 25 million ish population not very far away from you know billions and billions of people one of which being the people's republic of china where ideas obviously ideas of democracy are are not seen with much um you know are not looked upon but also at the same time they are creating this entire economy of value with with respect to government cooperation and a social score now and and i'm curious you know it's your book is really interesting because here you have this australia is in some ways sort of this this island of western ality in the east and obviously continuing to get um you know significant levels of immigration from other countries of the east and significant influence i'm curious how i'm curious how your book plays in australia in this way given the fact that china quite clearly i think is central you know a one-party government you know dabbling in you know getting into free market economics i'm really curious where this goes with them yeah i try i've tried um i've tried to write the book in a way that it's um not particularly culturally specific um australia seems to me to to follow many of the trends that other western countries do so some of the things we've been talking about um about uh relationships are true in australia as they are in the u.s the the shift in politics from about the 1980s onwards which was um more in favor of market deregulation and led to greater inequality that's that's true in australia as well although there's there's more um there are more what economists call transfer payments in australia than there are in the u.s so taxes are higher and and benefits to people are generally higher um yeah it's interesting you know certainly different different political systems uh value things differently um going back to what you said about um about uh sex i i suppose i have to be a little bit careful it's true that it's true that um that there's there's equality along several different dimensions so i don't mean um that i think that um people are all equal when when people are choosing marriage partners for example obviously there are differences in people there are things that people find attractive things that they don't and i actually think that's a god-given thing and it's something to be celebrated and enjoyed for a period of time um but if uh relationship formation and breakdown is a kind of ongoing thing that happens all through one's life then that becomes the norm of how how one lives all the time and that seems to me um to be um not a great thing it's it's kind of uh not good for people to be in that situation all the time uh but there's also a sense of uh what we were talking about before whether you treat people as things or whether you treat people as people so the difference is if you buy a car it no longer ceases to function very well for you you get rid of it um so if you know your parents are supporting you you value them but if they if they stop supporting you or they get old and frail you just break contact with them because you can't get anything out of them anymore um that kind of that kind of uh market mentality applied to relationships is what i think is is very destructive and i think it's part of the encroachment of market thinking onto onto the world yeah do you think um there are bulwarks against that in democracy yes i think you're i think there are that's a that's a great question i haven't thought about it in quite those terms but for example if economic inequality gets too severe although i do actually agree with you that um sometimes concern about equality is not so much a concern for the least privileged other people it's a concern for me that i want to get my hands on what the what the rich have got so i'm concerned about inequality has all sorts of motives but whatever the motives it's true that if economic inequality gets too severe then you might start to get in a democracy you might start to get democratic pressure against it um so i think i think that's right i think democracy does do that it's harder with um it's harder with the sexual revolution i think because um that's a very complicated question but i guess i guess for example um children don't vote young children don't vote and if they but if they could vote would they vote for the kinds of um conventions and laws that we have about marriage dissolution i don't know that's a that's a very good question but they can't vote they're too young to do that and this is one of the other this is the other problem about democracy is who's in and who's out as far as as who can vote and democracy is a great technology for stopping a small group oppressing a large group but as long as we don't forget but some people can't vote and and their interests have to be protected as well you can't rely on them protecting their own interests through their vote because they can't well and which interests i i often you know when you get when you get down to the american political system regularly let's say people on the left complain because they they would argue that many of the people on the right vote for who they vote for because of in american politics what we label as social issues have tended to dominate issues such as abortion um so so on the right it tends to be abortion on the left it tends to be let's say gay lgbt rights and and you can hear this because um or anti-racism you can hear this because these are the these are the defeater arguments brought out into the political space in order to um scare your group back you know to keep them from wandering from the base and so one argument will say it's all about the supreme court justices so that we can overturn roe vs weight and the other side will say it's all about supreme court justices so that we can keep them from overturning same-sex marriage and and what's interesting is that even though you know james carvel says it's the economy stupid when i look at the way a lot of people without a lot of money vote um they voted for tax cuts for very wealthy people um you know in order to hopefully one day overturn you know make abortions harder to get and it's like well this is this is very interesting the way this democracy is working but i'm very interested in your idea of and i would phrase it this way um james k smith is a is a philosopher at calvin college who has uh written some books on what he calls cultural literacy or cultural liturgies and jordan peterson in terms of a lot of his work about human behavior talks about the fact that we act things out this this acting things out is is something very deep and basic in terms of our formation about a lot of these presuppositions and and i think you're you're very much on to something in democracy that the that the acting out of of voting becomes a strong cultural liturgy for ideas of human equality even though you know right now there's all kinds of concern about is is you know russia is russia trying to influence the election on facebook um i talked about this with someone yesterday i said yeah my mother is too my mother is trying to influence the election on facebook it's just that when we think about russia doing it on one hand russia is more powerful than my mother on the other and she's i've used this illustration now twice and she's gonna stop using me as illustrations in your videos paul just like my kids don't like me using them as illustrations of my sermons yeah but but this is a very this is a very interesting idea of democracy as sort of a cultural liturgy that you know every couple of years we we all practice something which deeply communicates a certain equality of people and the i love that little illustration about why people are more valuable than animals because again so often with so many of these fundamentals these presuppositions if you ask people about them they'll sort of look at you like you know this is something i know and believe but don't ask me to justify it and so sudden part of the brain will just make up a story that to satisfy themselves emotionally but i really am interested in this idea of of democracy as a as a formation mechanism that attempts to reinstill within people at a very deep level the equality of people and i think you know obviously christianity church these kinds of religious liturgies have the same effect in us and and the discomfort that you feel as a christian which of course i would agree with that increasingly market dynamics being used and and and people being part of them is a is something that is that is giving you dissonance on the level of your presuppositions you want to say hey people are to be loved and not used which is of course you know the deep at the heart of the christian message yeah i i agree with you it's it's a nice phrase actually that voting is a a ritual or a liturgy i think it is i think it's a it's a moment where people affirm that um even the most um ignorant or incapable or um for one of the better word weak contributor to society has the same say as somebody else i also agree that um christianity proclaims equality of people in certain in certain respects that are absolutely fundamental it's it's i think it's important to say what they are they're they're by virtue of creation that god's created everybody uh everyone is um as it were his property and so um we we all stand equal before him on that basis it's not very complimentary to say this but uh we're all sinners so we're all equal in that respect um as the bible puts it everybody is uh fallen short of god's standards and um uh another great biblical theme is is redemption that god has um has sought us and wants to save us and that's offered uh indiscriminately so as it says in john 3 16 god so loved the world um that he gave us some that whosoever should believe in him should not perish but have eternal life so it's offered to everybody without distinction so uh on an equal basis so yes i think that that those foundations for equality are certainly um uh very deep in christianity and um not only for that reason um but partly for that reason they're very deep in the west as well because of course the christian tradition has formed the west alongside other things um so yeah i i think that's i think that's absolutely right and so i think people are right to feel uncomfortable uh with depersonalization and to feel as though they're just machines or parts of a you know cogs in a machine that are going to be used and and discarded when they're no longer necessary um and so that's a these are great tensions in our society and i think um to go back to um the two people i do you want to know who are who i think are prophets for western fundamentalism yeah everybody has to have every um great religious movement has to have prophets even anti-authoritarian ones they they often cite people with such reverence that you get the sense that they're actually they actually are prophets well i think um john stewart mill and nicha are the prophets for western fundamentalism so john stewart mill says that people you can do whatever you like up to the limit of where you start to hurt somebody else and so that sort of strongly gives the impression that um all preferences are as good as each other as long as they don't actually cross anybody and then nicha comes in and helps us because that actually doesn't answer a lot of the questions of life because many of the things we do impact on other people in fact if you have a functioning community that's almost as definition that what you do impacts others and what they do impacts you so john stewart's more criteria john stewart mills criteria is a very weak criteria which won't work for a lot of social situations so what do you do in situations where whatever you do you're going to impact others well nicha says that the strong uh the powerful the beautiful they have a moral right to marginalize the weak because that will restore greco-roman greatness to the west which was lost when christianity came onto the scene and and perverted um everything good in culture and and moved us away from the kinds of um the kind of celebration of strength uh beauty dexterity that was the great the greco-roman world and i see that coming back through um sort of unfettered market liberalism which rewards those who are marketable and surprise surprise the people who are marketable are often strong beautiful dexterous etc and intelligent i mean intelligent is often not in that list but when you listen to people talk well he's a smart person but i mean intelligence is sort of the well there's the well who should who should i mean play it up who should reign the philosopher king the golds that's right that's right and i have to say also hard working i mean the market system does reward hard work it sends financial rewards your way it's more likely to send financial rewards work hard so it's a complex picture there's there's good and bad thrown in there but maybe limiting markets to a certain sphere of activity is a good idea and keeping that mentality that that cost benefit analysis ruthless cost benefit analysis away from a lot of spheres of life is a good idea it the the i agree with you i mean that's the part of the difficulty of this conversation is there's so much agreement um but the you know the question the question i think is okay what will limit the markets what will limit this and and i would you know i would assert that it is probably religious ideas and commitments and for example in the context of a marriage in a sense what a marriage what a marriage vow does is is close down certain kinds of marketplaces because the the individual says well i might um you know 10 15 years from now by virtue of how i've aged versus how you've aged how much money i've made i mean depending on the different men and women come to the marketplace um with different values that are appreciated by the other side in a sense what a marriage vow does is say i am off the market and we even use that language and um what's interesting is that it is often these religious ideas and religious communities that and religious liturgies that limit the market and in a sense as so i listened to a lot of conversations and podcasts from secular people who are very much wrestling with similar things that you're dealing with here the difficulty that they have is once the religious realm is sort of pushed aside the question is what in fact will limit the market and then people have all of these ideas about well we've got to we've got to care for the weak and then someone like tom holland will come along and say well where do you get that idea and nicha will step right in and say it's very clear where you get that idea you get that idea from christianity doubt that um in one of his interviews with respect to his book made the observation that you know it appeared in the 20th century you know if you read literature social literature going all the way up to the second world war ideas such as eugenics involuntary sterilization a lot of these social darwinian ideas were very much increasing and and doubt that makes the observation that and as does tom holland that in many ways nazi ideology was you know in full-throated embracing of this nichian ideal and the nazis had this idea that you know what what really went wrong is all of these all of these all these higher level ideas and if we can only look at the way the world really is which we can see now through a darwinian lens that it's important to get rid of states and get rid of inhibitions from kind of a natural jungle order to take over and um and so they very quietly hitler in his first attempted control of power realized that all of his anti-church um rhetoric was not doing him any favors and so part of what he did in terms of gaining power was figure out how to mollify the church so that he can basically come in and take and so what's happening now in a lot of camps highly secular camps is that increasingly they are looking for a religion that isn't a religion because they recognize we need a buffer against markets against these nichian darwinian impulses because they are so powerful and religion played that role and it once it's taken from the field um these other fundamentals with the possible exception of some of that democratic liturgy seem unable to restrain the avarice of the intelligent and the strong and the beautiful from finally taking what they will that's fascinating um i hadn't thought about it in quite those terms but um i think that um just going back to the nazis i think that uh i think that in i talk about this in my book i think that the nazis do embody one part of nichia which is his contempt for weakness so um uh he says in one of his writings that the week and the failures shall perish in the earth and they shall be given every possible assistance this is um this is our neighbor love this is what nicha said so uh the idea of giving them every possible assistance is just uh it just echoes horrifically with what the nazis did i don't think um nicha uh would have been a nazi for a couple of reasons he he hated anti-semitism um and um uh he didn't really think in racial categories that much he had these he had this idealized overman that was was more like um goethe he wasn't he wasn't running a death camp he'd be a kind of artist and so on so i think nicha um probably would well he wasn't an anti-semitist so he wouldn't have been a he wouldn't have been a nazi but his ideas about strength and weakness yes i think i think that the nazis really took that up and as you probably know um um nicha's sister was was given a state funeral by hitler and um there was a there was a lot of recognition that this was the case that there was mutual influence there um as to as to what will stand in the way of the market whether whether marriage uh and whether or what will what will keep marriage alive as an institution i'm just not sure i mean i i myself um my uh my christian stance or belief is that marriage is a creation thing that it's it's given to to everybody and so um it's not like it's not like communion for example which is just given to the church so i think that um it's possible that uh even without even if christianity um wanes in certain areas that there will be other reasons that people will come back to value marriage that people might think that the world is in a sufficient mess that we've gone too far in that area they might go back um but uh i agree with you that certainly having a a transcendent view in place a transcendent reason for valuing people or treating people in a certain way is a protection against the market my my secular friends tease me and they talk about having a sky hook for my views but it's not a bad expression you know the idea is that certain things about my views need outside god to come in and sort of support them with a hook coming from the sky and and so but i i it's good natured criticism and i sort of take it that i think that i think that um certain ways of thinking definitely are informed from outside as a christian they're informed by revelation and if you abandon them um it is very difficult to know why you would not at least at least have a nichian um survival of the fittest ethic as an option i can understand existentialists saying well look we can make up whatever value whatever society whatever human creation we like we don't happen to like uh nichian values we like something else i can understand that it's their free choice that's the whole thing about existentialism you're not bound you just make up whatever you like um but to say that that's an impossible choice to make or that it shouldn't be made i can't understand that at all i can't understand why if somebody um regards people as mere animals hitler actually put it best he said i cannot understand why man should not be as cruel as nature um what's what's the reason for saying you might choose not to do that but what reason are you giving is apart from your raw arbitrary choice right i was you know i was working through some of this stuff a little bit a few months ago you know i was reading i was reading a fair amount of timothy snider i don't know if you've come across his books um written a book um black earth um about um about you know the nazis uh bloodlands which is sort of the poland belarus ukraine in the 30s i mean because they had the unfortunate they had the unfortunate distinction of being subject to experiments from the far right and the far left you know first stalin geographically and politically yeah first stalin takes them apart and then hitler comes through and runs his experiment on and then stalin comes back i mean these poor people and it's these are not easy books to read by any means but i mean timothy snider's observation was devastating in that and i had always wondered what what was the at the heart of of nazi anti-semitism given the fact that you know even as late as the first world war and the middle war period the obvious it was obvious that um jewish intellectual scientists engineers were in many ways at the forefront of so much in german culture well you know think i think timothy snider makes a compelling argument as do other scholars of nazism that you know it was kind of a rabid it was kind of a rabid darwinian perspective on hitler's part that again i think you're you're right about nicha you the you know the nazis can't necessarily wholly be laid at his feet but it was it was the perspective that all of this second order thinking by which we would have a morality which would we would have presuppositions which would come from someplace other than nature itself led to the assertion that these ideas of regard for the weak which clearly are it can be found in the old and new testament um that that these things should be dismissed and i i am quite compelled by the fact that part of the reason that these western fundamentals have become so ubiquitous unquestioned presuppositional and yet people are you know unconsciously embracing them is because of the the 20th century in which both sides were tried at the cost of so much blood and i think doubt it is right that in a sense the west was probably trotting towards okay we're getting away from christianity we're getting away from from all of this all we really need is science and and then you run into the soviets and the nazis and you say oh no neither of those but what to do with religion there's the quandary yeah i think that and i talk about this quite a bit in the book actually i think the second world war was a wake-up call for for the west and i think that the danger is that as the memory of the second world war wanes that we will go back on and some of the debates that are emerging now are are along the same lines that they were in the early 20th century you see it now with discussion about designer babies and so on i think that i think that the second world war it's an unfathomably large tragedy and yet the good that came out of it was that it made people aware of the dangers of things like eugenics rampant racism destruction of minorities and so on it's a very it's a as a christian i'd say it's a it's a mirror moment where you look at human nature and see how bad it can be how bad we can all be because it wasn't just hitler of course it was he was he was a genius at taking advantage of of of human nature but it's it's still human nature i really like what solzhenitsyn says about this that because he had every the soviet writer solzhenitsyn had every reason to turn stalin into the good guy and sorry the bad guy and everybody else into the good guys but he didn't say that he said that the line separating good and evil goes between everybody's heart and and i think that's so right i have a i have an image of how people in the west process evil or think about evil it's the image of a centrifuge so a centrifuge spins around around around and pushes certain things right out to the fringe if you want to separate blood or something you can use the centrifuge well i think that people in the west now process evil in this way that they only recognize evil on the fringe they only recognize it in the in the big bad consequences of terrorism pedophilia dictatorships the hitlers and starlings of the world they recognize evil there but they don't recognize their own ordinary mundane petty evil and so people don't believe in evil except that they believe believe it for things like september 11 so i'm old enough to know to have noticed the change in discourse after september 11 people started to use the word evil much more freely they had always used it for the nazis but they used they didn't use the exact word but they used words like sick or whatever barbaric but evil came back into popular discourse after september 11 and i think i think that that we are making this is the danger of using world war two although it's been a great blessing for us to use world war two as a wake-up call the danger is that we only recognize evil in in its extreme forms we don't recognize it in ourselves because i think many people in the west think that they are basically good people that the system is wrecking and and i don't really agree with that as a christian interesting interesting i've peppered you for with questions for two hours i hope you haven't felt too cross-examined who is your book who is your book for um my books really for two groups of people whom i think might find it interesting um i think christians who are feeling increasingly marginalized in the secular world might find it interesting and they might find that the um the way to i guess apply biblical ideas or christian themes to what they see going on around them i hope that that will be useful to them but i also think it's of interest to people who perhaps feel marginalized in the west and feel that their cultures are constantly looked down on um when really uh western people are often very bad at looking at their own failings or presuppositions so i hope that it will be of interest to them as well so i've um as i say i the style of writing really comes out of my the style of writing really comes out of my teaching uh that's um uh been successful and has won awards and so on so i i enjoy engaging with young people so i i suppose it's written for a younger audience i'm not sure yeah okay well any anything else you wanna anything else you want to plug or say or anything before we before we wrap this up no i mean plugging i could there's the book um i like the barcode on the front that's i like the cover it's clever yeah i i saw another artwork where um somebody is walking and they just basically turn into a barcode so that's where i got the idea of the barcode but um yeah yeah look i am i've really enjoyed talking and i i am i'm fascinated to hear uh just fascinating to hear your perspective on these things as well so thank you very much well thank you gordon and um my day is ending but uh yours is just beginning there in uh in tomorrow land that's right that's right well have a good night all right well have a good rest of your day take care bye bye