https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=IfBfG2z4Vag

 Hi, this is Paul and this is my second conversation with Sid Helema. Sid Helema is the team leader of the Faith Formation Team, which is a denominational effort to assist churches to form, to be able to bring us all up into the image of Christ. Now I know that's very much Christian language and depending on your background you can hear that any way you will, but we're a Christian denomination and so we unapologetically use Christian language. Hopefully when we're speaking in a more public forum like this we can use words that are understood by a broader audience and not encourage kind of this insular Christian talking like Christians often do within their And so I just appreciate, Sid, your willingness to come on again and we're going to talk more Jordan Peterson this time, partly because Sid was just at an event in Hamilton, Ontario. So why don't you tell us a little bit about that, Sid? So Peterson is doing his 12 Rules Tour and he was doing several cities in Ontario on consecutive nights and he came here to Hamilton, which is a city of about half a million on a Friday night and actually it was kind of odd. All day my wife and I hemmed and hawed and finally an hour before the event we went online, bought two tickets. Why did you wait so long? I know, we were tired. It was a Friday night. But anyway, we went and both of us were very thankful that we did. There had been four articles in our daily newspaper here leading up to the event and what I found quite astounding was that each of the four articles focused on a reaction against Peterson rather than on Peterson himself. And there was a rally across the hall from where he was presenting. So my wife and I stopped at the rally for a couple of minutes and then we went into the hall. And I'll be honest, we were a little nervous. Our newspaper has some fairly outspoken views on things and our city also has some politicians all across the spectrum. It's an old steel town so there's a lot of, it's more of a left leaning town in terms of the Canadian political landscape. And we actually wondered if there might be some folks on the way in who were unfriendly and maybe even a little, well whatever. But our walk into the place was completely peaceful and calm. The rally itself that was opposing him was very peaceful and calm. And we arrived a bit early as we tend to do. So we went to the back and just watched people gathering and coming in. And we both said to each other, there's this unusual vibe of gentleness in the room. Kind of a quiet expectancy. And we also noticed that there were a lot of 20-somethings with their parents coming to this event. Especially fathers and sons, but not only fathers and sons. And we found that kind of interesting. There's not many events where you'd see that kind of a demographic gathering. We were definitely in the older, well that's everywhere we go, or in the older group. So that's normal. And finally at 7.30 the lights went down. He was introduced and he basically just walked onto the stage in his suit and talked in a random rambling stream of consciousness style for about an hour and 20 minutes. He named his focus for the evening as Courage and Fear. I was surprised at how little he actually referred to his book on the T'rall rule. But he, in his normal manner, told stories from his counseling room, from his research lab, from his life observations, from his childhood. He wove them all together. And there were several young adults all around me in the auditorium. And being a bit of a people observer by nature, I was quite struck by how wrapped they were. And how, how, my, you know, it's a bit subjective, but my read and my wife Evelyn had a similar read, was that there was a profound spiritual hunger in the room. And this was a 2,000 seat auditorium and it was about 95% full. And so folks came, they bought tickets basically to have their, it seemed to us to have their spiritual hunger awakened and in some measure nourished. After an hour 20, it was Q&A time and folks could email in questions. So we had a number of questions printed up that had been sent in. I'll give one example that kind of struck me. One person had said, I messed up and had an affair and I'm devastatingly sorry for all the hurt that I've done. What suggestions have you got for me? And he was just quiet for a moment and then he said, well, it's basically pretty simple. You must repent and atone. And then he gave a six minute meditation on what repentance and atonement looks like after one has really messed up. And it was, like being invited into, no one of course knew who had sent that in, but it was almost like being invited in to observe kind of a pastoral counseling conversation. I mean, the language, repent and atone is almost more suited for the pastor's office than the counseling chamber. And most of his reflections were focused on the repentance bit. But I just found that quite striking. A couple of days later, I submitted an op-ed to our local newspaper, which they accepted and ran. And its thesis was pretty simple. It basically said this, we had this event in town last Friday night, 2000 people showed up. Your coverage of it focused on four reactions against the event. And you did not give any coverage to the event itself, either beforehand or afterward. What's with this? Is that presenting a just picture to your readership concerning what this event is all about? Interestingly, two days later, one of their regular weekly columnists who had attended the event with his son and daughter, who are both in their 20s, and who came there not as a columnist but as a father, did his weekly reflection on what it was like for him to be there as a father. And interestingly, his entire reflection was also filled with the kind of spiritual longing and hunger that we ourselves felt at that event. Then two days later, another regular columnist, who wrote a lengthy column in which she identified at least 12 ways in which Peterson is on the record as basically being kind of a jerk. Things that he said or done that put him in a camp with those who affirm injustice. And she did not mince any words. And then a few days later, I saw along the way there's letters to the editor responding in both ways. And they're about 50-50 in terms of the different responses. And then finally, the publisher of the paper every Saturday in the edition has a column in which he reflects on the dynamics of being a publisher. And so he reflected on what it meant for him to oversee the Peterson conversation for the last couple of weeks. And basically, he just summed up all the things that had been said in the paper during those two weeks and then did not really develop it beyond that summation, which actually I was a bit disappointed by. I wish he'd had one more paragraph in which... But it was a lovely community conversation for a couple of weeks before and after on the event. And it really struck me what the two fundamental reactions to him are, how vastly different they are. A gentle, quiet, spiritual longing, and an angry, forceful rejection of what is seen as a very unjust way of approaching reality. Is your impression of how he's being portrayed in the media consistent with anecdotal impressions of conversations you're having with people who aren't writing in the paper? Yes, very much. So there's a few folks here. And so I'm part of a network of churches in my denomination that is named Classes Hamilton, the area surrounding the city of Hamilton. And I had some conversations with friends who also have been listening to a lot of Peterson's YouTubes and reading the Twelve Rules. And they generally are engaging him in the same manner that the crowd did, as seeing him as awakening a kind of spiritual hunger and are quite fascinated by the response that he's evoking in that way. On the other hand, last week I was at a small pastors group prayer meeting. We're a close group. We really bless each other in our time together. And I just mentioned that I'd gone to the Peterson event and that I'd been pondering it a great deal. And then during an informal moment in the session, the woman next to me leaned over and said, but you do know that he's a misogynist, don't you? And I said, well, I've heard a lot of folks say that, I can't find that. I can find things he said that lead some people to conclude that, but I don't think they're right. And then she said, well, we should talk more about this sometime. So, and I, well, it's understandable because what he's doing doesn't fit into any neat categories. And so I can understand that in terms of making sense of things, we need to find categories that are helpful in our own experience that work. But I would love to see a robust, warm conversation with different folks who have these two different responses and see if there might be some common ground. Because there are definitely, one thing I've come to conclude is that last time you and I talked about under the title, What Does the Church Need to Learn from Jordan Peterson? And I would say a sequel to that question might be, but what are the things that the church cannot learn from Jordan Peterson? And I think there are important parts to that question as well that it would be helpful to name, to help find a way to have these two different categories of responses find each other. What do you mean by that? I'm really curious. That's interesting. Well, last time you and I spoke, we mentioned the fact that in many ways he's an individualist. He issues an evangelistic call to personal renewal and a personal embracing of one's responsibility as a human being. And then he will say in response to people who question that individualism, he will say, yeah, but when people sort themselves out or begin to sort themselves out, which is one of his main themes, that will ripple out to the people in their lives, the people in their communities. And so inherently the focus on the individual will have communal benefits. And he's right. And that's a theme in the Christian life as well, that as we embrace the Christian journey of, as you said in your introduction, being formed in Christ, which is Christian language, or being brought to greater measure to the image of God, also Christian language, that's actually language that Peterson uses, that will affect all the people in our lives and then the people in our communities. So there's some resonance there. But I think there's two places where there's limits to Peterson's approach to matters. The first is he seems to assume that all of us can do this alone by ourselves, that the call to sort yourself out is an individual personal call. I can't. I can't do it by myself. And in one chapter in the Bible, it says, in the book of Hebrews, there's a reference to a mighty cloud of witnesses surrounding us as we run the race set before us. And if I would begin to name the mighty cloud of witnesses that has surrounded me from the day of my birth till today, those who have been living members of my community, but also those whose works I've read, those who we meet in the scriptures, literally thousands upon thousands of people, without too much trouble, I could name a hundred people whose life has had an impact on my own transformation and seeking to become the person God has recreated me to be. Secondly, the Christian faith talks a great deal about the Holy Spirit as the presence of Jesus living in those who surrender their lives to Jesus. And there's teachings in the scripture about not doing things in one's own strength, but in finding one's strength through the power of God within oneself. And that's certainly part of my life story as well, that there are so many times when I'd felt like I could not take the next step. And then in some measure that at times literally seemed miraculous, some form of encouragement gained that enabled me to take the next step. So that's the first limitation I see in his work is that he appears to be saying to us, this is something you got to do on your own, just buckle down and get her done. And the 12 steps are all part of 12 steps in taking responsibility for your own life and sorting yourself out. Secondly, and this gets to some of the reaction that he receives a great deal in the press. Speaking as a Christian, there's something about my faith that requires a public witness to what justice means as it is embodied and taught and proclaimed by Jesus Christ. The four gospels on every page have some reference to restoring justice, to a very important and very broken and unjust world. And so here's where I'd love to see a conversation. I get it that Peterson rails against ideology. And actually in the forward to the 12 rules, a wonderful forward written by a friend of his, Norman Deutsch, Professor Deutsch explores Peterson's railing against ideologies in a very lucid manner, in a very clarifying manner. And I find that a very helpful critique. And it's also helpful for me as a leader in my denomination committed to social justice to recognize the temptations of ideology to, to, I'm going to use a homemade word, superficialize or in a reductionistic way, name analyses and solutions for very complex justice problems. And so I appreciate his critique, but I feel he overstates his critique. And I'd love to be part of a conversation in which we ask, what do we need to learn from Jordan Peterson concerning a Christian witness about social justice? But what do we want to say? Well, no, not so fast. You're throwing out the baby with the bathwater here. There is a place for public witness concerning what it means to proclaim the name of Jesus in the public square. It strikes me. Peterson is, I first noticed Jordan Peterson by his demeanor when he was being verbally assaulted over the use of pronouns at the university. And what impressed me about his demeanor in that video was how, if I'd use the word meek a whole bunch of Jordan Peterson people are going to go crazy because the way he's defined that word and the way I've said he's exactly wrong on that definition in the Sermon on the Mount, but the way he was non-reactive, I'll say it that way, the way he was non-reactive in the face of this protest. He could on one hand maintain himself and maintain the integrity of his position without hating his adversary or rival in the debate. That's the way he was. That caught my attention immediately and said, if someone is capable of doing this, I at least owe him the debt of listening to what he has to say. And so I did. I have noticed that there are times when he is in a context which is something akin to a rally where he is surrounded by his fans, he's surrounded by his supporters and he decides he's going to start talking about another group that isn't in the room and off he goes. And here on this gift given to me by someone, bloody postmodernism. And I think he is at his best as a clinical psychologist when he is face to face with someone with whom he disagrees. And the monk debate where Dyson really said some very, I think Dyson was inappropriate in that context and Peterson didn't handle it well. And I think he handled Kathy Newman far better. And for that reason I think the Newman interview won him a lot of the audience and attention that it did. I think you're also right. It's interesting because to get the measure of a person, there's an awful lot to listen to. And so when, for example, on the August question and answer that Peterson does for his Patreons and then puts it out on the web for everyone, someone asked a question about there's a personal need and one of the things that this person, one thing Peterson advised is he needs to get into therapy. And you might say, well, he's a clinical psychologist. But I think that balances your correct critique that too much of the focus we're seeing is sort yourself out. And where I think his message is deficient when critiqued from a Christian perspective, especially from a Calvinist one, in our tradition at the heart of our tradition lies the assertion that we are unable to sort ourselves out. And we need, if we could make our way to God, he wouldn't have had to come to us. Amen. And what's kind of ironic, just to piggyback briefly on your observation, I think in our previous conversation I mentioned that a lot of what he says resonates with a teaching in the Calvinist tradition, which has an unfortunate name in some ways, total depravity. But it's simply saying, we're messed up. We need help. There's nothing inside of us that can make it go right for us just by ourselves. And he will basically say that same thing. But then he says, go sort yourself out. And there's an irony, there's an inner contradiction there that he doesn't quite process, I think. I was reflecting this morning because before this I had a conversation with Andy Wagner, who's an atheist who gave up the faith. And we had a conversation, which I'll post also. But when I was contemplating what I was going to say with Andy, one of the things that I think Peterson does fairly well is both and. Both and is really important. And the reason both and is important is because I think what consciousness does, which is the realm in which we have to process things, what consciousness does is tends to focus on, I can think about on one hand our total depravity and how we are totally messed up. And Peterson voices that very well. And I can think about the fact that, and Calvinism does not in any way, and this is a misconception of non-Calvinists out there, Calvinism does not in any way denigrate our responsibility for our own lives. We have no responsibility to express effort. No one has ever looked at the Calvinist tradition and said, ah, their idea of divine election has made them lazy. Calvinists tend to seldom be lazy. It's that Protestant work ethic. But Calvinists, by virtue of their theological system, say that our efforts are not earning status with God. So what I think our responsibility and our tradition and what Christianity has been able to do, which is what in Peterson's own definition separates it from an ideology, is we are able to make multiple points that our intention at the same time and within a tradition and affording a language to hold these things together. And what consciousness tends to do, and I think what our current monofocal media dynamic is, is to look at one thing and at the exclusion of all else. And so if Peterson gives a critique of feminism, well, first of all, you're a man critiquing feminism, you ought not to do that. Well, okay. But men will be doing that. Everyone will be doing that. So when I listen to him, and I have listened to a lot of him, I will often hear him speak in certain contexts in a far more balanced way. In other contexts, I will listen to him and I'll wince and I'll think, this is not going to help blunt this, I think it's been essentially a political, at least in the United States to a degree, a politically motivated labeling of you in a certain way because there's a particular political outcome we're in search of. Right. Right. And just to piggyback on your comment about him in different contexts, I've especially enjoyed his conversations with Joe Rogan. It's a two and a half hour podcast. Joe has hosted him four times. And what I like about that podcast is that Joe is not afraid to call him out on stuff, but then you hear two thoughtful people thinking out loud together and revising their thoughts based on their conversation. And that's a central value for Peterson as well. That's right. And I think one thing that he dares to do that I respect is he's not afraid to think out loud in public. And that can be a very dangerous practice, but at the same time, what he's really saying in part is, I need a community to refine my thinking. And he will literally say that after every speech, something about his thinking has been tweaked because of a response that he garnered from the audience. And that's one of his 12 rules as well, to listen to the person you're talking to even if you disagree with him because you just might learn something. And he embodies that principle himself. That's right. So for example, during the Q&A time, and I forget what the question was that evoke this, but he did a 10 minute meditation on the place of music and dance in the cosmos and in our personal lives and how those two are linked. It was like poetry in motion. My wife and I looked at each other when he was done and we just couldn't quite believe that what we had heard. But here he was almost improvising out loud. And I'm just glad that he has the freedom and the courage to do that sort of thing. And I think part of, so I, you know, I talked with an atheist this morning who gave up the faith. And one of the reactions that I've gotten to my YouTube channel for many people has been, I can't believe a Christian minister would do the kinds of things you're doing. And when I hear that, on one hand, I think, I don't think anything that I am doing is in any way unusual for what I have seen modeled in the church by my father and by other pastor and clergy, many others now that I respect and work with. This kind of transparency, vulnerability, owning our doubts, owning our questions. This is, in my opinion, what the church does. But many churches don't, even within our tradition sometimes. And somehow we have communicated to the world, let's bear our responsibility for this, we've communicated to the world that we are a bunch of ideologues that essentially can't fess up when we don't have it all together. And I think about, for example, I think about Genesis 18, when the Lord comes and talks to Abraham. And Tim Keller does a beautiful job of that in one of his sermons where he notes that instead of Abraham standing before God, God stands before Abraham. And in textual tradition, people switch that around and say, no, no, no, you may not have God standing before Abraham because that makes Abraham look like the one with higher status. But if you look at that conversation, God is open to listening to Abraham. And this is the Hebrew God of the Old Testament, okay? People with caricatures of the caricatures of the Bible. And so this is, people say, well, I don't think it's right that God would answer prayer. No, you don't understand. You don't understand the humility of our God that is on one hand, the God of the universe who is holy, holy, holy. And if he shows up, we should hit the ground. At the same time, will come before us in a humble manner and engage us and be open to our influence. Yeah. And so I think, you know, that be having the courage to speak out loud, having the courage for having the courage and you'll hear Peterson do this, someone will challenge him on something and he'll say, sometimes, well, maybe I'm wrong. Concede the point right there. It's like, no, no, you're not supposed to do that. No, no, you are supposed to do that. Yeah. And your comment that embodying a kind of public vulnerability is something that in our Christian tradition, we have not excelled at. And yet the gospel calls us to do that. And Peterson in many ways embodies that. And it reminds me as well, when I used to teach on the Psalms, a collection of prayers in the Old Testament and the Bible, one of my favorite statistics about the Psalms is that the most common genre that you'll find there is called the lament in which the Psalm writer goes public with doubts and confusions and angers and sorrows. And so that kind of public vulnerability is right there in the Bible's chief worship book. Yeah. And one thing as a leader in the Christian Reformed Church that I'm very grateful for is that more and more congregations are recognizing a place for public vulnerable testimony during worship, where, you know, the tradition was you come to worship and you put on your public best and put on the, you know, the mask and everything's great. And now we're recognizing that true worship and spirit and truth involves a lot of humility and brokenness and an appropriate manner of recognizing we're not here because we've got it all together, but it's just the converse. We don't have it all together. Your comment about that question of the person who brought forward, I've had an affair, you know, I've messed up. And your comment too about the Hamilton event being, you know, this was a people are spiritually hungry. And as a pastor, the last place many of these people would want to go with their spiritual hunger is a church. And that just breaks my heart. Yeah. And so it's, and I ponder, okay, what have we done to set this up? How have we, how have we denied our Lord and betrayed, betrayed him by having this be our reputation? And so then now they, in a sense, have to go to someone who I think will give a lot of good advice, but can't with exactly what you said before, say, but I have some good news for you because the truth is you are never going to clean yourself up sufficiently. And Peterson says that, but there is hope that you will get there. And there is promise. And and I don't know. You've shared a different time, some of the responses you're receiving from your, from your YouTube channel, which I just find deeply moving that, that you are, and actually here's another Petersonian principle where he says, today's pulpit is YouTube. Yeah. It's, it's the place that will reach people in ways that no other platform available today is going to reach people. And you're embodying some of that. And, and so back to last month's question, what does the church need to learn from Jordan Peterson? Maybe some of our methods of proclaiming the good news through our own brokenness needs to break beyond the church walls and find other ways to, to break down the stereotypes associated with church walls. Your comment though about the embodiment, a public communal embodiment is, I agree with you, a hundred percent that, you know, this is why I started the meetup, that there, there is no, in a sense, the, the event you went to started to get at some of that. Now part of my critique, the word justice has come to be used in this context that the church should embody justice. If, if you were to time travel a hundred years ago and say it that way, it would have been understood as condemnation. And I think there has been a confusion and I think our denomination is not doing itself a favor. I think we should use, I think we should look for another word, probably the church should embody shalom because implicit and using justice in that way is the idea exactly what you critiqued before about Peterson, that this is something we can attain as a community and we can attain it by now as it's being practiced and promoted by certain elements in society, we can attain it by enforcing certain rules. So in other words, if we have all of these rules about gender, about color, about, if we, if we practice all of those rules, then we will attain justice. On one hand, that is complete legalism because it is all from us. Whereas this, this idea of shalom that you look at and say, acts two and acts four, where they're, they're living together and they're sharing their, they're selling their goods so that they can help the poor and they're embodying those, those, you know, halcyon moments in the book of Acts. They would never call that justice. Right. They would call it the kingdom of God. Right. Now, of course, justice in terms of a critique, but generally speaking, that word justice means God's condemnation of us. And so I think implicitly when we employ the word justice in that manner, we are, I think betraying, I think we're betraying our Calvinism, quite frankly, because we're saying we can attain this by, by, by enforcing these rules. And as a Calvinist, I say, we have forgotten who we are, which is exactly what Peterson keeps saying. We're not going to get there this way to any degree that we experience and are able to embody shalom. It is a gift of God that is given to us almost always quite apart from our intentional our intentional enforcement of particular practices or rules. Yeah. And I, the word shalom is probably the central word in my own faith journey, that, that, that hebraic sense of everything, the way it's intended to be formed and made by its maker, redeemed by its savior, wholeness, interconnectedness, a word that's in some ways undefinable, but yet embodies a longing that is somehow part of what it means to be a human being today. And the complication with the word justice is on the one hand, like you say, in Reformed theology, it speaks of a God who condemns us apart from the cross. And yet at the same time in scripture passages like Isaiah 42 or the suffering servant who will not stop seeking justice until it is accomplished and who will not break the bruised reed or snuff out the smoldering wick. And so we have, we have again, a kind of a polarity right inside the word itself. Yes. And so part of reclaiming it with that sense of a longing for shalom is, I think, part of our mandate, our calling in today's context as well. I think the intellectual dark web, as it's, as Eric Weinstein has phrased it, what I like about what I think that's trying to embody, because in terms of the U.S. political spectrum, they've got people on both sides, is what we're talking about in terms of our capacity, the intellectual dark web, what they are attempting to embody is reasoned, and I don't want to elevate reason too high because that gets me into other errors, but reasoned conversation about complex and difficult matters. And not a reduction to Jordan Peterson is the savior of the world or Jordan Peterson is a misogynist. Both of those are reductions and unfair. But to say, okay, if you want to evaluate, I appreciate that we all need low resolution thumbnails of people because we can't manage the whole world. That's a function of psychology. But we ought to be very careful when we reduce people to them, and we all have to decide how we're going to spend our time. I'm not going to listen to Jordan Peterson because he's a monogamous. Okay, fine. But at least appreciate what you're doing in that. And then you have the other burden as a Christian to say, here's what I'm told by my master how to regard image bearers, and to love them. And if you read in the Heideberg Catechism, how that is supposed to be embodied by us in terms of our neighbor's reputation. The Heideberg Catechism is very strong on that. Yeah, as an expression of gratitude. Very strong on that. So yeah, and I think just dialing back for a minute, there's a there's a little verse in the New Testament written by the Apostle Paul that is in a chapter full of quotable verses and it gets ignored. But the simple verse says, let your gentleness be evident to all. And I thought about that, and I thought of all the different kinds of demeanors and postures that a person can embody, probably the most difficult one to have everybody notice about you is gentleness. And so when Paul says, let your gentleness be evident to all, what he's really saying is, you got to go way overboard on this, because around you are people who are angry and there's there. And I find that especially a helpful verse for our polarized times, when very often the Christian faith is also parked at one or both ends of the pole, depending on where the person who's doing the parking is seated on the polarities. And I'd love to be part of a community that says enough in the sense of, you know, just silence all the noise and let's listen to each other in a way that is gentle and understanding and then work it through together in good conversations where we don't have to agree, but at least we're hearing each other and responding to each other wisely. And I see in some ways Peterson is a role model for myself as a Christian engaged in these kinds of conversations. When he's not really too hard on his bloody postmodernism. Right. Because the irony is that he, you know, one of the institutions he's been outspoken in terms of Ontario politics, he's been outspoken in terms of his critique of the university. Right. Whatever, however valid that critique is, on one hand there's the validity of the critique and then there's also, well, how do I embody that message? And what you say is that I think part of the reason gentleness doesn't get seen is because anger gets all the attention. Yes. And it's the person that we don't see who is actually being quiet and listening that embodies then the gentleness. I think that's a good word. I think that's a good word. And then to clarify for a moment, the Peterson that we heard on that Friday night, I actually found myself on Sunday morning when I was preaching, I found myself asking myself, there are things about his manner on Friday evening that would help me share the gospel in stronger ways here on Sunday morning. Yeah. Kind of a thoughtful, reflective posture, almost a wondering out loud and yet digging into the word at the same time in a sturdy manner, all these polarities. And I quite literally, I had to drive an hour to where I was preaching and in the car I was actually almost pondering what about his persona would make me a better preacher that morning. I found that kind of an interesting ponder. I found that kind of an interesting ponder. Did you stay for the VIP? Was there a VIP event afterwards? Did you? There was for those who paid the extra. And I think I mentioned it before, the group of us from my meetup who stayed, the biggest impression we had of the evening was how with each individual who came to see him in those 30 seconds that he had to exchange, you really felt he had your, you had his undivided attention. Yeah. And in his, in the August Q&A that he just put out, he did a, he talked in that for a little bit about his practice as a clinical psychologist. And there were words there that I thought, boy, Christian ministers could learn a lot from this man. And it's tremendously hard to do because we know that as ministers how hard it is to do. Yeah. Yeah. And one of his Joe Rogan conversations, he actually reflects that length on how much those one-on-ones after a talk mean to him. Yeah. And how, what a privilege he finds it to be able to converse with folks and learn about their lives and speak into their lives. And yeah, it quite struck me the way he approaches those, like you said, 30 seconds of undivided attention. And how powerful that can be. And I, so I did conversation with James Frazee, who was also there that evening and he teaches psychology at a local community college. And I sat when I, after I went through early in the line and I sat there and being the nosy jerk that I am, I was close enough to watch the interactions and overhear some of them. But the, the power that we see evident in these events, just like you described, where people are hungry and it's, it's impressive. And those who are flippant about it, I think, are not paying attention. It's, it's, it's something, it's something, it's something to pay some attention to. Yeah. I know you've got a time limitation here. Any last things you want to touch on before we, before we part? Well, in last month's conversation, just a little PS to that one, we noted that as a great deal of spiritual hunger is awakened by his talking that in many places, for example, you're meeting folks who would be blessed by having someone walk alongside them, but you can't always find local folks who can do that. And I, I wondered out loud if we could create a cadre of digital disciplers who, who might walk with others in that kind of a way. And so I, I don't have a proposal yet, but I'd love to have a conversation with other folks who feel a similar calling. I'd love to find one or two retired people who have some time that they say, well, I could imagine that I'm prepared to dedicate some wisdom and guidance to this. And I, so at this point, it's a, it's an unformed dream, but recognizing that one-on-one discipleship is so central in the way that Jesus does things. I'm still pondering ways to create support systems for that sort of thing to happen. Just a little PS that's not finished, so to speak. Oh, and I've been, I've been thinking about that too. You know, obviously one of the reasons so many people are coming to me now is because of the YouTube channel. And they get a chance to watch me for a while and develop a, you know, via this false cyber thing, a sense of trust in me. And so then they're willing to step out and have a conversation. I think any, anything that would develop would probably, similar to what we see in church contexts in terms of form, there will probably have to be meetings where there are multiple people. So people get to know each other because these trust is a key element. And so, so those who would be, would be mentors, let's say, they will have to have a certain degree of visibility in order for others to extend to them a degree of trust. And, and even just saying that, as I have so often thought of through my own journey in this with the meetups and the videos and everything, the church has been doing this stuff forever because let's say you have a pastor and not everyone can meet with the pastor. Well, you have elders and, and you're, and people are watching the elders and they say, this elder, I can trust with my story. And then, you know, then you can have a pairing off. And then the, the relation, the unique relationship that builds between those two that maybe couldn't build with the pastor, you know, and, and so I see, I see the Holy Spirit's generosity to us through the church in this. And so when I think about, you know, the fields are white with harvest, you know, ask the Lord of the harvest to send workers into the field. We can leverage a lot of the wisdom that we have learned by the Holy Spirit's good work in the church over the years. So I'm, I'm, I'm encouraged and I, I don't know what God is doing, but a God who could make this world, a God who can, you know, surprise us like this. I'm to be a Christian ought always to be a tremendous optimist. Amen. Yeah. So I'm with you there. Well, thank you again, said, thank you so much. It's a complete pleasure. Thank you for hosting and keep, keep mulling this over. And you know, if you, if you get some ideas or you want to talk again, let me know and we'll, we'll put it together. Okay. I will. Okay. So I'm going to stop recording now, just in case there's any final things.