https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=sdEx2xnYXGo

 That's a new feature. Yeah. Once isn't it? lovely. It probably had some issues with that. People complaining I got my being recorded. Well, have you been Paul? Well, well, you know, we're in the middle of moving our families moving, you know, we're staying in the Twin Cities. But you know, you've probably done I know you've done several moves. This isn't a cross country move from New Jersey to California or to, you know, the Dominican or I can't remember if it was the Dominican that you did your missionary work in or not. But, you know, we got a family of five. There's a lot of crap that accumulates in your house with kids. So yeah, we're good. We're good. Just this is like the first week we've really settled into the new place. And it's nice. You've got a little vacation time in, didn't you? I took a week. I'll hope to get some more. I didn't take any vacation time during 2020 just because COVID was crazy. So yeah, a lot. I've got a lot banked up. Probably more than the church wants to give me all at once. But I'll take it as it goes. Yeah. Well, I've been really interested in I reached out to you a few weeks ago to do another conversation because it seems like and this happens, like I'll occasionally check in and, you know, obviously, you even admit this yourself, the amount of content that you put out is more than any one human being can bear. Yeah, which is great. I love it. So occasionally, I'd check in and go like, well, what are the threads that Paul is following? And I'm always fascinated by the threads that I go, Oh, man, I think we're tapping in or at least exploring some of the similar things in parallel. And it seems as of recently, you've been thinking more about not just with kind of public intellectuals like Jordan Peterson, or, you know, the YouTube intellectuals. You're not just thinking about what they're exploring in the demise of secularity. But it's been interesting to hear your reflections on some of those expressions of the myth of secularism, seeming like it's collapsing, even in our public narratives and the stories that we tell, which are always a reflection of our cultural consciousness. I think like, if I were to sum up your work, as I've been following over the last three years, it seems like you have been grappling really for the last three years, with the ideas that are emerging, the movements that are emerging in these sort of twilight years of secularity, both like you're doing it on the macro cultural level, you know, you're tracing these movements throughout history and Western Civ, but you're also doing these, capturing these personal anecdotes from people who seem to, in their own personal stories, oftentimes like follow a similar narrative arc. Isn't that the case? It's like, I don't know how many stories, you know, you call them the rando conversations where it was like, you know, I grew up in the church, you know, I became disillusioned, fell in love with Dawkins, found the meaning crisis and Dawkins and the new atheist, got either into psychedelics or Jordan Peterson or Joe Rogan or some combination of all those things, kind of exploring church. I mean, how many of those are the script of your rando conversations? Do you think that's a fair summary of like the things that are really intriguing you and have been intriguing you for the last few years? Yeah, you know, I, right before I discovered Jordan Peterson and went down the Jordan Peterson YouTube rabbit hole, I was working hard multiple times through CS Lewis's book, miracles and asking questions about, okay, we just had Ascension Day. Why did Ascension Day sort of fall off the map in Christian churches? We celebrated Easter, but Easter's a bit blurry when it comes to a lot of especially evangelical churches. We celebrate Christmas, but that's, you know, there's this massive commercial wave we sort of have been carried along with. What about Ascension Day? Because most of us, when we look up, we imagine that, well, there's this rock up there called the moon, and beyond that rock, there's this ball of fire called the sun. And then there's a few planets that we sort of have in mind this little image we got from grammar school about the solar system. And then there's stars that are far out there. That's what's up. Jesus ascends up. And of course, Lewis, this is before I had read the discarded image. Jesus ascending up made complete sense to our ancestors all the way up to sort of the discovery, the invention of the telescope, Galileo, Copernicus. I mean, everything has changed in terms of our mental map of this world. And as a local, as a minister of a local church who has to regularly deal with these biblical texts, we have Ascension Day, and it is completely disconnected from the Apollo moon landing. And so we have these two worlds. And basically, most of us deal with these two worlds that don't fit together in a fairly avoidant fashion. And I get grief from both sides of this conversation sometime when I just note that people get all exercised about a biblical cosmology, and they don't seem to have the same problem with a biblical physiology. But there's a field physiology implicit in the Bible. You're supposed to believe with your heart. Well, do you think you believe with your heart? Or do you believe with your brain? What does that word heart mean? Where is mind? I mean, all of these questions. And so I, you know, before I discovered Jordan Peterson, I was thinking a lot about Ascension Day, because I basically, it had pretty much dropped off my radar screen too, till one of our senior citizens said, you completely, you know, you completely blew by Ascension Day. And we know it's not just the fact that we no longer have Thursday services for Ascension Day, but you didn't even mention it the Sunday after. And now I don't think she was terribly, you know, invest, you know, she wasn't thinking on all these terms either. She was basically an older person who had grown up in the routine of, we have a Thursday Ascension Day service. And the reason churches stopped Thursday Ascension Day services partly was because people wouldn't come to them, because why should they? They'll show up for Easter and Christmas, but they won't come to Ascension Day. Is Ascension Day any less important than Easter or Christmas? Theologically, Ascension Day is potentially more relevant to a certain perspective than Easter, because it's Jesus ruling over the world. But how does that work? And that gets into God number one, God number two. And so, you know, over Twitter, once I really hit the superheroes thing a few weeks ago, you, that really lit you up. You're like, ah, this is, because it had, you know, I listened to Jordan Peterson and Sam Harris talk about Sam Harris kind of blithely says, well, my daughter is so into, you know, Catwoman or Wonder Woman. And Jordan's like, she's into a deity. She's into a God. And Sam Harris is like, and this is God number one and God number two. And so then that sent me down the comic book rabbit hole a little bit. And X-Men, I think, I think, I think, I think number one and God number two. And so then that sent me down the comic book rabbit hole a little bit. And X-Men, or not X-Men, but what was this, this one? So, so, so the new the Justice League, yeah, Zack Snyder, Watchmen. So I watched Zack Snyder cut of that, and looked at Miracle Man, and Alan Moore. And it was like, oh, that makes perfect sense, because they are actually, they are actually playing, you know, re-enchanting isn't the best term, but they are playing with the deep questions of what, what, what is the actual shape of this world being saved? And what is the process? It's a myth. It's myth, just in the classic sense that the pagans had myths, and ancient Greco Roman world had myths. I do, I want to talk about that. But I have to confess to that, like Ascension Day is always one of the hardest for me. I remember, I used to do this thing when I was teaching in the classroom. It was the last day of school with my seniors. And we called it Book of Secrets Day, because throughout the year, I wouldn't tell them what I believed on a lot of things, because I wanted to play provocateur and troll them. So last day, when they're out of there, also, I didn't want to get in trouble with my administrators in my more conservative Christian school. So last day, school is always Book of Secrets Day, you guys can ask me anything. And I remember one of the questions was, what's one of the things you most wrestle with about the Bible? I said the ascension. And I've realized in hindsight why it is, is because whether I'd like to admit it or not, there's still that deep secular age programming that runs in the background, like Charles Taylor, James K. Smith talk about it runs in the background. And I don't even become aware of it until I realize how much I wrestle with things like the ascension. Like you said, more so than Easter and more so than incarnation, though that doesn't really make any sense. That picture of Christ, you know, like beam me up here, it feels almost like the fodder of ancient alien stuff. You know, and I always wrestled with that, because I knew like, well, where's he going? Because heaven isn't just beyond the stratosphere. Like, how far is he going? And I used to hate there was the song more of a contemporary worship song we used to sing, you know, maybe 1520 years old, it was called God of Wonders beyond our galaxy. Yeah, yeah, yeah. And I always detested that song because it was like, you know, I don't know, what are we talking about here? God of Wonders beyond our galaxy. It's, it brushes up against this deeply programmed secular story that we're all swimming in in the West. And it becomes exposed in moments like that, because I'm like, where's Jesus going? It's not to the moon. It's not, you know, to borrow something from Watchmen. It's not like Dr. Manhattan that he goes up and vacates and hangs out on Mars for a bit. So that's, that was always that's a revelation, because it actually shows me a bit of a blind spot in my own my own theology. But getting back to the superhero stuff, you know, one of the ways for me that I've been really interested in exploring beyond just like guys like Peterson or Taylor or, you know, Jonathan Peugeot or John Verveke, these, these voices that are kind of hinting at the end of secularity and the appeal that people experience the draw to them, the draw to a Joe Rogan, is that Joe Rogan, whether he's aware of it or not, doesn't play well within the boundaries of the secular myth. He calls people to explore the possibility of transcendence for him. It's through practices like meditation, through disciplining your body, through being really incarnated into your own body, but also these psychedelic experiences, right? That's a huge draw. It's people that it's primarily men, you know, I know there's women that are attracted to the work you're doing on your channel and participate as well. But I don't know the demographic doesn't seem to be balanced, right? It's predominantly males. It's similar with the work I do on my podcast. I'm sure it's the same for Joe Rogan. You know, I've been to a Jordan Peterson talk. There's certainly women there, but it's more men that are drawn to it. They're, they feel this disenchantment. They feel the story doesn't offer them a sense of meaning or sense of significance. And so they're attracted to these stories. Why has Comic-Con, which started off as this niche nerd thing in San Diego, I believe in the 70s, has blown up into an event that I mean, pre-COVID, and I'm sure it'll happen in the same way post-COVID, if we get really a truly post-COVID world, hundreds of thousands of people fill the Comic-Cons. And it's such a misnomer when people that aren't into these stories from the outside, they go, well, it's just because muscular bodies and spandex are punching people. It's like, that's not why people are attracted to these stories. They're attracted to it because it provides them this mythological framework that the ancient pagans had, which gave them a sense of meaning. It gave them moral exemplars, virtuous exemplars to follow. It also provided them this sort of cosmology and helped them understand where they fit in the universe. It haunted them to use like Charles Taylor's language that there's something beyond. And that's why people are attracted to these stories. And that's why they are the comic book stories that are now the most popular things on box office big screens. These are the myths that in some way, you know, there was this book a few years ago, it's called Real Spirituality, and I'm drawing a blank on the author. I've got it over there. And he's got, you know, there's no real data to back this up. So again, it might be more of an instance of correlation instead of causation. Peter brought up this interesting point pointing to correlation between declining church attendance and the rise of video stores. Now that's an old term, right? But when you saw home movie video stores spring up, starting in the late 70s and the early 80s, you also see a decline in church attendance. Now, a lot more research would have to take place to figure out if there's causal connection there. But to me, it's interesting correlation. The argument he presented was perhaps these stories have replaced the preacher. Yeah, you know, these are the guiding stories people look to and they actually give them a story that draws them into enchantment. Yep. That's Zack Snyder one. We can talk about that for a moment. I don't know what what stood out to you. I know you did some commentary on it. But it seemed like one thing that stood out to you that also stood out to me was the scene in which Wonder Woman is kind of retelling the story of the old gods fighting off dark side the first time around. Yes. And to me, that was such a telling scene. I'm curious why that stood out to you. I'll share after why it stood out to me. But I think we were both attracted to that scene. I think that's exactly where the preacher stands. In that sense, Wonder Woman is getting up into the pulpit and she is connecting the two worlds. But our worlds are, I think, a bit more, you have the continuity in that frame of demigods. But now, just as so with sort of with Marvel, you have Thor, who sort of inhabits both worlds. Now, okay, you've, you know, so you've got Zeus and you've got Superman. And they're, they're in they're working in the same plane. And so now suddenly we have connected, oh, what were the Greeks doing? What are we doing? Whereas the canal passing modernist secularist subtraction story, as Charles Taylor calls it, is the Greeks were, you know, the Greeks were trying to figure out the world and they didn't know too much. So they invented all of these, these crazy stories about this or that. And now we know better. And so the Greek gods have diminished and now we have science. But no, no. And what we have is Christendom, which has also been receding with modernity, and at least the Protestant version of it that gained hegemony and very much gained hegemony on in the American, you know, in, in the United States because of the patterns of European immigration because they were, I mean, the United States is basically the marriage of an intense religious, religious zealotry counterculture, which are the Puritans and the pilgrims with drug dealers, which are, you know, Virginia tobacco farmers. That's, that's what built America. I mean, Jamestown was a catastrophe until, oh, heck yeah, tobacco is addictive and we can, everybody in the world wants it. I mean, there were laws in Virginia telling farmers, please, you have to grow food because every square foot was developed, was dedicated to tobacco because it was so profitable, but the government's like, we still got to eat. We still got to eat. So, and, and of course in the North, these were people establishing the kingdom of God. That's what they were doing. You know, I talked to a guy a while ago who was talking about, you know, the founding of New Haven, Connecticut, where Yale university is. So, you know, where are those Ivy league colleges? They're all, most of them are in the Northeast. You know, this is who America continues to be. Yeah. It was some, all those Greeks and the mythology, we're beyond all that. We're, we're up here above the next, you know, heads on sticks, as Jamie Smith likes to say, we're up here above the neck, knowing everything. The entire world, we know is at this level. And what we're seeing now is that no, Freud was right. Jung was right in that most of what's going on is not in this little conscious part of the brain. Most of what's going on is in terms of formation. And so of course, Jamie Smith has been emphasizing that point, but in some ways, he's following up on all the brain science, which is saying, this little conscious, this member of my consciousness, Congress that is working my mouth and is sort of aware, this is not what is calling the shots in many ways with respect to who you are. And what you are is to a limited degree encased in this skin. But what you are is in continuity, not only with your genetic descendants, but with the descendants of your mythology that you are inhabiting and both, you know, receiving the data of the world, filtering that data and also projecting back onto the world. That's much more of what we are. Yeah. And that's why it's to me, I'm so interested in cultural theology, not just reading the work or listening to talks by academics, but I'm almost in some sense, more intrigued by what happens in a Marvel movie, because in art and in story, that's where the sort of bubbling up from the deep places of our consciousness and people, you know, that make music and make art, how that process emerges out of them to create something and how we're all connected to this sort of cultural consciousness that we all share, because we are, we are encultured people. There's no removing you, you're not just an individual that can possibly be removed completely from culture. So the cultural artifacts that we're surrounded with are putting these inputs into our own consciousness. And what emerges, especially when people work together, you know, a song by and large part can be the work of one or two people. When you look at a movie, that's a lot of people working together on a shared story, especially these big, big box office movies, not, you know, indie films have probably fewer chefs in the kitchen. But when you get to the level of a Disney movie, a Marvel movie, there's a lot of people that have some say going on in what emerges in that story. And it's not like they're explicitly aware of the story they're telling. So you take a Zack Snyder's Justice League and you compare that with, you know, you know, maybe it would have been 15 years ago, you had the Dark Knight trilogy, Christopher Nolan's movies, which also was coinciding with like the heyday of new atheism. And what's interesting about those movies, it's a superhero movie, but it's it's grounded in the secular age. Yes, there's no superpowers. There's no magic. Right. You know, the appeal of that story was, you know, that you got this guy dressed up like a bat that's kind of living in the real world. But now you look at the superhero stories now, and it's like, we really want to toy with this mythology a bit more. We you know, the grounded, you know, Cape Crusader, I'm sure I know they're doing another one with the, the Twilight guy, whatever his name is, you know, it's going to be coming out in a couple years, another Batman movie is supposed to be grounded in, in real life. But people are really attracted to these mystical mythological stories. So you jump into a Zack Snyder story, who's really like divisive, you know, the the Marvel Marvel stories, and the movies always, they're kind of like, they suddenly break the fourth wall, you know, from time to time, they do these wink, wink, set the camera to go, hey, we know we're not in the story. And Zack Snyder stuff doesn't do that. It's much darker. So he tells the story about Superman, from the very beginning, that Man of Steel, the first movie, where he's clearly drawing on these Christological connections. So the original creators of the Superman story, they were Jewish, and they were using a Moses, you know, Moses archetype story, maybe in the basket sent down the Nile, Superman sent down, you know, escapes Krypton. These are Jewish immigrants telling a story of an archetypal figure. Snyder takes it and makes it Christological. They even I remember this happening when they came out with that Man of Steel movie, the studios actually put together these like, discussion points for churches at the time to have discussion about it. There was some really clear symbolism, like, sometimes really on the nose. The second movie was that the Batman v Superman one. And of course, that one was really divisive as well. But part of the reason why it was divisive is I think people didn't understand the story that they weren't expecting a superhero movie to start dealing with the problem of evil and questions about if God is all powerful, he can't be all good, which is literally something Luther says, in the face of Superman. Yeah, Batman's wrestling with nihilism, you know, all this stuff. And it leads us to that Justice League movie where now God is dead. And part of the problem that Superman experiences as this crystal Christological archetype in those movies is that he doesn't fit in, in American culture. How many times does Perry White tell him in that movies, you know, it's not, you know, you're not in smallville anymore, the world's changed. And he's always like, I don't fit in. The world didn't want him and then they kill him. How is he killed? You know, the spear pierces him. Someone asked Zack Snyder, why a kryptonite spear like Batman could make a kryptonite batarang or a kryptonite gun. And Zack Snyder posted this picture of Jesus being pierced in the side with a spear. Like he clearly knows what he's doing here. So he dies, God dies. And what happens immediately, something rushes to fill the vacuum. And I saw that. And I saw that story. And I went, oh, I think people are starting to feel as if, you know, Nietzsche said in the 1880s predicted, you know, in the parable of the madman, the madman rushes through the town square saying, God is dead, God is dead, but they're not ready to hear it. Nietzsche saw this forthcoming, the descent, the falling out of the Christian story in the Western world. And, you know, he was, actually, he was concerned about what would replace it. He certainly proposed some theories as to what should replace it. But as that happens, and people are now seeing the fruit of, well, we are never actually secular. There is never religionless spaces. And I think this is something that you've been bringing up for years. I mean, for as long as your channels existed, you've been highlighting people who have been telling this story, who've been showing that secularity is totally a myth. So God dies, what rushes to fill the vacuum is something far, far worse. And the old gods, that's an interesting story, because in some sense, the old gods kept that chaos at bay. You know, so that the, this myth, the secular myth, right, was that we go from paganism to Christianity and improvement. We go from Zeus. Everybody knows Zeus stories, knows Superman's an improvement from Zeus, moral improvement. You got a good looking daughter, a goose may show up, you know? That's right. Even in that scene in Justice League, the god that gives the crushing blow to dark side is Ares, the god of war. And in the Wonder Woman movie, Ares is malevolent. And so you go and be like, well, these heroes are an improvement. Part of the secular myth has been, we had paganism, paganism saw some sort of improvement in Christianity. And we are on this inevitable march of progress towards this utopian world. And now once we remove Christianity out of the equation, we're going to have something better. And I think you've seen in people's personal stories, but as someone who's studied this, people are quickly becoming suspicious that that is going to be the case. I'm sure you've gotten that sense from people. But how are there other places you're seeing that in stories, in cultural stories, or even just in the people that you're talking to this suspicion about, okay, I don't really know if we ever were religionless. I don't know if what's filling the vacuum and the death of God is better than what we've had before. Where are you seeing that emerge? Well, so The Good Place was a television series that caught my attention right away. It was clearly religiously oriented because it begins with a woman's death and she wakes up and there's, you know, Sam from Cheers. We're not in a little Boston bar anymore. So here's Sam from Cheers and he's older and he's grayer, but he's still him in some ways. And he's explaining to another young blonde woman, oh, well, congratulations, you know, you're in The Good Place almost. And then he sort of walks through an articulation of, you know, what is sort of the pluralism account of ontology, which is that we can't know ontology. So this is basically skepticism. We can't know ontology. And there's just one rando that actually got it right. Everybody else got it wrong. And so, but congratulations, you've arrived at The Good Place. And here at This Good Place, we've sort of turned it into a village. It's not a city. It's a village. It's, you know, a couple thousand people maybe so you can get to know all your neighbors. And we've hooked you up with your soulmate and sit down and you can eat whatever you want and you won't get fat and you can do whatever you want. And there aren't any of those nasty, there's only good results, never unintended or negative consequences to pursuing your desires. And so here you are. And, oh, but very quickly, this woman is a little suspicious because on one hand, she's a good person. On the other hand, she wasn't as good as she could be. And this perfect world is not a perfect world. And so, you know, we've got to be careful. And Candace, why don't you just come in andDER AC conditionally. cheap for Sorry, for bass guitar in olla Jay. Glad you asked this pop question. But we couldn't continue talk it into your head and because the system is such now that anything we do in this world is consequential, you know, the, you know, the strange persistence of guilt. This article that I've read a number of times, there are no good people. Everyone deserves damn damnation. It's like, wow, this is sort of like Calvinism. But another way, but there's no grace and there's no redemption and there's no forgiveness and there's no hero. There is no hero. And so on one hand, you've got with Zack Snyder Superman. If there is a hero, we will kill him. Yes. And on the other side in the good place. And so then, then the team now. So this is so American. The demon isn't really thoroughly evil either. And so they, they sort of with all of their pluck and courage and innate goodness even the, the bad people there now, they've now have been have the opportunity to reconstruct a good place that really works. Interesting. I've never seen the show. Oh, you've got to watch the show. It's only four seasons. I think it's all on Netflix now. Now they've got the chance to actually do it. And you know what, you know, the best they can come up with. Having a really nice time for a limited amount of time. And then, ontological suicide. Wow. That's the best we can do. And it is, it is pure it is it was for me one of the clearest pictures of exactly where Chris Arnotti calls it front row and back row. I think I'm going to change that I'm going to call it front seat and back seat, because the people in the front seat are driving the people in the back seat, they know a lot more they're kind of in the back there like I'm in the back I'm always going to be in the back I'm never going to be led into the front but I got ideas about the people who are driving this bus. And it's back row America it's backseat America that tends to usually default to a lot of the older myths. May that be, you know, I never met a homeless person who doesn't believe in God. And I think that atheism is is sort of a luxury good. You know it's it's a, it's a, it's a metaphysic for the privileged. That's what atheism is and I think if you look at human history that bears out. But then now you've got the question of, is there hope is their redemption is, is there something beyond the good place. And, you know, similar thing was Amazon's upload which only they've only put out one season so far, but basically, you know, again, well, we can't know if there's anything after So what we do is, again, we're using science as we download the contents of your brain, we download your consciousness into a machine. And now, you know, lots of black mirror has played on this. Now you inhabit a server. And, but guess what, there's sort of a sub freemium model, you know, in kind of get in and have an okay heaven. But if you've got enough money you know you can you can pay the perks for, you know, for all these little, you know, purchases. And, but that's where we're at, because we can't, we can't actually, and I think it becomes much more trust, we can't actually trust that the universe is such that it can be better than we can imagine for ourselves. But why would we, there's not like a narrative that supports that in the secular story. It's chaos, it's random. You know, so as people become disillusioned with that. What other story. Are you going to tell. And where does that story come from, what is it aimed towards. This is, this is the stuff where, again, we've got plenty of really good, excellent public intellectual discourse that happens around this stuff. And the place where I think maybe a little bit of the front seat and the backseat meet is in pop pop culture. You know, so when we start when we look at the stories emerging we look at the aesthetic that emerges, I think we've talked about this before, Dwight Hopkins, most known as a black liberation delusion I've had him on before. He laid out this framework in his, I forget what his book is called, it's a cultural theology book. You know he talks about the three domains of culture being spirit, aesthetic, and labor. And spirit is that invisible domain of transcendent ideas and values. And our aesthetic are the things that we make that give representation to those transcendent ideas, it's the way that spirit is actually made manifest in the phenomenological world in the physical world so in our stories in our art. And labor is what we do with our work that reflects the spirit that we follow it's how we use the natural world around us and then turn it into something how we work with each other the laws, the laws that we make so you know I'm really interested in these stories, I'm becoming almost more interested in them, because I think those, those are maybe a greater indication of where the macro culture is shifting and heading towards maybe even more so than what happens in. I think that's such a pejorative term but in ivory towers, which the reach of those ivory towers, certainly becomes something as it's transmitted through the cultural artifacts right so you know, whether it's critical race whether it's postmodernism whether it's Marxism whether it's capital, whatever the story is, certainly those things do have in a certain sense of birthplace and ivory towers but where they get disseminated and actually produce cultural transformation is in the cultural artifacts it's in the aesthetic it's in the So those are two stories I've, I don't know those shows at all and I find that really intriguing. And as you look around you see, you see this all over the place. And it's not necessarily something new. Another one I recently talked about was of course Fight Club. Fight Club was to me, that was my, you know, whether you're an older millennial like me or a Gen Xer, that was like one of the cultural zeitgeist movies of the formative ages of a lot of men in their teenage early adult years, that and the Matrix of course. And so one of those stories to me, Fight Club struck a chord. Because one of the things that actually emerges in this vacuum, the secular vacuum is that you, one day you wake up and realize that, and you just played a clip and a couple videos ago from a really, really good was a short video you did 20 minute video playing some clips from a Jordan Peterson conversation that was excellent. I mean he was as succinct and as clear in his communication that maybe I've heard in quite some time. And, you know, in that you did such a good job of highlighting that what we actually end up seeing in these, in stories like this is that we have these values. We're always aimed towards values. We're becoming aware of that and in that way there's no religion this world. And so I think Fight Club for me was a realization that a lot of men in particular experienced as they had built their whole life around being told your aim and your tell us is to find a career and they started to realize that it really wasn't an empty godless space that they were actually following after Mammon, a very ancient God, the God of greed. And as they became face to face with how empty as all idols do, all idols leave you feeling empty, the emptiness what is, you know, what is the protagonist, you know lament about in the very beginning that he works this meaningless job just so he can have nice furniture in his apartment. And he feels the emptiness of that and why did that resonate? It was like an unveiling. It was apocalyptic. It was an unveiling of the God of Mammon. And not that it presented the right response, I think, to that God's unveiling but it showed you something. It showed you something behind the curtain. It's like, no, this isn't a neutral, a neutral space. And I think you're seeing that in those stories that you're talking about, Paul. Are there many others that have stood out to you? Well, The Good Place was one of the clearest ones. What do you think that one was unveiling? You know, that we are insufficient as gods. And I don't think that's a... So, George Marsden is one of the premier historians of religion in America over the last 200 years. And he wrote a book, The Twilight of the American Enlightenment, where, you know, he goes into the 50s, 60s and 70s. This question beneath Fight Club was very much in being asked in the 50s about the corporate man, the suit. And that came up and sort of exploded in the 60s. You know, the 60s are really 65 to 75, the Vietnam War years. And of course, you know, Vietnam was... Vietnam and Watergate were sort of the undoing of the Superman myth. But Superman was the, you know, Superman was Uncle Sam, I mean, pretty much. And so that has continued to bubble up. But, you know, if we think about an anthropology, we are... Peak modernity says, you are your consciousness. And what has been revealed since then has been, there's way more beneath in your consciousness that you have limited access to. And, you know, Eternal Sunshine of a spotless mind. Yeah. You know, so many, so many... or even, what was the movie, the whole movie that was backwards? Oh, yeah, the Christopher Nolan movie. Yeah, yeah. Tenet. Yeah. So, Tenet, no, not just Tenet, but there was another one. I just watched Tenet. That was fascinating too. But there was another one a while ago, which was the guy had no long term memory. So we'd take all these Polaroids and people who listen will immediately... Yeah, he'll put in the comments. So we've, you know, these ideas... So, okay, so why aren't people in church? Why are... here's a more interesting question. Why are... In the Jordan Peterson phenomenon, I just had my first meeting with my local group of CRC pastors. We used to meet monthly until COVID and then around Zoom a little bit. We had our first physical meeting yesterday. And so we always catch up with each other and they're always, you know, what the heck is VanderKlay doing on YouTube? What is good? Because they're not watching any of my videos because, you know, there's a certain segment of YouTubers that are, you know, their lifestyle permits them and encourages them to watch a lot of content. And that's, you know, some of my audience, certainly. But why are people... I love your thesis that, you know, in a sense, Blockbuster displaced church and Netflix has continued with, you know, with ferocity what Blockbuster started. Because Blockbuster, you get one or two or three videos, but you had to return them. And then, of course, I was on the mail Netflix for a while where they'd mail me DVDs. And then, of course, but it was like, why are they calling it Netflix? No, they knew where they were going. Yeah. And so now Netflix is Blockbuster is the crack to Blockbuster's cocaine. And now we have COVID. And now we've got church next to on the same screen as Netflix. And, spoiler alert, church loses. Yeah, I can't tell us. I mean, the story. We can't be as good as storytellers. I think we can tell a better story. But that's hard. It's there's a lot. And it's not all bad either. This, you know, I don't want to demonize this to take a Christ against culture approach or anything like that. But there's a lot of true, good and beautiful in these stories that people like Van Hooser calls the, you know, there's there's the latent church, the church that exists outside of the walls of the church. And we see that in these stories. So it's not to demonize them. In some ways, there's a lot. What is it that appeals? You know, why does so many people will stick with the superhero genre? Right. They go to these Marvel movies and what's, you know, everybody's seen them at this point. But what's the the pinnacle, the climactic moment of the entire 15 years? I don't know how many dozens of movies they had in that final Avengers endgame is not Tony Stark just beating Iron Man, beating Thanos to a living pulp and beheading him. It's Iron Man self-sacrificially laying down his life. You know, and people are attracted to that because there's a degree of the good news in that story. So it's not to demonize it entirely, but there's also you have to have some sort of compass like a guiding story compass to help you determine whether or not the stories that you're consuming are actually true, good and beautiful because a lot of perversion disguises itself as something that's true, good or beautiful. But yet, you know, you got to have what's the Rosetta Stone? Where's the what are we using to actually decrypt those things? So that's the that's the concern I would have long term is that it's not that we can't have these stories or you got to stop, you know, do the 80s youth pastor 90s youth pastor thing, which was burn all your secular CDs, you know, never go to a movie unplug your, you know, I remember kids. My youth group had t-shirts that said kill your TV and there's probably maybe a degree of helpfulness in that. But it's not that entirely. It's that if you're if you're not anchored to a true story, you have no ability to discern whether the stories that you're consuming have their proper telos or whether they are a movement away from the good as you consume them. But you're right. Those the exponential I mean Netflix. I noticed the change in the years I was teaching from when those streaming services came online. I noticed a clear difference in the students and of course the technology in the classroom that was allowed to be incorporated as those changes were happening because they were affected. Some some thought they were effective tools to have a laptop or an iPad in the classroom. But I mean, do you know how many times a student in my class like we're talking about stuff like we're talking about right now and they're sitting watching the office and I'm going, okay, yeah, you shouldn't do that. And there's a degree in which there's just a selfish laziness in here. I'm not saying that I'm sure you'd rather watch the office, but I'm also going, why would you rather watch? What is it about the office that you're so attracted to that would have you bail on this sort of discussion that we're having that attracts you to that story? That's another question. That's really the question I have. It's a it's one of curiosity. It's not one of pulpit pounding when you get everybody back in church and I don't I don't hear you saying that either. Well, part of I love I hadn't I hadn't heard that term latent church. I'm going to have to look I'm going to have to look into that because I think that's right because I mean one of the point books I point to I actually asked, you know, anybody got a anybody a vision a version of dominion that they've used already, because what dominion points to is that in the western world, we are Christendom more than we think we are. And in a sense, the the tell over whether you're going to church or not going to church doesn't necessarily mean what both people in church and outside church think it means. And, you know, church after Jordan Peterson. I mean, I get this on my Discord server. So one of the things one of the ironies is that here I'm a Christian reform minister, but my channel is not flooding people into Christian from church. If there's a church it's sending people to it's the Catholics and the Orthodox. What's with that. Now, And then I have people saying, what's with me that I go to the Orthodox Church on Sunday to receive the Eucharist and participate in the divine liturgy, but six hours during the week I'm listening to you and Peugeot. And so we've got this, this Protestant sacramentalism going on, where six days you shall Protestant and do all your work, but the seventh you shall go to the cathedral and participate in the holy ritual. And, you know, part of profane sacred divide is still there. Yeah. And, and, but it's really much more of a rider elephant divide. Okay, because the the cathedral speaks to the elephant in a way that the, the rider was sort of trained as a Protestant to dismiss. And you know, oh, I'm okay. It's dark. I know what you're doing that psychology, because darkness is sort of, you know, then you can throw all the verveky things darkness is sort of triggering this in me. And, you know, the cathedral has architecture in a certain way, and this is provoking this in me, and the music is provoking this in me, and I'm being manipulated so the, the riders at the top screaming at the elephant you're being manipulated the elephants like. Yeah, so I'm still going in and there's not a thing you can do about it. Yeah. And so, and so part of what we're working on and the riders now. Remember the writers, to some degree, the PR firm of the elephant, as height says. And so now the rider is, oh, oh, well this is, this is spiritual. I, the, the, you know, the, the bland little Protestant church with the talking preacher on the corner, which is my church, you know that's that's that's, this is spiritual and spirituality is, you know, it's all of this stuff is, is going on. But, you know, when Jordan Peterson tell Sam Harris. Oh, you really do believe in God, of course Sam Harris is hard you know it's, it's like telling the preacher he's an atheist, I mean, it's that's that game. It's that game. But, you know, the minion basically says, Yeah, but a big component of your theology is your moral yardstick, and Sam Harris just takes the Christian moral yardstick and puts puts it up against the church and says, you don't measure up. And it's like, well that's that's what preachers do every Sunday isn't it. Hopefully not exactly but yeah. It's not exactly certain kinds of preachers do I write the question is, are you preaching guilt or are you preaching grace. Yeah, you're right. But in order to make grace compelling. You know, and then you get into all kinds of stuff that we've been talking about in the church for the last 30 years, but. Yeah, so the moral, the moral yardstick that he uses is being grabbed from someplace is you I'm going through dominion again right now. And Tom Holland does a great job of, of illustrating this historically. But when we are exploring art and story. It's like when you step into the cathedral it's, it's not really okay, if we were to say that stepping into the cathedral is some sort of psycho psychological manipulation. We apply that to everything. Right. And this is why vervekis work to me is so helpful and he's such a great conversation partner on this because even though we're not necessarily from the top in our metaphysics in the same place vervekis helps give language to the bottom And to me, like if you have the sacramental view of the world and truly Christian, incarnational vision of the world, I don't see dissonance between the fact that I get a dopamine hit when I'm in raptured in song with other people, and that dopamine hit to me is evidence of the presence of God, and it's not an either or for me. The question about it and this is one I've talked with John about and we're going to actually just looking to do another talk together is, okay, how do we know that we're the rider and the elephant are headed in the right direction. That's the question that I have as we assess the cultural stories that we're looking at and we step into the world of art and beauty and wonder, because some might say these are all just culturally conditioned. Right, they're all just culturally conditioned so whatever you get culturally programmed at a young age to believe is true good and beautiful is what you're going to think is true good and beautiful the rest of your life. But then you look at some of the things that seem to transcend across culture, right, right, and you go okay, there seems to also be not just cultural conditioning, but a universal human condition. Right, and what in our universal human condition is for our good that leads and is aimed and oriented towards something good, because even in the good life, even though I'm the good place, never seen the show, they have a clear sense of what the good life is. So I think as people start to realize that, that is where they're experiencing the haunting that Charles Taylor talks about, the imminent frame, they're feeling cross pressured. And so to me what I want to, I'm curious about, we had some discussion with some of the people that listen to my podcast regularly, somebody asked this really good question about, okay, so I think Paul, you guys are making a convincing case, both of you Pauls, that secularism is in decline. Similar to maybe what Nietzsche saw was the decline of Christendom in the West, I think we're on the front end of the tail end of secularism. And what comes next is the question, and is it better or worse than what we had with secularism? And I see like a few different things emerging. I'm curious what you see emerging as secularism inevitably to me, heads towards its death. I see revised revitalized Gnosticism as one thing that comes up. So it's like, okay, the imminent, imminence isn't enough. So maybe the goal is to escape and transcend it. To me, that was the actual appeal of the Matrix movies. The Matrix, and it was funny because at the time where I was at in my own charismatic theology, I was like, oh, this is a Christian story, the first Matrix movie. And then, well, how many ever years, 20 years removed from that, I'm looking back on, no, that's not the Christian story. That was the Gnostic story. Is that the world that you live in is an illusion and you have to get the secret knowledge to transcend it. But that's also, that's a big appeal. I think that's part of the big appeal of the psychedelics movement. Psychedelic seems like you're taking the red pill, right? And you get this transcendent experience. And I know there are people that follow you that are going to get on me for saying anything negative about psychedelics. I know one person in particular who's always in my Twitter feed. Yeah, yeah, yeah. He's there all the time. Yeah, so I see like revitalized Gnosticism, which actually is still in the church as well. I saw it a lot in my charismatic and Pentecostal stream, which I still consider myself charismatic, but there was a lot of it where these experiences are used to say we need to get out of here. We're trying to be rapture ready. We're trying to transcend. We're trying to get beyond. I see that in all these different forms. I also see maybe even a doubling down on the state and politics. Oh yeah, yeah. And perhaps even like the storming of the Capitol was good evidence to me of the decline of secularism. Because the religious nature of that whole spectacle and the liturgical things that happened even on campus, not campus, on site of the White House, the nooses that were built, which again, there was even signs in front of them that said this is art. They're not intended, they weren't intending to hang Mike Pence on the spot. I know that might be controversial, but it was like a liturgical procession of a certain kind of story. I see a few things like that Gnosticism. I'm curious to see where the sort of revitalized panpsychism goes. I don't think reductive materialism goes on. I'm curious to pick John Vervecky's brain about that because he's a non reductive materialist. So to me it's like, okay, what is ultimate reality? What are some of the things maybe you see emerging as secularism dies out, whether you think they're positive or whether they actually bring cause to concern to you? Oh, there's lots of cause for concern. A secularism for all of its... The videos I just did this week, I'm working on, so Jordan Peterson talked to Barry Weiss. What was interesting about that video was both of them are lamenting the death of what Jordan Hall calls the Blue Church, which was basically the cooperative mechanism by which the American Empire, the one seat American Empire was able to rule over the last 70 years. It was a very successful thing for many of us. But that is going away. The liturgies are manifest on both sides, both after George Floyd, you had foot washing, you had on your knees, you had confession, and then at the Capitol, you have other liturgies. It's highly religious. We have saintly figures, right? We have patron saints. What secularity sort of afforded was a mutual agreement to take the most potent, high voltage symbolism off the stage, leave vague Christianist symbolism on the stage. We can agree with this sufficiently in order to continue to combat our enemies. But of course, once the Soviet Union and the communist block were no longer the big threat that they were, and Islamic terrorism also wasn't the threat that everyone feared it might be on 9-11. Everything, okay, now we're putting things back on the stage. Okay, so there's this debate, can the military fly a rainbow flag? So there's a lot going on there. So what secularism basically allowed was here we're going to give this Robert Bell a call, you know, civil religion. His essay is still worthwhile, Googling and looking up his essay on civil religion. So, you know, basically looking at Kennedy. But, you know, for the most part, we will take Christian symbolism, and we will forefront that. Look at the National Cathedral in Washington. We will forefront all of that. And, you know, but one of the things that that other Fight Club question asks beneath is, okay, I'm asked to curb some of these desires. But for the most part, most of these other desires and basic needs will be met. That's sort of the bargain. And, okay, well let's say we're at the end of that bargain. So the perpetual conversation in religion has been that of, you know, let's say our fleshy desires, as the Apostle Paul calls them, our natural appetites versus these other more, these other higher desires that actually lead people to emotionally starve their natural desires. And so you have the monastic movement, you have ascetics, you have pole sitters, because they are, they are attempting to reach greater, you know, Yeah, they're trying to reverse the trajectory towards those disordered appetites. Right. You have to go really, really hard in the other direction. Right. In theory. So, Jakey is, you know, he, because of his ontology is basically saying and his epistemology is basically saying what we can really know with certainty, and this gets back into the certainty game, which, which in many ways we've been on since the Protestant Reformation. Yeah, but, you know, in the recent conversation between Jonathan Peugeot and Rafe Kelly, which I thought was excellent, you should have Rafe Kelly on your, on your channel, I don't know if he's connected on Twitter a little while ago so maybe I'll reach out to Yeah, you should I think I think you'd have a fruitful conversation with him. But, you know, in that conversation I thought Peugeot was quite clear in talking about the relationship between emergence and emanation, because the logos is is as many ways the emanation, and And that, I know john vervecki really wants to get away from a two worlds mythology. But I don't think you're going to get away from it, because the mappings of it are too clear you want to, I mean, if, if you're going to get away from a two worlds mythology then logos is going to also have to be emergent, but it just never feels that way to us. And so when you have Barry Weiss and Jordan Peterson talking about the death of the blue church and Barry Weiss is sort of going on about, oh but we need, I need a community around me in order to see myself and I need all of this, she's she's hunting and Well, you know, I know that wokeness is not an avenue for the future. You don't have to be too smart to recognize that so many of these little woke tricks. If you think about them through there, you're not going to get there because it's purely I think as Peugeot says a parasitic movement. The only unity they have is, is because of their adversary. So once you take out the man that you're working against it's sort of like in basketball, the, you know, you have, you're in the paint and someone you're defending and defending it's or it's Hold the chair. And that's exactly what happens with with the woke, because once you pull the chair, you know, they once they become the man, the cycle starts all over again. And it's really hard for an actual leader to emerge from that movement because you have to be the best at deconstructing and the hierarchical competition to be the best at deconstructing likely means you're going to be a casualty of deconstructing and canceling, which is like, why go I just I don't you're not going to have an MLK figure and move emerge from this sort of movement. I don't think it's possible that the game isn't structured to have someone emerge victorious because and there is there's need like deconstructive movements, there are valid critiques in them. But when deconstruction is the telos. And that's, that's your left, you're left out in the cold, you have no structure to live in, you have no institutions to pass on to the next generation. And that's to me like to circle back like, that's what the concern of Zack Snyder's Justice League is about is you've killed off Superman, and you've destroyed the, the thing I mean, he's better than Zeus, he's better than Aries, he's better than Artemis, but he's still probably got his flaws. And you but you deconstruct that to the point where you kill it. And it's like, you just think something better is going to emerge in that vacuum. It's like, I don't know. And even like I've been provoked by some of the messaging towards Christians that I remember getting a lot in my 1920 years old 21 years old about, you know, the revolutionary nature of the way that you're going to be able to do that. And I think that's the kind of the revolutionary nature of the message of Jesus. And true, like there's a paradox here. It's, it is revolutionary in a sense, but it's like a mustard seed revolution. It's not the way we envision revolutions. And Tom Holland brings this up in his book, this tension between Paul's message and the fact that Paul's like, hey, you know, you should like subject yourself to the governing authorities, pray for them. And then you know, you're like, I'm going to pray for God honor the Emperor. Like they realize it doesn't, it's not for the blessing of the world. If you destroy the Roman roads you need for the gospel to be preached on. You know, so there's the slow growth tension in the way of the kingdom. It's that mustard seed that you barely see and it grows into a tree. It's not, it's not status quo maintenance either. It's just an entirely different thing. It's a third way altogether. And I'm hopeful even like, as I said, I'm hopeful that the church is, I like that term, the blue church. I haven't heard that before. That's actually really helpful way of framing what some people are disillusioned by. And I think simultaneously, some people are trying in the death of secularism to champion to go back to. And that's where you actually get these dark Superman archetypes in the stories. Why has that become a thing? Well, to me, like, if we're going to use that blue church symbolism, the dark Superman archetype is like a critique of blue church. You know, it's like this guy that was truth, justice, the American way we see these in all these stories. Of course, there are these actual dark Superman stories and the injustice comics. You could go back to Frank Miller's work in the eighties with the dark knight returns. And Superman is essentially a pawn for Ronald Reagan. He's got to put out the Batman. But then you also have these new shows and comics that are popping up like the boys on Amazon Prime. You've got the Homelander who's the dark Superman on the internet. You've got the dark Superman archetype, the critique of the blue church. You had another really popular like comic cartoon on Amazon, invincible Omni man. It's the same thing. And so I think some ways people I'm concerned sometimes like the appeal, the appeal to Peterson early on was people seeing him as a voice defending the blue church and like we need that. I don't know, you know, the cult we've talked about this before. Yeah, he is. Yeah, and I, I would hope that eventually he transcends and unplugs from the culture war matrix. I just don't know if we would have ever heard of him if he didn't. Right. He well, at the, the question, the difficult question is what is what is beyond the blue church, and we're getting what is beyond secularism, and we're going there. And so the video I made two days ago, or the video I posted yesterday, actually there's a version which didn't have the ending and then there's the second one has the ending. But, so how can we, how can we conceptualize secularism in some ways it's a bright fog. And, and the reason it's a bright fog is because what secularism affords affords is a degree of pluralism within it. So you have Protestant Catholic Jew. That's the, that's the, you know that that was a very famous book written in the middle of the 20th century Protestant Catholic Jew. There's a sort of the three and secularism. We ought to kill each other when we go to the mall is a good thing. Exactly. That's right. But we will still participate as Jamie Smith talks about in the liturgy of the mall. We'll still participate in the liturgy of the mall. And so there was a degree of hedonism that was afforded, but at least as a culture, we sort of had a sense of too much hedonism isn't good, so that there are limits to this. Again, the problem that you have with, with a with a woke, a thoroughly deconstructive thing is that your leaders must be crucified. That is because that is the only way that they can maintain their status is they must be crucified Martin Luther King Jr. Had to be assassinated for him to now be memorialized and granite on the Washington mall, he needed to die. Because if like you have currently with Black Lives Matter one of the leaders of the organization just purchased a seven figure Hollywood mansion overlooking the heights of the city of angels. Once you get that, you're just in the middle of perpetual. I mean that it's that spiral that Peterson is deathly afraid of. And so he sort of stands at the top of it and says, you know, the blue shirt in the blue church we didn't go down there. And he's right. And so a lot of other people are look at him and like, oh okay he's on our side, but Peterson on the other side says, he says okay Christianity, Christianity was what kept us from that, but. And that's in these days then he stays right there. Chaos and order and with respect to Christianity, which is what keeps them interesting. But, okay, what is beyond the blue church of the tech, what what the fog with the bright fog of secularism afforded was, we can have a degree of plurality of pluralism, but we don't need to stand in the full sunlight. Because and this is where you let's say trigger the prologue of, of the Gospel of john. We can't stand the full light, the full light kills us. That's why we can't stand in the presence of God. And, and then you get back to this deeply. The, the, the continual understanding of the ancient world which was this world, and this life can only afford so much. And in order, there needs to be something from somewhere else, not of this world to actually allow us to go places we've never gone before. Star Trek says, you know, we can sort of build our way up. These are people and you know these are other people in metal ships that have, you know, you know, you have the board, different things, but. So, the, you know, basically, the Jesus story says okay, your deconstructive heroes have to be crucified, there's no other ending to the story that stable. But, but wokeness is just perpetual crucifixion, it's the guillotine, you know, okay we're going to start with the royals, and then we're going to and you know the story of the French Revolution was if you just keep guillotine and everyone. And maybe in the Soviet Union you can live behind closed walls and say, there's no private property but there certainly are exclusives. No private property means no exclusives. And so you know that doesn't work the corruption, you know bail them so you still have to build something at the end of that. And then when you come out of that process you're in the tail end of the process like the Jacobines are like, well let's switch to a 10 day week, because we have to have something so different from the old order, so we can differentiate ourselves from the old order, you go through all this and you still have to build something The 10 day week didn't work. It was worse than the seven day week, the changing of the holidays. You know you change the the Notre Dame Cathedral to the temple of reason. And then what do you do, well you still have a temple. So I think the thing in the last few videos you've been talking about, which is the realization I think is dawning on most people, even those like, who was the gal you said Jordan Peterson was talking to? Barry Weiss. Right. Even a self admitted, I don't know if it was her or someone else in a different video. Who's the, no it's the gal that talks with the two brothers that are always the math guys. I don't follow them at all. Heather Hying. Yes, yes that video you know she's a self admitted atheist but not a new atheist. Yeah, yeah, yeah. And it's dawning on her that religion is an inescapable feature of society so it's like which God do you want to have. That's the better question. Right. But she's sort of like the, she's sort of like the parent who sends her kids to Sunday school. And so is Jordan Peterson. Yeah. But not for me. I'll send my kids to Sunday school, and to VBS, but I'll stay home and watch Netflix, because I have my degree, I don't really need it, but all those other people they need it. It's not gonna work. It's not gonna work. I do think though that part of that blue church resurgence or even, and I want to be careful and I say this because I don't want to be offensive but I do think some of the attraction to Catholicism and to Eastern Orthodoxy, I've, there's so much tremendous theology in both of those traditions that I love and I value and I celebrate. But I think as a movement, part of the attraction to it is people going, okay, this train of progress this inevitable moving away from the past because we think any movement away from the past is a movement in the right direction has to be altered somehow so I'm going to go back to the past. I think a lot of people were enchanted. And it's really funny like, I, I have talked to young, younger people whose parents, their parents came out of Catholicism to their born again evangelical experience like my own mother. Now one generation away, their, their kids are going, hmm, I think I'm done with evangelicalism, I'm going to go back to the Catholicism that my parents, my parents left, and I don't, it's not even so much to me like the theological reasons as much as well it seems like back there those people at least they are enchanted. They, this is a place this at least is a story that offers me. It's a coherent story. It's a story that offers me wonder and beauty, and something that's a bit mysterious what are all the smells and bells for right it's something that disorients my senses I don't have a grid for all of it. I am sympathetic to when john verveke those says. And he's not the only one that says, I don't think, at least in Western Civ that there's a going back. Right. And that's sort of where that, you know, so reason why people came out of it, and it's like, I'm charismatic I am really attracted to these, these old practices of liturgy Robert Weber, you know the ancient future stuff and I see that happening a lot of people. And I think the new Anglican church is popping up down the street from us and really excited about the good work that happens there. But I do tell people sometimes if liturgy was the solution we would have never had a reformation. Exactly. The. Here's a news flash for you. The France, the French Revolution happened in what country. What country was probably the most third one of you know what country I mean, Italy wasn't yet a country, the most thoroughly. Well, maybe Spain is competitor the most thoroughly Roman Catholic country in Europe. And what followed the French Revolution. I mean, in some ways the French Revolution was the French reformation, and what followed it was Napoleon, the most thorough going modernist reformer in Europe. And so it's in a sense, you know, Germany, and Switzerland and the Netherlands and England. They bought into the Protestant reformation, and that resolved some of the tensions those way. You know, France sort of buckled under. And, you know, we're going to resist the Protestant reformation, they had the French Revolution. And then they had Napoleon. And, and if you continue to look at let's say the differences between the French model of secularism and the American model of secularism. You can see, so you're not allowed to wear a burka in France. Why not. You are in America. Why, which country better affords pluralism. And so, and so we've got these issues and that's where so, which is more Christian. Exactly. So we've got verveky me and Peugeot. So most of the time, it's me and Peugeot because we believe in the resurrection, we you know where we're Christians we're expecting and we're coming where, you know, we're inhabiting, but then suddenly when the question is well can we go back again then suddenly I'm over by verveky. That's why I know going back again. And part of this is, you know, when I look at say orthodoxy and Roman Catholicism. The kingdom came in orthodoxy in Constantinople with Justinian. That was the successful Roman Empire, the kingdom came. And where did it go. Islam, or even before Islam, you want to talk about how the Haggai Sophia was built. And you want that like that is so that's where if I could offer nuance critique because you've brought this up in a few videos back you're playing a clip of Jonathan Peugeot talking about universal history with with someone else. I hear that stuff. And I'll be honest I go, been there done that and it didn't work. Yeah, and this is why postmodernism is a valid critique. This is why people are suspicious of meta narratives. Because when you start talking about a universal history and there's like, well, where are the Chinese in the universal history, where are the Africans, the ones that you didn't colonize, you know, and people hear that and you go you're going woke and it's like well no there's a valid critique there in universal history. I think I've made that word up that goes okay, who's telling the story is it the front seat. Is it the people driving it do they have a vested interest those are valid critiques that we don't want to squash out because we go postmodernism and make it a boogeyman. It wasn't. You want to tell that story from the perspective of the, the people that were huddled up into I believe, let's see, that would have been right before the building of the Haggai Sophia. Justinian is hiking up taxes people are upset about that. You got these competing political factions which are also like tied up into chariot racing I think they call them the greens and the blues. And what Justinian did was he rounded them all up saying okay we'll have a meeting about this and he killed all the people, silence, dissent continue to raise the taxes so you could have this beautiful church that when you step in you feel immersed by beauty with. It's like, have you ever watched the Queen before, and you feel like, oh man these castles are so beautiful look at all these artifacts and you start to go well where did these come from. How did they build this and like that's actually part of a valid critique that isn't postmodern. It's to me, the Jesus that identifies with the poor and says blessed are the poor in spirit. And I don't want to lose that because I get really really concerned about. Well, that's, are you, you Marxist smuggling stuff in it's like, it's not that there's there's a story that's much older than that that holds these tensions together of order and chaos of deconstructing orders that aren't working It's like a mustard state seed slowly growing seeking the good of the city. You inhabit Jeremiah 29. Yeah, so I'm a little suspicious about that and I feel that tension that you feel between those two worlds where I hear john and he's like, we can't go back and I go well there's something true that's always been true. So we can't go back completely so I, I hear that but then I also connect with you and when I hear someone like a Jonathan Peugeot talk about, you know, we need to be really really aware of the symbols and what the symbols are pointing to that these aren't neutral symbols in the stories we inhabit. I'm sympathetic to both. I feel that tension and living in that tension is difficult. Well, it's with many of these things you you both need a universal history, and you can never quite fully pull it off. It's both true. And again in Christianity, incarnation crucifixion resurrection ascension. Second coming I mean it's all it's. And, and so what happens in Christianity is you actually hold all of these things together. And, but again, to what degree are we is to what degree is this world able to host a stable. To what degree is this world able to afford the sum of all our joys. And the Christian messages. It isn't that there has to be, we're pointing towards the, the, the reunion of heaven and earth, but remember, they descend. We don't build them. Now whenever I say that people like well, no, we are supposed to garden. I mean that's, that's the original job we're supposed to garden, and we're supposed to be fruitful and multiply and fulfill the earth. That certainly is our so it's not that we're idle. But we have to give the growth. That's right. And so it is, I, and this is where now I'm sort of back on Peugeot side, we're not going to get away from a two worlds mythology. Because those tensions, I would say, are built into us. And this is where I'm more with Peterson biologically. We are the one creature that is the merger of heaven and earth. That's what we are. We are the stuff of earth and the breath of God. And so heaven and earth meet us that right inside of us. The Bible says that in many different ways book of Ecclesiastes, he's built eternity into our world. He's built eternity into our hearts. And this is both our glory and our torture. Because the best we can do is a tower of Babel. And that story is that story gets recycled again and again and again and again. It's true that it's more cyclical than linear. Right. And the more, you know, the. What are the stories then in the Bible where kingdom does come. Well, they're apocalyptic stories. So, Elijah builds an altar. You know, when we say fire comes down from heaven lightning you know they're on a mountain or lightning comes down from heaven, you know burns up the sacrifice evaporates the water and the prophets of bail are slaughtered. That's the book of Revelation. And, and so, in our short lives we are, you know, we are always somewhere in this cycle. But it's in that way you know it's spirals are both cycles and progress. And I know I've just made all the spiral dynamics people excited, the integral people that can, you know, find unruly wisdom but that, you know, that's the that's the direction of the biblical But fundamentally, and this is so hard for moderns to swallow. You are I mean I just watched the Jordan Peterson Michael malice video. And I, you know, I always find anarchism. So, one of the guys in the discord communities keep says no Christian anarchism. What's that well Jacques Lul and and Simone, they and and Tolstoy so okay well I'm not I'm not annoyed at that like I was at Michael malice, because this world can only afford so much and we human beings are what we are, and, and the, the fact that eternity is in our hearts the fact that we are the breath of God and the stuff of earth. This is both our glory and our torture, because on one half we are tortured and this is the story in the garden where, you know, the serpent And, you know, did he really say is he really holding up back on you and so visions of towers of babble well up in our hearts and we imagine we can construct and we can save ourselves, but the message is that we are not capable of that. And at that point, then we are back to worship and and we hold in, and we live between we we live between the cross and the resurrection we're not yet at the resurrection, but the path is cruciform until the resurrection. And again, this is basic Christianity we've known this story. But then where I say we can't just simply go back. Yeah, yeah, yeah, Jonathan Peugeot is deeply Protestant. And, you know, no he left Protestantism, but you take it with you. Oh, I am deeply secular Oh, but you're a Christian minister who believes in the physicality of the resurrection. Yes, but I am secularism is built in me in ways that I will never in this life, divorce myself from there's this limitation we simply have to accept, and then turn over to our God and say, here is the offering that I have here's the offering that I am. It's the best I could do. And that's of course where we are not saved by works. We are saved by grace through faith, not that anyone can boast so to me emanation. That's right. That's right. That's the grace is the emanation grace is the word from above of pardon, but it's also the, the, the means from above. And that's the gospel of john is the means from above. And now in secularism we say I can't believe that stuff. Okay. That's but you're living it out, because you're in Christendom. And that's the thing in case people think I mean uncharitable to some of the ancient traditions like orthodoxy that is another part of this, the good attraction to the ancient Eastern Orthodox tradition is the story of, and the framing of theosis. You know, and that's something I had not heard of until I began to explore that and there's real attraction to that because in that story in that framing of the story is a way of addressing those tower of babble appetites in us. Stanley grants, the passed away, I don't know, years ago, Baptist theologian, and his systematic theology he talked about how humans unlike any other species on the planet appear on unlike any other species that we're aware of save for maybe cancers, if you can call that a species. We are not satisfied with our habitats. And we always are moving beyond beyond beyond and that in one hand, can be like a cancer on the planet, and to the rest of creation to our neighbors to our brothers that constant greed that ancient mammon idol, but it can also be directed towards what we were made for, which was union with God, the You know, the, the unlimited, the fountain, the fountainhead of all truth, goodness and beauty and so there's a way that we can have that appetite, there's a degree of even harmony in a sense with Buddhism, then, because Buddhism part of Buddhism, I guess is to say it behind it all is nothingness. And so you should be satisfied, right to be satisfied with what you have. And in some sense, there's a degree of harmony there because beyond our momentary experiences of the good, the true and beautiful we feel in that very next moment a sense of dissatisfaction. Right. The degree of harmony there is to say there is a sense in which what's the line between infinity and nothing. Infinity feels so beyond. And so when we say that we've we're made for an infinite God, there's this infinite journey in us and it's a recognition of the thing right in front of us. Even if it is a good is an invitation to go further. And that appetite steered towards the good is, is a blessing to the world. It's a blessing to everyone around us. The perversion of that is the pursuit of lust. These are the seven deadly sins. What are the seven deadly sins, if not the perversions of those, those good things that we are called to pursue on our journey towards the union with God in Christ. The question then becomes like as we inhabit this story, this cultural frame that we live in. Are we able to discern the spirits of our age, which are calling us to see certain things as an end to themselves. This is Romans one, right. Certain things and things that are made with human hands as an end to themselves, or we called on that perpetual journey. So maybe that's the place to me where a verveky is right, and that we aren't going back to the past. You know, we don't want to make an idol out of any particular tradition stamp it in the ground and say, I get this, you know, you probably have these conversations your church too with people that are like, well, I don't know how we feel about contemporary music versus traditional music like traditional music is just contemporary. You're just saying, we're pressing pause back several hundred years ago and saying that music was blessed by God for worship, but not this, which is a weird thing to do. So that tension between the two is like, we have, we can't, we're not going back and making idol of the past. There is an eschatological aim. And yet that aim is oriented by received wisdom that we must cling to and hold to and pass down to our children and their grandchildren. And can we find harmony? So maybe that's the thing for me that I'm trying to sort through is like, okay, what was even good about secularity that was actually bearing witness to the truth that we want to cling to, like, I don't want to go to the mall, and or go to a public space, public space of any kind and feel like I might step into a religious war, or a tribalistic war between races and all the different cultures were being split up into. I don't want that. What was it that was actually true, good and beautiful, we need to cling to that's in harmony. So maybe it is a universal story. But I like, you know, I like Tolkien's idea better in the simile really, and that there's a song of creation. We have a unique melody, but we can contribute our music to the song of creation as long as in harmony. So what I'm looking for is harmony versus discord. You know, but in order to do that, you kind of have to have a tuning fork. Yeah, you know, and so we're right now we're in a cultural moment. It's like we're done, we're moving away from secularity. And we're still going to tell you that there's discordant notes and harmonious notes, but the good place is like, we don't really know what we're doing. What we're tuning up against, right? That was what the show was really about. We feel that there's a good place and a bad place. But yeah, so I'm curious. I always love these conversations, Paul, because I feel like I gained so much from, from your wisdom and even hearing these shows that I hadn't consumed and taking in those stories that I now have to, I got to go check out. You've got a lot of you've got a lot in your catalog that I haven't had a chance to listen to too. So I, you know, I've got, you know, I've got maybe one or two. I've got time in every day for maybe an hour of listening. And so it's, it's because I don't listen during work hours usually because I'm working. But, and I don't do the kind of work that affords listening and like a lot of my audience, they're coders and artists and illustrators, and they can listen while they work and most of my work I can't, I can't, I can listen to music, but I can't. But, you know, secularity, secularity does have its, you know, in some ways, you know, Jordan Peterson and Barry Weiss are saying secularity was the golden age. But we've all got our own little nuances on that because of course Barry Weiss is a lesbian and she's married and so her golden age started in 2013 and rapidly deteriorated from that point with the woke. That's right. She's got the L and you know nothing past the L thank you. And no G or B or D, maybe the G but no certainly no T's. And then, secularity, secularity in many ways afforded a, a, a secularity was in some ways an attempt at, so let's, let's use the lens of universal history. So there was in secularity and implicit universal history that afforded secularity, and in many ways, that was the subtraction story. In some ways, the new atheist, to one degree or another, when you are able to actually articulate the epitome of your universal story, you then set up its undoing, because in many ways the new atheists did exactly that. And so they created the subtraction story, and they basically said here we are at the pinnacle of civilization. And then everybody looks around. Is this all there is? You're going to set up a deconstructive cycle. And so the universal history of secularism is the subtraction story, but it's not universal enough. And so, so then you've got other discordant voices saying hey wait a minute, your utopia was purchased at the, at the, the un, the uncompensated suffering of my ancestors. And they're right. They're right. Then the question is, how can you compensate the uncompensatable? So part of the reason the reparations conversation seldom goes anywhere is someone brutalized your great grandparents. Put a dollar sign on that. So, you know, in the wake of George Floyd, there was a court case, there was a settlement. Okay, so are we done? Are we done with George Floyd, because the city of Minnesota paid a settlement to the family? Doesn't look to me like we're done. So what did that money purchase? And so then, you know, we're back into the Christian story. How can the uncompensatable be compensated only by, now we're in penal substitutionary atonement, only by, it's a Heideberg catechism, that which you also something of such value that it can't be. The infinite. The infinite. So, you know, now we're, you know, now we're in archedipple stories. Only the infinite can purchase the infinite guilt. This is the only things that work. So, here we are again. Back at Christianity. That's a good place to land. That's, that's awesome. Paul, this has been a blast. I'm thinking maybe even I'm having another talk with Verveki, we're working on the date, but I think at some point I'd really actually love after that one maybe a little bit later towards the fall to get both of you together, and maybe I can act as sort of a mediator between, because there's times I've heard you guys talk together that I go I want to ask him, but while he's in the presence or at least virtual presence of the person, I think that would be really, really fun, profitable conversation so thanks for doing this. Oh, my pleasure. It's always good to talk to you, Paul. Keep doing what you're doing. I like what you're doing and I think it's really important. And it's. Yeah, there's no. We need lots of we need lots of voices, working at this because we all, you know, it's, we so quickly look for a hierarchy someone who's got 100 million subscribers or something like that. And it's like, no, actually the way this changes is all these. That's the church way of change. You can have a community that you can participate in. Yeah, yeah, and those sorts of conversations you're having them on your, you know, discord servers and stuff like that and, you know, I've started to have conversations zoom conversations with people listening and it's it is that what does verveky call it the. There's a verveky in term, he calls it distributed cognition, right that happened. The iron sharpening iron in a psychological terminology cognitive science terminology and it really, it does you talk about Voltron ing up we Voltron up with that together. And I, it's immense Bennett immensely beneficial. And I, I kind of hope because I, you know, certainly you've got quite a few followers on YouTube, but there is a hierarchy to that you go well my numbers aren't as big as someone else or other people listening. There's some encouragement to you like, just, just be faithful and be fruitful. Because there's some sense in which I think he probably would be suspicious, you should be maybe suspicious of a quick skyrocketing to. Because you go well if not all of the rules of this game are structured in a way that I want to move up this particular fame hierarchy. What about be lost. Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. So, well, I'm grateful that you continue to take time to do this with me. I think you've probably been on more than any other guest and every time you come on there's people that like hey do this every month with them so thanks Paul. Well, I have to get you into so I'm going to have some days I do weekly I do a question and answer on the bridges of meaning discord but I'm going to be taking some vacation so maybe I'll, I'd been voice slotted in for a q amp a maybe if you're interested I'll get you slotted in for a q amp a I love that yeah that'd be good. Good. Thanks Paul. Take care. Okay. Take care Paul. Bye bye. Bye bye.