https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=vfDSIY58c54

 Well, we've never spoken, so why don't you introduce yourself a little bit? I will. I had just said to my son this morning, I said, because like when I got the meeting, there's a little thing you do, a little blurb about yourself, and I'm like, I probably should have given a little bit more information, so he'd just be prepared. So I just did, it was like a tiny paragraph, but... I'm used to going into these things blind. Yeah, so I figured you'd be okay. So, well, first of all, I was like, obviously really excited to get a spot. And we had just, like two nights ago, I started, well, I'll just randomly watch certain videos and usually finish them, but I watched one with fellow Ryan, I think it was a new one you'd posted, and he had said how he went in and clicked it and there was a spot and his heart was racing. And that's how I felt, because I went on like that night, like 10 minutes later, and I thought I'm just going to do it again. And it kind of, it's like a little game. Yes. Whether I wanted to do this conversation or not, I thought, okay, I'll just see if I can do it. And it was there and I almost didn't click it. I thought, do I want to do this? I thought, well, whatever, I can cancel. And then so I was telling, I told my son Ethan, and because he's the one that kind of got me onto you. And anyways, I was excited. And then I was like, I don't know what I'm doing, why I would do this. And then like an hour later, I said, Ethan, now I'm just like, I don't think an hour is going to be enough. I don't think I'll be able to finish talking in this hour. So anyways, I have like a whole bunch of stuff to just written down, but probably won't get to any of it. Well, I'll give you a pro tip. If there are two slots available, I often don't have things after the second slot. So if you know, there's always the possibility of going longer with the second slot. So I always say, you know, two slots, and then you got to ask for more. So you've still got another go and get out there. Okay, well, that's good. Okay. Well, so anyways, all I had written to you is just that I was well, I'm a Christian and was brought up Baptist. And, and so, I guess maybe I'll start with how I knew how I found you. Okay, trying to get the story. Let's see easiest way because I really get off track easily. Let me see. Unlike me. Well, you know, right before I started this, I thought I watched I just watched one of your recent randos that thought, okay, I'm just gonna watch it. And it'll make me feel better because I think they all just ramble to who won everything, right. And so you both do you both rambled a lot. So I felt better. So, but okay, I'll start with myself just that I'm in Nova Scotia, Canada. And we are I'm on I'm on a boat at the moment. But I wondered, yeah, and we just live. It's this Digby Nova Scotia, which is a little town and, but I knew kind of where you were from the East Coast, right? Possibly you knew what Nova Scotia was. Yeah, I'm a big Oak Island fan. I fantasize about Nova Scotia. You know, and we actually just live our house is just like 15 minutes from here. In across counties. At the moment during COVID our counties are we're all not supposed to leave our counties. But anyways, we're kind of right like minutes between these two places. So doesn't matter. But come the summer, we mostly spend it here at a marina with about 15 boats, right. And so which is where my husband works in this area. So anyhow, we that's why I'm here. So let me start why I came here from Ontario. So when I was five, my dad and my mom's family had already kind of made their way back east. They were from New Brunswick and they had moved here and then my parents followed. So my dad become a minister. He worked like in social services. And he came to go to school at Acadia, which is a big one of the big universities here and a Divinity College. So he came became a Baptist minister. And so when I was five, so my whole life has been like that, like, I don't really remember learning about like, I don't remember not leaving in Jesus, right? Like, it was just sort of part of your upbringing. But I say that and it still wasn't, I joke, I've always joked. But you haven't heard my jokes yet. So they're not old yet. But we didn't say grace, you know, like we didn't, it was not a strict upbringing in any way. Like, we said grace when company came. And we prayed in church, of course, and so and it wasn't like a fake. It was just my parents weren't like super strict about stuff. But I grew up in the church in the 80s, where I was born in 72. So by the early 80s, things, some people don't seem to remember it. But actually, I think Jonathan Pazzo just mentioned something about the weirdness of the not weirdness, but um, they were burning music around here, you know, some churches, it was, it was like the 80s thing. And so it really got turned, it turned off a lot of people by the time I was a teenager. They were like, weirded out, right. And somehow I just never really affected me. I just thought it was a little strange. It didn't, it didn't affect my faith or anything. But so after that, well, let me see. I don't know how much more I get. I got so much I could tell you. But at 14, my dad joined the military without telling my mother actually, it's just a whole other story. So we all moved. He was like filling in as a pastor as a chaplain kind of just at the nearby base. And so it's kind of a joke. I mean, I think they had discussed it someone. But anyways, there's many layers, all kinds of stuff. But anyhow, we moved just not too far from here. But my mom's family is all right here in Digby. My dad already left his family in Ontario, we moved just an hour away to Greenwood to a base and he came chaplain. And that's kind of what eventually they separated was sorry, so they divorced and he has since they've gone on to their own lives just fine. And he has since married a new wife is a Baptist minister or as a was a chaplain Protestant minister Anglican, I guess, is her background. But okay, I'm struck. So let me go another path now. Now. Let me see myself. So well, after my my poor family, my poor family will listen to this, my husband, kids, they've already heard the rambling so much, her entire life together. But so my wife doesn't listen to any of my videos. She's like, Why would I do that? It's true. And actually, my husband, my kids will definitely watching and my husband's like, well, no, I'll definitely I'll watch some of it. I don't know that I'm gonna be able to all of it. But meanwhile, when I was 16, living up to that, like living just a little ways from Digby area, my husband was from here. And through my sister, we met and we dated since we were 16. So I've never really, I've never really left the area, right? I kind of came back here, went to nursing school, not too far from here. And, and yeah, so that's our background. But now I thought this would be I thought I'd have a lot more interesting things to say about it. But oh, it's all been interesting. Keep going. But now, let me back up and see. As far as Christianity part, okay, and then we'll get into my children. I never did not believe and I didn't my whole little childhood was about converting everyone I could, like, and not too obnoxious about it and not arrogant, but just praying. And I prayed for family members that didn't believe the ones that pretended they were Buddhists and all of it. I just thought, okay, we're just gonna just pray for them. And I mean, it was, you know, pretty intense as a 10 year old, like it was. And like I said, it didn't really come from my parents, because I knew they believed in God and stuff. But it wasn't like a there wasn't the daily bread in the morning. Like I had church there were church members that that's what they did. Like it was strict. And my family kind of wasn't fake, but it wasn't instilled at home like that. Right? I mean, we open if I had a question and talk to my dad about God, but and but myself personally, I just it was I just never doubted it. Right. And then I so I was really open to everything. And I was the youngest of three girls. So 10 is what really stands out in my mind. And they were would have been like 12 and 14. They got to the age of kind of like, well, they became teenagers, right. So I prayed for them too, because of everything going on in their lives. And I so at 10, this is my big thing that I it wasn't big at the time, but I had had I had like a dream. And so I don't know. I've told the story over many times and nobody really seems to press. But I was when I was small, like 10, I had had a dream and I just a short little dream about it was a picture of a sick old lady. And it was the and it had a Bible verse and it was James 514. About healing the sick or I've got it here. But so I all it appeared like when I think back, it was like a little newspaper flipping maybe looked like sick old lady. James 514. And I can remember getting up and reading it the night and sort and I was really open to any of that, like just I didn't think I was like a prophet. I didn't think anything I just thought was sort of normal, right? Like I was open to it. And I remember telling my I would assert that is actually normal. It was I would say that is actually normal. It's just everybody covers it up. Well, yeah. And so I and I told my parents about it and they if they watched it, they'll be like, well, I don't we I don't know if they'd remember or if they also just took it for granted that that was they just knew that I was a spiritual child and whatever. But I don't remember them being too amazed by it. And so it was just sort of one of those things, whatever. And then as I went on, like got older, I was kind of like something and I wasn't even a big drinker. I mean, had times in my life where I drank more alcohol, you know, in the evenings or if we once the Blue Moon had a party or something. And that story always came up to whoever wanted to let you know, people were kind of drawn to me because they knew I was openly Christian. I had no problem talking about it. And it was all about Jesus loves you in certain situations. I knew when to hold back. But so even as an adult, I shared that story with people. And I don't know that I don't know what they thought of it. It's crazy. And plus, it's like it's a it's my story. So they're like, we don't even know if she's made that up or if we don't really care because we don't believe in God and we don't think he's real. But it's you know, she seems kind of nice. So maybe she's not like trying to like do anything bad with that. But so whatever, regardless, that dream has always been in my mind. And then I think is like at older, I looked at it like a way of I just told my son today, I said, I'm going to talk about that dream because it was almost like a grounding for me. Like, no matter what goes on, as I explored other religions, I mean, I never seriously gave I can't say I really over opened up my heart to not being a Christian because it just never it just didn't make sense. But I certainly opened myself up to understanding other things, maybe not being just as I was taught as a Baptist, not like I was taught in the 80s. And but the dream I thought, it's why would I have that if it wasn't if God wasn't speaking to me about something in the Bible and about the Christian Bible, the New Testament, even right. I'm like, there's got to there's got to be something there just means that whenever I have doubts, whenever it's too much, I'll just think, I know that was real. And I'll use that to stand on right. I think that's what it became. And then over the it's that is what it is for me. But I also got obsessed with the book of James because so short, so it wasn't hard to read. I have not read the whole Bible, even though people here we go on like they'll ask me Bible questions or on jeopardy when the Bible questions come. They look at me and I'm like, I get them all wrong, right? I can't think that fast. But I did start like analyzing the book of James and going into it. And I had talked to my dad about it. And he's like, he's like pretty logical, which I like, like, he's not unlike me. But he's kind of even where my mom's side is mom's a little more. Well, not not even. And so he just sort of like would say, you know, well, it was he first just first one that told me that it was Martin Luther. He said, did really like the book because it was about about earning your faith. Right. And then I remember telling the story after he first said that years ago. And I said to him, I said, well, yeah, you know, he said it was Martin Luther King. He's like, well, not Martin Luther King. And so when I look back, I realize how little I just I hadn't read up on that stuff yet. Anyways, my challenge, my history challenge this was showing. So I knew that there were issues with that book in the Bible. And then that even intrigued me more. And then over the last few years, I was like so intrigued that I from what I've I like to believe it was written by James, the brother of Jesus. And I know that controversial, too, but that kind of a treatment that that's got to be something to write. And then and then I'd look at the verses all around it and then whatever. And I got a got a list of a few more things with it will come to me. It'll bring in all these other things we've been talking about. Jordan Peterson and John the Peugeot and you and the stuff of meaning. And I think at least people can pause this so they can pause this and think if I'm talking too fast. So there was something Jordan has said a bit ago, like a couple years ago about, you know, acting out as I go anyway, forget all this stuff, but like, you act out. Your truth is what you're acting out. Get it wrong. It's something. Your religion is what you act out. Yes, exactly. And so I kind of thought it triggered something in the book of James, my thought of it doesn't just like I believe that once you're saved, you're saved. Like I don't really I'm not big on I guess I don't think you really earn it at all. But I think the book of James opened up for me thinking that obviously if you're a believer and your faith is real, you're going to act in that way. Right. And so that sort of triggered that. And then it was that moment of like I said to Ethan, my son, I back then I said, like, like something washed over me. I said, I got to take a break because I feel like I'm trying to make too much meaning out like, you know, I mean, like when you see in sign somewhere and then you're like, it's real or am I just insane? But I I know I feel confident that things that we see meaning in actually do have meaning. I don't really question the same, but wait a minute. I'll let you speak, but let me see. In fact, I'm fine. You keep going. I see. I knew an hour probably wouldn't you. Oh, we're only 17 minutes into. We're doing good. We're doing good. Keep going. You're on a roll. I said so what happened was with the reason I even got to you was with my son and I have a daughter who I try to speak up to, but it's Ethan and I that have been talking so much because he's been living home with us. How old is Ethan? Ethan's 23. OK. And so he's home. I'm thinking that like he's 10, right? My buddy. I've never met Ethan, so I don't know. I don't think a lot of 10 year olds watch my videos, but 23 makes more sense. Probably not. So he's 23. But so when he started, he started out his sort of journey of all this stuff. He graduated. He just graduated from university yesterday. He and his girlfriend. They've been living home with us for a year because of COVID. And so five years ago, he left off for university. And so it was 2016 when all everything was beginning to start with all this stuff. And somewhere through that year, he found Jordan Peterson, right? Kind of on his own. He was taking him. He was at the University of King's College and it does this foundation year and they do like just there's so many books of like way like a lot of literature, right? Of all like the history like way back when. And so he was required to read a lot of that stuff. And I don't think he read much of it, right? He read what he had to to get through his year. But me, but as well on his own, he was sort of like, I don't know how he ended up. I guess he was just found Jordan Peterson through the Bilcy 16 thing that I think everybody did. And then eventually that got to Jonathan Pagio and everything else, right? And so when he started, I right away took to Jordan because I felt he was I'm a little bit, I guess, I'm not a devil's advocate, but I don't like when like I knew that he was I knew it was being misunderstood. I knew he was misunderstood from the beginning. I just I don't think people understand what's going on here. And I'd watch something of Jordan's through Ethan and I'd be like, I'd hear somebody talk about him, right? Or even in my like, like sort of in my area, soon became a name is like, ooh, they don't want to talk much more. They just I knew what they felt about him. And I didn't know where that was coming from. So like, but you don't understand, like, have you listened to me? Like, I don't think you understand what he's saying. And so then I kind of got into like, I'd started watching quite a bit of it and it's only so much you can watch, right? It takes a lot of time. But I tried to understand and we'd have big discussions about it. My poor husband would just like it was just constant, like, whenever Ethan would come home, we'd just have these big discussions about it and our daughter too, Hannah. And we just kind of, I think, I don't think we got obsessed with it, but you just couldn't help like just watching this stuff. And then I found that I was defending him, like I found like I was going to Bible study and I got a Bible study with a bunch of ladies. They were like a few grades ahead of me, mostly they're in their seventies and eighties. I started bringing up Jordan Peterson and I felt like I was sort of defending it. And then I thought I got so like, I'd watch something in the next week if I was studying, I'd mention something I'd read that week, but I wouldn't say it was from Jordan, not to hide them. But I thought as soon as people hear Jordan's name, they're like, oh, okay, I see. He's that white wing guy. And I'm like, yeah, yeah. And so anyhow, but it wasn't soon. Soon after I got into him, it was the biblical lectures. And that just like things lined up inside of me. And I saw it in Ethan, right? Like Ethan and Hannah, we did not go to church regularly, like surprisingly growing up. Them growing up. I taught Sunday school and they helped and we'd go to our like tiny churches. And then it kind of gets slack and we didn't do that. We didn't go regularly. But I never want like we always spoke openly about God and I never, it was laziness. I know. There are other things just come up and you have your little wall up about certain stuff. But it was never, I never had like, I did, I never not went to church because I didn't like it. It was just, we were doing something on Sunday. And I figured I could just sort of, I could do this in my own home, right? Like I could do this. And I know now it's, we need a little more than that. But so anyhow, they, they grew up knowing all about Jesus, but I don't know that they ever had it for themselves the same way I did, right? The guy was obviously, like I said, was into a baptized at 10, which was young in our church because I was ready and I knew it. But so they, our daughter got dedicated to church or her son didn't because we weren't going at the time. So, and neither of them baptized and it's, it's, you know, I don't know if that will come for them or whatever, but to me it's always been symbolic anyways, right? And so anyhow, they knew they had their faith and I knew they had some faith, but I didn't know what it was. Because it's so personal, right? And they always humored me or they just allowed me to ramble on about stuff, but sometimes it just gets too much. If I get ranting about it or in it, they kind of shut down or even certainly shut down, right? And I think he kind of just needed to find, find it for himself or not. And so through Jordan, I saw it, like I saw the light, light in his eyes with it, right? Like the interest in it and the meaning. And that's when I kind of, I felt like things were like, synchronizing, I guess I'm trying to find the right word for it, but that there was a reason why we were watching Jordan, right? There was a reason there was more to, there was more to this Jordan Peterson than just Bill C-16. And then with Jonathan Pagel, I, I just, at first I'd listened to him a little bit, but only through Jordanry. And now I've been just, since this winter just been listening to so much. And I think it was the video, of course, the one in January with Jordan kind of breaking down. And I just, I mean, I, I shared, I shared it by the study recently because I just, I was, it's like, I was waiting for it, right? I was just waiting for Jordan to just feel it, like feel that it was real, right? And I just felt for him, like as a, just as a Christian. And so anyways, I've been watching a lot of Jonathan and you, that's where, even like you got to watch Paul, and he watches, I think it's Sitch and Adam. Oh yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. So when we've been home, I tell you a lot together. I'm a nurse, but I'm not, I don't work now and don't work outside the home. So sometimes he, well, somebody will just have a podcast on the house going on and I'll be like, who are these people again? What are they talking about? And I just find myself laughing at them. And that's Ethan said, yeah, they, that they talk about Paul and I do. So anyways, then I watched you, man, it just all felt good because you can get confusing to me. I will tell you, you obviously pretty intelligent and I can follow most of it. Like I said to Ethan, sometimes I go through like really in the mood to listen to Jordan and see, and it's just been so good to see him back. Right. And I just really have been, it was just like, so happy for him. But, and then I'll listen to join the panel show and it's like, so good and I'll write, I'll write little notes. And then sometimes just in a break, I think I just need to listen to Paul Van de Klay instead. I just need like just some, and then you get confusing too sometimes. And so that shut it all off. But when I watched just the other day, your Fred and Paul, your newest friend Paul video. Fred and Paul show. I didn't even, you know what, like, okay, let's see, and a little note, I was watching some video the other day and I said, it was like, oh yeah, I think John LePage would said something about, you guys must've been talking about the deep weird. Was that you or no, that might've been a different, I think that might have been different video. I get them all confused. I should have written them down, but you were talking about Protestant sort of like flatten things out. Like he's all about like he was talking about that some of those things aren't really weird. It's actually just like an intuitive description of how reality unfolds. And then you put the Protestants flattening them. And I don't even even know if I'm on the same wavelength here, but my feeling is that watching maybe the Fred and Paul thing, I feel like, okay, the Jordan stuff and the Jonathan stuff and the stuff you've been doing, it's just touch like, like ringing true to me because it's like, I finally, it's everything I ever believed. Now it's finally being spoken in a way, an intellectual way, I guess, more than just the blind faith thing, right? But then I was thinking that when I watched the video the other day, just hearing just regular people talk about stuff, how important that is too. Yes. Yes. And it's like when it comes down to it, that is what it's about. Yes. And we can all try to be intellectual about it. Well, I'm glad people are being intellectual about it. For so long, it's like Christianity and well, not for so long, but in the recent, my whole experience, Christianity is just always, we watch Survivor. I don't know if you watch Survivor. I have in the past. I haven't recently. Any person that is on that that is Christian, something usually happens. Something goes wrong. It's usually something weird, right? And I'm not saying that they're doing anything wrong, like they're testifying, they've got their faith, but some way on any show, they're always put in some sort of weird light, right? I understand that, right? Sure. It's not a true representation of Christianity, right? It's a little deeper than that. And that's, like I said, that's not to say anything negative about any of the people that are professing their faith. It's kind of how it's twisted, you know what I mean? Or it's twisted by other people with it. Reality shows are scripted. I mean, they're unscripted, but they are, I mean, they are edited and there's a narrative that the producers create. They do, right? And I think they're not interested in creating Christianity. No, I don't think that's a big. I think that's the first thing. And then the other thing too, that's kind of like a meaningful funny thing here is that both of my kids, our daughter Hannah's like super artistic. And I said, like I remember when she was little and she could, she all of a sudden could draw better than me. Like I can't draw really, but like at seven or something, right? It's a weird feeling when you all of a sudden know you've helped create a life that's like, goes way beyond you, right? And so she went on to, she didn't know what she wanted to do after school. And she had some anxiety and those kinds of things of leaving home and not just leave at home, just she has some anxiety, right? And she'd done really well to overcome that on her own. And but I'm saying she decided she did leave home and went to like a film school. She went to, well, it's an art school, NASCAD, and she didn't know what she wanted to do and ended up with a film, a major in film. And so we were very proud of her graduate and now she's in teaching. So her path has taken her to an elementary school teacher. So I'm just so happy for her because she's 26 now and kind of really feeling like something is, you know, she's on the right path. And she, but when she graduated, she was kind of like, what am I going to do with the film degree? It's kind of like, and I said, I think we're the only family that ever encouraged a child to go. Like I knew it would be a base. I knew she wanted to do something and I knew it would be a base. And it was to take her degree for teaching, right? So it did work out in her case, but my son also is obsessed and I'm going to plug in for his channel later. So he does like movie reviews and different stuff. And so he was going to follow that path. Yeah. He wasn't sure what to do, but the university she went to required at the time, drawing, he had to do a bunch of stuff to get in. If he can't, he's worse than me, like stick, stick bad. And he's like, I was too, too daunting for him to try to get into it. They've since since lowered the bar a little bit. If you want to take film at that school, you don't have to be able to draw. So he applied to another film school, like a community college and was rejected. He didn't get to that. And then ended up on this path to this university, right? When his friend was going and, and, and not that community college isn't, it's obviously difficult to get into certain programs, but I kind of had in my head, okay, well, he'll go that path maybe. And when he didn't even get into that, I'm like, what is going on? Right. And then we got into the university. And in the end, kind of, you couldn't major film there, but he pursued like a minor in it. Long story short, he's kind of on the path to teaching possibly. And he graduated, he ended up majoring in English and had to switch his minor to psychology and had to give up the film minor, but he's still obsessed with it. So it's just funny because all the time. There's always YouTube. That's right. And so the last five, six videos I watched of you and even some of them, I ended up talking about film, like film stories. It's always been a big thing. Think of it as a big deal in our family, but I realized that it's been a big part of like, you know, like I said, my daughter's not really going to be working in it, but her, her boyfriend of many years now is, is a safe, is working in film, right? Oh, wonderful. In our area in Halifax. And so that kind of still became part of her story. And Ethan's is like, well, it's just a big part of it. Right. And so it's, it's just interesting how all these things, every time I hear like about narratives and any who had said about, I still have to watch the parasitic parasitic storytelling. That's terrific video. Yeah. Probably my favorite video. Yeah. Yeah. I guess. Okay. So now I want you to talk for a minute and then we'll see if there's something, something else I have to say. Okay. What do you want me to talk about? I don't know. Okay. Well, if you're not ready, I thought you'd be ready with, no, I keep going. I think you're doing great. I'm, I'm, I'm all ears here. Hey, I'm trying to, I'm trying to kind of make sense. I was laughing. I said to him after I got, well, okay. So now I have a question. So now the question. So, so you've got a daughter and she's, she's landed on a career and she's, and you know, she's, she's doing well and your son, he just graduated. He's getting a good start. Why is, why is this kind of stuff you're listening important to you? Hmm. I know it's an interesting question. It's hard to. Because you're, you know, I mean, for me, you know, you and I close to the same age, probably you're a little younger, but you know, my kids are my kids. I've got one kid left in college. I've got four that have graduated college. You know, they're getting their start out into the world. And so for me, that's kind of like, okay, good. That's, you know, from the time we started, my wife and I started having children until sort of the time you get them graduated out of college, still haven't still have some of them live at home, but part of that's COVID and high cost of housing in California, yada, yada, yada. But you know, the kids are, the kids are almost out. Yes. So now, you know, it's, it's time for, okay, okay. Now this, this chapter in life, what, what are the priorities? What are, and I think a lot of times when, when you get to this, when, you know, now I'm thinking I'm getting into getting into my late fifties, it's about, okay, now it's, it's sort of time to accumulate the wisdom that I've gathered throughout my life, whatever it may be, and give that back to the world. And, you know, that's, that's part of what I'm doing. And so I listened to, you know, the, I mean, I, I find, I do find the fact that as many people as in my channel, listen to big channel by any means, but as many people who listen to my channel as they do, I'm always a bit surprised by this because I don't really see myself as a content creator in this. I'm much more thinking out loud and it's sort of an invitation to, to think with me about Christianity and the world and, you know, the kinds of stuff I talk about. And that's basically what my channel is. And so then my question is, okay, how, how is this helpful to you? To, to me? Yeah, to you. Real question. This isn't rhetorical. No, no, it's a real question. Well, I don't have anybody else in front of me, so might as well ask you. Okay. So, um, well, I don't know. And I think my little blurb that I had messaged to you that I love, like I enjoy conversation. I enjoy like, like just details of stuff, right. And so I think, yeah, okay. Personally, I think that I have been searching for ways since I was a child to, I don't know if it's, I guess it's in the traditional sense, be like, giving a testimony or evangelizing sort of, I've come across a lot of people in my life that just don't, they either pretend they're atheists. I don't really believe them fully, but they, I get it. They can't swallow all of this, right. And they're just, they don't, they don't believe, right. And so I've always struggled with wanting to not convert them, but I mean, when I was a child, I wanted to convert them, right. I wanted to save as many as I could and be as good of examples I could. And so as an adult, I think I still try that, but I'm trying to, I think my ultimate goal, yeah, is to show, be the best that I can, but show like, show God through me, show Christ through me, through a life like that. And I know that requires some improvement. I try, I'm not really living up to it all, but I mean, basically I, it's not hard for my nature. Like I heard you said before, like, oh, it's easy for Paul. It's easy for Paul because Paul likes to, it's Paul, it's easy for Paul to be in a good mood because Paul's easy going or I don't, it's something you've had said when I, and I have always said that about myself. It's easy for me because I don't feel, I get mad. I mean, well, I had a little notice there about my internet, but I guess, sorry. You're still, you're doing fine. No hiccups yet. Obviously I get upset. I do get upset. And I think I've been told sometimes I'm a little bit passive aggressive. I think it's told me that there's a little bit, I would disagree, argue with it because I'm pretty like an open book, but I get it. Some of the things you say to your kids are kind of like, and I will agree, but mostly I don't have those feelings of like, I don't anger easily. I don't even like when I've been, I know I've been assaulted to my face and I'm in, I'm often, I think viewed as either naive or like in a bubble or it doesn't penetrate, but it really doesn't. I get it. I'm not stupid, but it doesn't stab me in the heart. I mean, I get stabbed in the heart sometimes, but not by that. So my point is it's, my personality is fairly easy, I think. It's easy to be nice to people. I find it hard to be mean to people. And I've said, I have a, I do joke about one of my sisters, she's sort of a little more difficult growing up, for like a little more, and it's harder for, she's still, she's learned to deal with that personality, but I always said, even when I was small, I had a sense of, that's not her fault. I mean, you take responsibility, but it's not your fault that God made you that way. That's how I was, I felt that way when I was like 10. I thought that's not, I've, it's not that I was, I sound like a little bit like a, it's not arrogant. It's, it's, I don't think it is, it probably sounds that way, but it's that I knew I was born with an easier personality. Sure, sure. That doesn't sound arrogant to me. And then I think I should, not necessarily a gift, but it's one of my things that I should certainly do the best that I can with it, right? Whether it's, I don't know what. And so trying to get to your point of why I like listening, I just like, I like all this stuff and I like delving into it. I like trying to figure out stuff. And so I said recently at Bible study, I do jokes, I really am, well I'm 49, but, and the minister actually just turned 50, but everyone else is a lot like 70. Yeah, I better say it last time that they ever find this video and they're 69, I do it so whatever, but there's certainly 80 year olds there, right? And so I get chatting with them and sometimes I have just so much to say from this kind of stuff, this content, and I cannot articulate it yet, like I'm bad. And I, I, I started and I start some little stammering thing about it. And I call our minister, you know, he's interested in, he's trying to, he's trying to get me to finish a sentence. Just, just keep going. Just try to say, and most of the people there, it's not that they're not intelligent. They could understand it if they wanted to. They don't, either they don't have an interest or it's just, if you don't watch hours of these videos, it's, you can't even begin to understand what someone's trying to explain, right? Yeah. Well, I'm trying to get a better grasp of it and say it more in layman's terms. And I'm also trying to be there, I think for the younger generation, like I said to the minister, our minister, I said, you know, there's, I think younger people need, like my son, my daughter, not so much because she's like, maybe I don't even know that she's my personality, but she doesn't, maybe her faith is, I shouldn't say it's been easier. Like she doesn't go to church either, shop practicing, but she has in any time she's does not find it difficult to pray or turn to God, right? Even if it's just herself, her own personal relationship. And I don't know, I think that Ethan is getting that or has that in his own way, but so I will take my son, for example, I said, I think this generation needs more than, well, you believe you go to church because this is what we do and you just believe it because it's real. Like, and I know that, so I guess what my quest might be a little bit is trying to, I like what's happening here. I like that there is real, I said to Ethan, it's almost like all this stuff for me, I've always, I've never not had a faith and I don't have to relay that to people because it is a leap of faith if you don't believe any of it, like, it's hard to express it to someone, but this stuff is almost like it's like concrete and I don't need to see, like, I don't actually have to see things to believe, but this, everything that we're talking about here is just so, what do we say, it's got a lot of bite to it, right? Like, it's like, I feel like it's, so let me start again. I've said in conversations that I think though the older generation, I think, fears that God is going to be destroyed, I don't know, or there'll be no God left. Forgotten. Forgotten. The little churches are going, everything's going, and I- Churches are full of old people. And I get it, I get it because I don't even, the faith, the belief I have, and I'm not even going to church, so I'm one of the few, I am going some. I think about recently and then COVID shut us down again, but I, so I understand that I'm not participating in the church. I, of all people, would be the one that should be taking up for the old, that last generation, I'm going to be the old generation. And so I get why they're worried, but I just keep saying that I really feel something, like, and I can't really explain it to them fully, but I said I feel there's something happening, right? And I see it firsthand in my son, I see it firsthand in all these videos that I watch. There's something happening, and church may not be what we all see it as today. I don't know. I mean, I still think there might be a return to it, right? Like, I don't know what it is, but I'm not frightened, like, I'm not frightened about it, and I don't know, I don't know what it looks like exactly at all. I don't know what's going to happen, but I feel positive that there's something going on. And so, so watching your stuff, just, I don't know, I just like it. Okay, okay. Well, I, you know, I hear you, I hear you, I hear what you're saying as sense-making. Yeah. I mean, there's, there's, the world is very big, and, you know, all of these terms, so I want to grasp it. All of this is about taking this very large world with all kinds of things going on. We get all these signals towards us, and we have to, we have to turn it into, and even all these metaphors, we have to turn it into a picture, we have to turn it into a story, we have to turn it into something approachable enough for us to enter and participate in a meaningful, productive way. And, you know, the, you know, your story of, you know, your parents and your father's journey and your faith and your dream, and, you know, that James verse is a, is a very famous verse. It's, the book of James is an interesting book, and, you know, if you understand Luther and where he was at, you can understand why he finds it to be an epistle of straw, but it never got, it never, James never, Luther never got his way. It was never dropped from the canon for good reasons. And the, you know, the verse that you reference, is there any among you who are sick? Let him call for the elders of the church and let them pray over him, anointing him with oil in the name of the Lord, and the prayer of faith will save the sick man and the Lord will raise him up. And if he committed sins, he will be forgiven. Therefore, confess your sins one to another, pray for one another that you may be healed. The prayer of a righteous man has great power in its effect. Elijah was a man of, a man, Elijah was a man of like nature with ourselves, and he prayed fervently that it might, that it might not rain. And for three years and six months, it did not rain on the earth. Then he prayed again, and the heavens gave rain and the earth brought fruit, brought forth its fruit. My brethren, if anyone among you wanders from the truth and someone brings him back, let him know that whoever brings back a sinner from the error of his way will save his soul from death and will cover, and will cover a multitude of sins. It's not a bad dream to have. It's not a bad dream. And it, and it, and it, to me, I don't, so of course in our modern skeptical buffered self world, we're, we're, we're rather dismissive of dreams, but dreams may be difficult to understand, but they are not random. Yes. Yeah. And, you know, I listened to your story and I hear that verse come through your story. Now you're, you know, you were, I hear, I hear a longing for the sick to be healed and for prayers to be answered. Yeah. And for people, people to have hope and that wanderers, you know, you're again, you're, you're talking to me from a boat. And it's one of the first things I noticed. I thought, is she in a boat? Is that you're the first person that's ever, you know, had a randos chat with me from a boat. And, and that's highly symbolic. Yes. Yes. You're on this. I don't know what, what body of water you're on. It's a, it's a, oh, now look, it's, well, it's the Atlantic ocean sort of, but it's a base. It's a Cianapolis basin. Yeah. Yeah. But you're on salt water. You're in the sea. You're in a boat on the sea. And I hear in you, you know, and, and just from, you know, you, you're not an anxious sort. I mean, that's, that's been clear, but you are, you know, I do hear in you something of definitely an evangelist, definitely a missionary and what you want for people are good things. You don't want sickness. You want health. You don't want lostness. You want foundness. And you, you know, you have your Bible study with the saints who are anxious about the future. And my entire life, I have heard the older generation be anxious about the future and the future of the church. I think that's, I think, you know, often people will look at churches and see them full of old people and say, ah, see the church is dying because it's full of old people. And there is a point to that because, you know, we do have, there's a lot of data about churches and the church has grown older in the last 30, 40 years. A lot of this can be attributable to the ups and downs in church. And even those who are, you know, like Jonathan Peugeot, who are going back to very ancient churches, modernize those churches by their presence and their influence. So I think you're making sense. And I think you're looking for meaning and healing. And you're looking for, you know, even by the way you opened this conversation with a dream, which I liked, you're you're looking to, you're looking that you're looking for us to be less buffered from God. Yes. Yes. And for God to be real. Yeah. For our prayers to be answered and for God to be known and seen in his glory. That's what I hear from what you said. And that's all a good thing. And it's funny that, well, I have, I just recently said to the kids that I like, well, and actually just recently bought them all, I bought us all the message Bible. I had to look it up. So a little weirded out that I don't want to, I always do the, I don't even read the Bible that much, but I always read- Eugene Peterson's Bible. Yep. So I always go to the King James version. And then I just, I don't know why. And then I thought, you know what? We just need something here because I just need, because my son's girlfriend lives with us too. And we get talking to all this stuff and it's complicated, like it's complicated, right? And they have read, they've read, they're both English, they just both were English majors. They've read complicated things. They're pretty capable, but still complicated. And so I'm just going to get something basic. And he's got his whole little, not warning, but he's like, you're going to want to study Bible along with it. You're going to want a Bible too. Yeah. Yeah. So I got that hoping that that would sort of get the message out to them a little bit too. But it's kind of funny because I sent off a little, I think a little scripture. Oh, I had written, we put paper on our table all through COVID. We put, you know, like at the restaurants. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. It's really cheap and this paper. So every day we draw and doodle stuff on it and write messages. So the other day I just left a little, I thought I'm just going to leave, instead of writing some sort of little Bible verse or something, I'm just going to write the Bible verse and not reveal it to them. And actually I have to take the step to look it up. This will be fun. And they actually did, but they, in the message, it doesn't break it down like, you know, I mean, it would have verse six to eight or something. And so they, you can Google it all anyways, right? And so it really doesn't, but I know something my daughter had tried to look up. She, which I thought was really sweet. She was feeling anxious one night and she looked at the time. She was waiting for her boyfriend to come home and she looked at the time and forget what it was, but six, 27, she looked it up, tried to look it up in the message Bible, which is complicated. And it was one that came up. One of the major ones I had actually just talked about it with her in recent times, but about being anxious, right? It was in Matthew, you know what it was. And it was just, and like, I used to, I always knew those kind of things had meaning, but I didn't want to make too much of them because I know it sounds insane a little bit, right? Like I thought you look up a verse, whatever. And don't let the culture bully you. Don't let the culture bully you. Stick to your dream. And I've said to both, I mean, I've said to the kids, that's something. That is something I don't care what, you know, but back in my dream when I was 10, I thought, I used to say this like to everybody that I talk about it too. It's not a common book in the Bible. When you're 10, you know, it's not a common book because I thought immediately they're going to think, well, she saw that she saw that Bible where she went to church. Her dad's a minister. She knew what James was. And except for memorizing the books, the Bible to get your Bible when you're eight or nine. I didn't know the books of the Bible. I didn't even know James was in, I think it probably took my 10 year old self a little while to find which part it was in, right? So I, I would always try to relate to people. Like it's not, it wasn't um, it's Psalm 3 16. It wasn't John 3 16. It wasn't the 23rd Psalm. It wasn't this, you don't understand. It was from the book of James. Like why would he, I didn't know. And it's an interesting verse for a 10 year old. It's a very interesting and that there was an old woman there. I mean, and I don't care. Someone says, well, she was in church. It doesn't matter. I dream every night. Um, but there, I have had dreams that are, that stand out and are significant and that I remember. And that isn't arbitrary either. No. And so I don't let those, don't let this world bully you. I don't, I don't get the sense it does. You know what? It is funny because I, I, it doesn't really, but I've said that. I don't get the sense it does. I don't get the sense for a girlfriend because we get every day, my husband texts, so what are you guys doing? I'm like talking, just talking again about, and if we get into political, we're all, we do it. I said to Ethan, I can't get into the politics today. I can't because we're, I, we're definitely, we're centered to a little bit not left, right? And just, and I don't even, but right away that makes me right winged here, right? Like it doesn't matter who I'm talking to. So I don't even, we're not, we're not in any way, but whatever. I said to Ethan, I brought it up, but I said, I'm going to try not to bring it up. It's just too much, right? It's too, we could, I don't know, maybe the next conversation. But, um, so as a girlfriend, well, I said, I do feel for you because even though we're kind of, we are cut from the same cloth in the way that we like to, to wait, it's not that we like to even be right. Like I, in the, I have no difficulty admitting I'm wrong because I use, I often am, right? Like I'm not, I don't even, it's not that I need to be right, but I used to always joke. I don't argue about things I'm not right about. Like I don't. That's a keeper. So I learned when I got older that you just suck. People don't find that that funny, but it's, I, and I don't, that does sound conceited. I don't mean. It's not conceited. It's just hilarious. When I was a kid, I wouldn't, like my friends would engage in a debate and I'd be like, but I wouldn't, if I didn't know this, I wouldn't argue with you, right? Like I'm not, and so I constantly try to convince them. And I learned a little bit to step back when I got older and not, not come across like that. But so for his girlfriend, I'll say she sometimes is on that. I said, I don't want you to feel you can't speak your mind or have a different opinion, right? Cause the two of us do get going or I think what it was we, we discovered, we'll have a big debate, big discussion. We usually end up siding. We all kind of have the same opinions and we try not to be like in the echo chamber of like, I try to get outside opinions sometimes, right? And, but I've said, I don't, sometimes people might walk away from the conversation feeling like, not bad. Like I don't, I really don't even, I don't argue with people much, but I often leave a conversation. I've either been, my mind's been changed or I'm confident in my original opinion, right? And, and I don't, I don't know if that sometimes comes across as like, um, I don't know how that could come across as opinionated, maybe is not wanting to be wrong. And it's not at all, because I think most of the time I'm like, I don't know what I'm talking about or I'm wrong, but the things I have a strong belief in our faith in, especially faith, like no one's ever talked me out of being a Christian. And I don't even, there's just no, so I've debated with friends who have, don't have any faith, right? And I, they never win because there's not, it's not a fair argument, really. It's not a fair debate. Oh, then okay. Then I think I, do we have a few more minutes? I do. There were a couple of things there. Well, y'all in the plane, because I got to get up and stretch and I got another one at the top of the hour. So, so, uh, well, no, you know what? I'm gonna leave you hanging. We're gonna have to wait because I cliffhanger. There we go. Gotta wait for the next one. Okay. Well, anyways, it's, I'm so glad that I clicked the button and I didn't get scared. Good. Good. I'm glad you didn't get scared either. There's nothing to be afraid of. It's nothing good. And never any, never, never that my lids, my kids used to play a little big planet, little big planet. And, um, you get to the end of a level and no lives lost. And that's how I get to the end of a video. No lives lost. Everyone's doing okay. So I will send you this video and you can share it with your, your family. And then you can let me know what you'd like us to do with this. Yeah. I'm sure it's fine to post, but yeah, I can, I'm going to wait until I hear from you because you mentioned your kids and the kids, the kids, because, because if I post it and then I get an email from you, can you take that video down? That's nice. We'll check it out, but I'm pretty sure I had both of their approvals to say anything and I didn't even say really what I was going to say. So we got to do. Wow. So we're going to have to do it again. Okay. We'll take care. You too. Thank you so much for clicking on the button. Okay. Bye bye.