https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=sn9EMFFmZCY

 Hi, this is Paul. Just got out of the car, just finished up listening to Rod Dreher and Jonathan Pigeot talk about Rod Dreher's new book. Haven't read the new book. I've been following Rod Dreher for quite a while. It was Rod Dreher, it was through Rod Dreher that I found Jordan Peterson. I have no idea how I first stumbled on to Rod Dreher's blog and why I first started reading it, but I've read it over the years, for a number of years, read it every day. Over the last few years, haven't read it anywhere near as much. But just a quick hot take from this conversation. It is a conversation that I thought was really important and well worth listening to. The thing I thought about, you know, one of the things that I've really learned from Jonathan Pigeot and what he said here, he talked about, you know, life at the margins and life at the fringe. You take the dragon into the city and it's no longer a dragon. Maybe you won't have a city. And just that bit of understanding that Pigeot has faithfully laid out, I think laid out quite successfully about the fringe being the fringe and the center being the center. I was reflecting on that and of course I grew up as a minority in Patterson. It's a majority white country, but being white in Patterson, where I grew up, was a minority. Minority in the Dominican Republic. I've always felt myself sort of on the fringe. And I, you know, when I look at the anxiety about the the soft totalitarianism, I think it's true. I'm not disagreeing with anything that they say. I guess the one thing that I think of is that it's sort of always been true, what I've seen in my life. When people come around and they talk about systemic racism, I think, yeah, that's always been here. And marginalization, yeah, there's always a margin and there's always a center. And I've, in my experience, always seen Christians sort of at the margin. When Christianity... I stopped the recording. I do that often. Trying to get my thoughts together, not waste your time. One of the things that Jonathan Paget often says is that Christ fills it from the center to the edge. And how does he do it? One of the things I was thinking about listening to them was part of my take with Dreher with his Benedict option was, well, I remember the Christian Reformed Church, not before... I don't remember it before World War II, but I had a sense of that church before the walls came down. Before the war encouraged the soldiers to come back and join the mainstream, either the main line or the evangelical mainstreams. And the CRC, of course, loves the moniker. You can hear it at Calvin College a lot. There's not one square inch of this world that Christ doesn't cry out or claim it is mine. That Abraham Kuyper quote. I guess what I'm trying to get at is the kind of dominion that Christ rules over is both the dominion of creator and dominion of the crucified. And he is crucified outside the city. And he is mocked. He is the fool on the cross. And he is the despised on the cross. And he, you know, when Peugeot talks about Christ filling up, you know, filling up the hierarchy and going from center to to edge and back again, that's the drama of the gospel. And it's right there in Philippians too. It goes from the he who did not consider equality with God something to be and then English translations of the Bible always struggle with how to characterize this. The latest NIV is something to be exploited or used to its own advantage or Christ fills and conquers. And one of the things I really liked about this conversation is it had the sense of, okay, so some Christians who have been used to being at the center, you're gonna feel what the fringe is like. It's not an unhealthy thing. I appreciated how both of them talked about COVID and both of them talked honestly about COVID in terms of has this made my Christian life better? Have I been more disciplined? Well, maybe you have and maybe you haven't. But one of the things that I've learned in my life is what Rod Rear noted and that made me want to read the book because any stories that show at some point the meeting of our greatest happiness at the times of our greatest sufferings, those are stories I always read. You know the Apostle Paul says a very strange thing that the angels, the epithumia, that for the Apostle Paul is often a word about sin. Your problem is your epithumia, your over desires, and you can listen a bunch of Tim Keller sermons about that. But your over desires. And then it's used of, that word is used of the angels because that's the fascination that they have with our humanity. Because unlike the angels, we stumble, we fall, we suffer, we become victims of one another, and the miracle of redemption is that Christ takes that suffering and can make a glory greater out of it than could happen without that suffering. And that's what we see in our lives and Jonathan Pujo was talking about it about how people, you know, and I've seen this, what Jonathan said is exactly right. I have never seen a Christian that takes my breath away in admiration who hasn't deeply suffered. That's what the Christian life is like. So yeah, thank you both for the conversation. Thank you for being honest. And again, if you're in a little bit of a panic because you're going to be taken involuntarily to the fringe, don't despair. Christ is crucified outside the city wall. He is wearing the spittle of his mockers. He is jeered at, he is laughed at, the sign that says, King of the Jews is intended to be a mockery. But again, Pujo always talks about that double inversion. So the one piece of advice I have for you is if you find yourself on the margin, whether, you know, if you, let me say it this way, if you think you don't belong there, well, the maker of the world didn't belong there either, did he? But that's where we placed him. And in that placement, he conquers all. And you know, I'd made comments about Alex Jones and Kanye West and comments on Twitter, I give some more of these hot takes on Twitter usually, comments about, you know, the Alex Jones types. I talk to them every day. Well, how do I talk to them every day? They come up and they knock on my door and sometimes they ask for $5 and sometimes they just want to talk and they're never wearing a mask. But it's here in these marginal places that Christ reveals himself in some, to me, places, ways that make the center, that keep the center, that gain perspective, that affords perspective to the center, that says, you know what, these places of power, these places of where people are full of themselves, these rooms in which people think they run the world, Christ laughs at them and he laughs at them from the cross. Because, yeah, you know, today you'll be with me in paradise, he says to the guy on the cross next to him. And so, yeah, I liked how Rodrier ended this. This is not an optimistic video. I'm a Calvinist. I'm not an optimist, but I am hopeful because Christ always wins. He always wins. And and you can beat him. You can crucify him. He always wins. And that's why, that's why I find the atheists thinking they know everything and I find the homeless and the street people and the fools never an atheist among them. And again, I'm not bringing the dragon into the city. All of the misery and all of the chaos and all of the madness, I mean, I can talk about it for a long time, but that's part of the reason I love ministering in places like this because, yeah, Christ plays in 10,000 places. And if you really want to watch him play sometimes with joy and humor and a wry smile and glory, go outside the city where they're crucifying people. Be amongst those who dare to stand. Not that you're necessarily going to, I mean, look at, look at, he's welcomed into Jerusalem on Palm Sunday. Hosanna, son of David. By Friday, another crowd is yelling, crucify him. By, and then he's on a cross. That's the story. How can you, how can you hold the center and the margin together? Only Christ can. Do you want to participate in that? Learn to participate as Christ does. Well, how do you do that? Well, you love your neighbor all the way up to and including your enemy. Another, another take from this video with Rod Rear talking about, you know, those who were being tortured, you know, how, how did the Christians survive it? They, they worked hard not to hate their torturer. Look at Dr. King. You work hard not to hate Bull Connor and the cops with dogs and fire hoses. This is how you endure suffering. This is how you participate in the completion of the world with Christ the King and Christ the crucified. It's, it's, it's, it's the, it's the most, it's the most published, translated, commented, talked about book in all of human history. And yet it's always fresh, always new, doesn't go away. You can't stop it. You can't destroy it. That's, that's the thing. That's the story. So yeah, listen to the interview. Pick up Rod's book if you want to. Sounds like a good book and thank, just want to say thank you to both Rod Rear and Jonathan Peugeot for the work that they're doing.