https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=7VJWRE8n3C0

 Hi, this is Paul. This is the second part of a two-part video on the question, is secular humanism more fragile than Christianity? Now I'm about to play the conclusion to part one where I do some summary of part one and some introduction to part two because I didn't initially intend to do this in two parts but the thing just got too long. So I decided to split it up, do it in two parts. So this is the beginning of the second part and what I will play right now is something that if you listen to the if you listen to part one all the way through how I ended it. So I'm going to begin at the ending and then jump right in. Now I've decided to, let me pick these off, I've decided to split this up into two parts and the reason is because it's just so darn long and I have various other reasons for this. So I'm going to release one part and then a few days later I'll release the second part. What I did in the first part is I posed the question, do we have reason to believe that secular humanism is more fragile than Christianity? And we took a fairly deep dive into Nazism and Hitler's faith. Now in all fairness, the church did not resist Hitler well. There were elements of the church, the confessing church, but many Germans were able to sort of piece together their Christianity and their Nazism and that is a huge problem. So I don't want to pose the question imagining that Christianity just always stands and never fails. Well that's not true. Christianity in the East for example with the rise of Islam, and that's another thing, I won't tell you too many things I want to study. You know Christianity was eaten by Islam to a significant degree. Christianity endured communism in the Soviet Union and managed to stay alive through that. Christianity has proven to be durable through many things, but the church sometimes can get to very small levels. And we've seen the decline in Europe of Christianity and sort of this Christianity light that Tom Holland talks about has seemed to have displaced much of Christianity and there's just sort of a rump of a church that endures. And this causes Brits such as Tom Holland and Douglas Murray to be anxious and worry that if the memory gets too long, then you can sort of lose the whole thing. So I don't want to overplay my argument. Now in the second part, I am going to change focus and we're going to look a little bit more at, okay, kind of debunk the Nazi position that, well, this racial genetic only idea. Once again, Brett Weinstein wades in and notes the story verse is foundational. And we'll take a brief look at Robert Bellah and his attempt to integrate religion in the story of human evolution. Just some bits from the introduction there because Robert Bellah also notes that it seems that, you know, as Brett Weinstein says, these two tracks, both the genetic track and the cultural track, and Robert Bellah notes that what happens very quickly is that the culture track doesn't stay isolated from the bottom track. It, of course, colonizes it. And this is a point that Jordan Peterson made many times that the human story verse gets into the natural selection and you can't really pull them apart. They, you know, they become intertwined and in fact, very quickly the culture track colonizes the other track. And what we're seeing now in terms of fears about eugenics, about artificial intelligence and some of these things, well, yeah, that's the continued colonization of the genetic track. But in the second part, I'm going to play significant portions from a piece that came across the Discord server today that Julian had posted, Russ Duthaut, moderating a conversation at the American Enterprise Institute where they're talking about, well, will another religion sort of displace Christianity in American culture? And it's certainly not the kind of atheism that Sam Harris and Matt Dillahunty are proposing. Will Christianity sort of recede as it did in Europe? Well, that doesn't seem to be happening. In fact, both will get, both will, both of the writers and scholars that will speak will note that, no, we're incredibly religious, but we don't, we don't quite know what's going on in this religiosity. And I think Stephen Smith from Diego Law School is going to make the argument, I think, quite compellingly that there's sort of a parasitic relationship between them and the full-blown established institutional dominant religion. So that's going to be in part two, and I'll release part two probably a few days after this, just in terms of, for the sake of time. So if you enjoy part one, stay tuned, part two is coming. Now I played this video from, from unbelievable Brett Weinstein talking to Alistair McGrath quite a few times, where Brett makes the point that human beings have two tracks of development going on simultaneously. The far slower genetic track, but then the culture track, and the culture track is, in some senses, what Hitler wanted to do was take out that culture track because he believed then the underlying genetic biological track could come to the fore and establish itself and, and proceed unimpeded. That's what fittedness was. Now, why don't I play this again? I think it's, I think it's a terrifically helpful video. Well, let's get into some of the meat of what we're talking about tonight. I wonder if you could maybe give us a brief and hopefully lay person-friendly account of, of how you imagine religious belief arose in a strictly evolutionary sort of paradigm. Sure. So the first thing I would say is what we don't tend to understand when we take a strict classic Darwinian perspective about humans is that human beings are the far end of a continuum. Most creatures have essentially one mode of inheritance, and it is genetic. We have a second mode, and it is cultural. And we are not completely alone. All of the other mammals have a cultural mode, and almost all of the birds have it. But that's a tiny fraction of the biota. But for those creatures that do have the second mode, what you have is a, is a locale where information can be stored in a non-genetic form, and it can be acted upon by the very same kinds of Darwinian forces that shape genes. Now, now what's interesting here in a lot of the videos that we've been doing is where we're dealing with kind of a perennial division. We see it in, now these divisions relate, they don't necessarily map on each other perfectly. They're sort of, you see sort of the axial age division of, of heaven and earth. You see the mind-matter division. And, and you see all of these divisions, and here in a sense we have the genetic story division. And, and all of these divisions don't necessarily map perfectly onto each other, but in some ways they do relate to one another in, in terms of varying what a human being is. And I think Brett makes the point here quite convincingly that, that a human being, unlike, unlike, you know, uniquely in the world is, is dependent on this, this story verse, this culture verse in order to be what we recognize as a human being. This, now of course Hitler's, the science upon which Hitler based his theories has in many ways been undermined by the complexity of, of genetics. And we know far more about genetics than, than the early Darwinists understood. But, but yet it's interesting that again even in Hitler's view there's sort of these two tracks going. There's the genetic track and then there's the story verse track. And of course Hitler thought that the story verse track was this, this big distraction that had to be put away with. And you get away from that track by getting rid of all of this Jewish contamination to get all of that stuff. But the, the continued endurance of these two tracks is, is noteworthy here. So in one sense Dawkins introduced this idea with the concept of memes. It became clear in my conversation with him in October though that he didn't take the concept of memes very seriously. That he thought that it was loosely analogous to the genetic Darwinian process but that didn't have important consequences. What I would argue to you is that we humans have offloaded a large fraction of the, the adaptive landscape to what I would call the software layer. Right? Our genomes do not create a functional creature. We are utterly helpless at birth. And our very long childhoods are a time period in which one can discover and basically self-program the software network. And then we program the software necessary for life. Now what we do during that time is we largely pick up the wisdom of our immediate ancestors who we meet. And then we augment it with things that we discover that they didn't know, which is a very small fraction of what we come to understand. So if you take that paradigm, what you'll realize is that we get handed a belief system that individuals whose belief system is a better match for the world have advantages. People whose belief systems are a poorer match for the world have disadvantages. And over time those belief systems, the narratives that we hand off will be refined by this process. And so this is so certain once you accept that we have these cultural traits and that better ones will inherently be passed on more often than worse ones. It is so certain that effectively we are talking about a tautology. When we talk about, for example, the narratives that go along with the life of Jesus, how is it possible that those narratives were not shaped by the fact that some versions of the story were more compelling, some versions of the story led to alterations in behavior that led populations to out-compete their rivals? These things effectively have to be true. Now getting into the particularities, let's say, of the Four Synoptic Gospels versus, let's say, the Gnostic text, so on and so forth, I don't think the time or community of those books necessarily were subjected to a Darwinian evolution. The books, there's just simply not enough time even in the story verse. I think those books, there are other factors involved. But the overall picture that he's giving us has some merit. And in fact, it's a little better clarified in his conversation with Sam Harris, I think. And so therein lies the explanation for all of the belief systems that we find different populations having on Earth. They are not inherently in competition with each other. They are adaptations to different times and different places, different obstacles. Sometimes a belief system replaces another. Sometimes we have a process analogous to speciation where you'll get a division, for example, between Catholics and Protestants, where both continue on, adapted to slightly different parameters. I was going to say, I'll be interested in Alex's response in a moment, but what you've described there in a sense is this idea that religious beliefs, like perhaps all beliefs of one kind or another, we receive them because of their value that has been handed down by the evolutionary process, this adaptive sort of, if you like, benefit that it confers on the people who hold it together, perhaps in a community. But in that sense, it doesn't have much to say as to whether those beliefs are true in a kind of objective way. It's more about their usefulness in that way. Well, I would argue that this is not really an obstacle, that in a sense, so what I've defined is something I call metaphorical truth. A metaphorical truth is a belief that if one acts according to the idea that it is true, one outcompetes somebody who will act according to the fact that it is false. Give an example of what that might look like. I've played this before and he talks about the, and I think there's real issues with his idea about metaphorical truth, but I think he's, I'll leave it at that. Now, one of the things that I've also been getting into is Robert Bellah's religion in human evolution, which is very interesting because part of the question in here is, well, what is a religion? He starts, Robert Bellah starts out talking about Dawkins' book, but then goes on to some other definition. Now, again, all of this would be a tremendous challenge to Hitler's imagination of what he imagines a human being is. It just doesn't, obviously doesn't really square with square with any of this. So, so Bellah talks about Dawkins and Dawkins, again, having a rather simplistic idea. You hear both Jordan Peterson and Brett Weinstein making the point that Dawkins didn't go far enough with his meme. And if you went further, and actually Robert Bellah gets into this. Most students of evolution continue to believe, contrary to Dawkins, that it is the organism that evolves, not just the genes. Mary Jane West Eberhard emphasizes the role of organism phenotype in its own evolution. I consider genes followers, not leaders in the adaptive evolution. Mark Kirchner and John Gerhardt in their important book, The Plausibility of Life, develop a conception of organ is or of organismic control of variation on the side of of generating phenotype, phenotypic variation. We believe the organism indeed participates in its own evolution and does so with a bias related to its long history of variation and selection. A particular importance are the behavioral and symbolic aspects of evolution, which build on genetic capacities, but are themselves not developed, not, not genetically controlled. As it were, what we, what we will probably find most of the resources, as it is there that we will probably find most of the resources for religion, cultural developments from biological beginnings. The evolutionary linguist Derek Bickerton suggests just how far back we must go in finding these beginnings. Speaking of language, but implicitly of culture, he writes, the trouble with almost all previous generations of evolution, is that they do not go back far enough. If we were to understand thoroughly all the language involved, we would probably have to go back to the birth of the lowliest animate creatures. For language depends crucially on the matrix of volition and primitive consciousness, which must have begun to be laid down hundreds of millions of years ago. A very suggestive elaboration of the degree to which organisms participate in their own evolution, an important kind of behavioral evolution has just been offered by John Adlingschmi and his colleagues in their book, Nietzsche Construction, the Neglected Process in Evolution. Adlingschmi at all argue that we cannot understand evolution in the sense that it is a process of evolution. If natural selection is blind, yet Nietzsche construction is semantically informed and goal directed, then evolution must comprise an entirely purposeful process. The evolution of the human body is a process of evolution. The evolution of the human body is a process of evolution. The evolution of the human body is a process of evolution. If natural selection is blind, yet Nietzsche construction is semantically informed and goal directed, then evolution must comprise an entirely purposeless process, namely natural selection, selecting for purposive organisms, namely Nietzsche constructing organisms. This must be true, at least insofar as the Nietzsche constructing organisms that are selected by natural selection function, so as to survive and reproduce. In other words, purpose gets into the equation. Now he develops this a little bit further and again in some ways talks about this alternative snack, alternative snack, am I hungry? No. Alternative track. I hope this gives some idea of what I mean by evolution and why I think it's important if we are to understand who we are and where we might want to go. But what I do mean by religion and what is an evolution of religion. Religion is a complex phenomenon, not easily defined, and although I spend much of the first two chapters trying to define it, just to get to the things I start to draw on Clifford Geertz's well-known definition, paraphrasing him, religion is a system of symbols that, when enacted by human beings, establish powerful, pervasive, and long-lasting moods and motivations that make sense in terms of an idea of a general order of life. It is interesting to note that Geertz left out, there is no mention of belief in supernatural beings or belief in God or gods, which many current definitions take for granted as essential. It is not that Geertz or I think such beliefs are absent in religion, though in some cases there may be, just that they are not a defining aspect. And then he'll go into that a little bit later. That's probably what I'll read. I'll read in here. Let me just pull back and look at the larger argument. Again, we began by talking about the question, is secular humanism more fragile than Christianity? The reason I'm going into the Bret Weinstein religion, Robert Bellistaff, is because my assertion is that the religion here is foundational. The religion here is much more durable. The religion here is something essential to human beings. This is very much contra Hitler. For Hitler, again, it's just the genetics. Hitler did not understand what a human being was in that sense. Hitler believed that, well, human beings will struggle and kill and reproduce, and he only imagined sort of the genetic layer. He didn't understand that, in fact, it's this other layer that very much makes us human beings. Religion, in fact, is how we survive. In fact, religion is why we survive. Religion has been the primary culture lane for human survival. The Pinker Tribe Enlightenment argument is a subtle redefinition of what it means to be human and, in fact, what the good life is. Hitler had an understanding of good life in very basic genetic terms. We, in fact, have to live in a religious landscape. And my question is whether this humanism religious light can really be durable. Now, if you read something like Yuval Noah Harari, his brief history, I don't know if he's got a new book out since now, but his brief history of tomorrow, he imagines that, well, humanity is going to continue on this culture track and then continue to impose itself on the genetic track. That might be. But what we can see now is we can get a sense of some of the things ahead that we're not quite sure how this is going to monkey with human beings as what we are. We're dealing with what we mean by a human being. What is the good life? What makes it good? Will you find these ideas in science? Now, I found another video on this website from this Jewish organization, and it talks about the outbreak of World War II, Jewish families on the brink of war. I found this portrayal rather interesting for something that I want to note here. In 1939, Jews enjoyed a vibrant, diverse, rich and active life throughout Europe. Vibrant, diverse, rich. Now, we're using very much contemporary religious terms, terms that are just simply assumed by us to sort of be, well, this is what life is about. Now, pay attention here because we're not going to go where Hitler did in terms of, well, we're going to be working on the species. But there's another track which has come online that says, well, this is what life is about. Life is about pleasant experiences. It's sort of an Epicurean value system. Now, again, notice this is, they lived their lives, dreamed and planned, loved and breathed. All of these are deeply psychological terms. Now, again, we want to get, I mean, John and his thing wants to get beyond the Axial Age mythology, but these dualisms keep popping up. And it's very interesting that we continue, what we've sort of had now, where you have Hitler with sort of this, this brute ecological argument about good, we now very much have this psychological argument about good. And we don't hear people making this case. But why should we, for example, end the life of either pre-borns or newborns with developmental problems? Well, because they can't achieve. What is good? Well, what is the greatest good? Well, it's this sort of this psychological well-being. And so every time we hear Delahunty or Sam Harris talk about well-being, it would be good to push that a little bit more because, again, most of this is psychological. We've in a sense gone beyond Hitler. But now we've sort of, again, occupied the upper half of the second story of humanity that has two stories. And, you know, there's a good bit of romanticism that seems to be sneaking in here. Now, one of the, again, one of the interesting things that my question here is, well, is secular humanism more fragile than Christianity? And I'm going to argue that by the evidence, it seems to be because what we do, it seems very clear, is not – Jordan Peterson made this point very often – once you sort of get rid of a bunch of the story stuff out here, up here that Sam Harris finds problematic, well, then people are supposed to be rational. But I keep bringing up countless examples of how they're not. And let's listen to – this video just dropped and Julian posted it on the Discord and there's tons of good stuff in this video just dropped today. Or I just found it today. So I want to start with an anecdote about – This is Tara Isabel Burton. About a hair salon and spa in New York. Now, I don't know how many of you are familiar with what was once the Red Door, the Elizabeth Arden salon. In the sort of American mid-century and thereafter, it was associated with a very particular brand of elegance, of glamour, of exclusivity. To go behind the Red Door was to attain a certain social status and glamour. The Red Door is rebranded last – Now, what is it – what is natural for human beings to do in a case like this? Well, status. Well, we will pay more for status, even just to get our hair done. Last year, it's now called Mind NY&D Spa. It is now a self-care journey with the same perks as its upscale predecessor. It's a slogan is, no matter how you define self-care, Mind is a resource focused on helping you achieve lasting beauty and wellness. At Mind, you'll find self-care you can confidently say is mine. Mind is mine. It's mine, not mine. That's just what it says. And I find this absolutely fascinating as an illustrative example that where you go for your kind of high-end investment in yourself, to use the sort of contemporary parlance, is not the place that advertises wealth or a particular vision of glamour, but a kind of spiritualised notion of wellness. It's a journey now to go and get your hair done. I've actually been there. You really just get your hair done. There's nothing different. It's the same as anywhere else along. But the narrative around it, what it advertises, is quite different. And to me, this speaks to a wider point or the first point I want to make, which is the way in which spirituality has become a very particular kind of commodity. It has become aspirational. It has become... Now, towards the end of John Verbeckis, I always talk about the secret sacred self. John very much talked about the sacred second self. Or was it the secret second self? I think it's the sacred second self. But the second self, and I found those very interesting conversations, and I'm going to talk to John a little bit later in the month. Maybe we'll talk about that. It's fascinating stuff. Easily treatable. It has become something that you can basically go into a store or go on Amazon and buy. And one might... You can take two approaches to this. You can say, well, this is completely terrible, and this is just horrible truth of late capitalism, which is not wrong. But it is also true that the fact that this is the hottest commodity in town, the sense of wellness, of spiritual well-being, of having a journey that you can sell products with this, I think speaks to a very particular American spiritual hunger. So, excuse me. According to a 2018 study by the branding arm of the media company Vice, it's called Virtue. That is true. 54% of millennials said that they were eager to spend their money on brands that, quote, enhanced their spirit and soul. 77% say they seek out brands that share their values. So, and again, these are just millennials that are being pulled here, but there is very much a sense among, let's say, all Americans, but I would say particularly millennials and Generation Z, that a kind of moral, spiritual, communal hunger, and these words are not synonymous, but they certainly overlap, is how people decide where to spend their money. This is coming, of course, at the same time that we are seeing more and more Americans, again particularly millennials and Generation Z, identify as religiously unaffiliated. So that's 36% of young millennials and around the same number of Generation Z say they do not belong to any religious tradition. However, and this is extremely important, and this is of all the religiously unaffiliated in America, 72% still say they believe in God or higher power, and about 20% say they believe in the Judeo-Christian God. So about 20% of the religiously unaffiliated are saying they don't want to check the Christian box or the Jewish box, but they still say that they believe in the God of the Bible. Now, it's worth saying that some, often atheists and agnostics do tend to self-under-report, so the 72% might be a tad lower. There may be people who say, I believe in something, but may not personally, privately feel that way. But even so, I think it's an extremely striking figure that there is just an enormous number, there's an enormous number of Americans who believe in something and care about something and want to spend their money on accessing that something. But for whatever reason, or for reasons which I will talk about, do not wish or feel that they can do so through the medium of organized religion. And for me, at least in my book and my read on this, is that so much of this tension has less to do with personal faith, with personal belief than it does with a mounting distrust in institutions more broadly and visions of what one's spiritual life ought to be. My hypothesis, and I'd love to debate and discuss and see where we align and where we don't hear, is that the tension isn't exactly between Christianity and paganism aren't the words I would use to describe it, but between a kind of intuitionism and institutionalism, that in the American religious landscape there is a spiritual trend that you can find, and I see it reflected in wellness, in modern occultism, in techno-utopianism, in fandom culture, in the rise of the cultures around polyamory, for example, a profound belief in the power of human individuality, of human intuition, to rewrite the script, to remake our own worlds. There's a kind of, I believe, a unified theology you can find in these many disparate traditions that are popular with what you might call the spiritual but not religious and what I call the religiously remixed, which is a combination of people who identify as spiritual but not religious, people who say they believe in a higher power but don't affiliate with the religion, and people who say they belong to one religion but whose practices are much more eclectic. Just one example, about 29% of self-proclaimed Christians say they believe in reincarnation. So what do we do with that? And all of these groups together I call the remixed. And I would motion that what unites all these different groups and all these practices popular with this group is this sort of idea that there's the self and there's society, and that the self is fundamentally good, fundamentally divine, its intuitions are fundamentally right, your desires are fundamentally pure, and a repressive society. Now notice again how these things have morphed, how these things have changed. And notice the level at which they change. This isn't structure, this isn't organized, in fact it's anti-institutional at this moment, but this isn't people shucking off Christianity and getting rational, this is people shucking off Christianity because they're more intuitive. Or a repressive culture in some way gets between you and your truest self. And that your duty as a person who wants to achieve self-actualization through self-care is to look inward to figure out who you really are and to cast off these oppressive shackles. Now this isn't necessarily, isn't at all, a new idea in American religious life. It's, for starters, sort of the idea that we're all into astrology now, or we're all into the cultism now is somewhat inaccurate. In the late 17th century and really throughout the 18th century, for example, only about 15% of Americans actually went to church. Practices like divination, fortune telling, astrology, folk medicine, and wordscraft, all quite common, so this isn't completely new. But also there's just a strong and robust American tradition of this kind of intuitional focus. I'm thinking, for example, of transcendentalism, of Emerson, who condemned human society as a conspiracy against the manhood of every one of its members, a joint stock company in which the members agreed to surrender the liberty and culture of the joiner. There's, for those of you familiar with New Thought, there's this extremely popular, massive craze in the 19th century. It's basically, if you're familiar with The Secret, it's basically that. But in the 19th century, it started in the 1860s by a clockmaker called Phineas Quimby and became this just massive, best-selling publication craze where the idea was you can manifest your own reality simply by believing in yourself, simply by dreaming it, and it would arrive. A couple of wonderful self-help quotes from New Thought authors. You're meant to repeat, I am well, I am opulent, I have everything, I do right, I know, and then this would happen to you. Anything if you use yours, if you only want it hard enough, just think of it. Anything. Try it. Try it in earnest, and you will succeed. It is the operation of a mighty law. That was William Walser Atkinson's making of one thought force in business and everyday life. So there is a sort of long-standing American tradition of this belief in both a kind of pure individualism but also a spiritualized individualism. Now I think part of what we should be seeing here is how human beings are. Okay? And, you know, there's clearly something motivated behind Hitler's imagination that while the Germans are up on top, and of course he's Austrian but considers himself German, his language groups perhaps, or he imagines his races to be, so the German language groups are up on top and the Jews are sort of a non-race or an anti-race because otherwise, well, Hitler might be second. Human beings are tremendously motivated, and the sphere in which this motivation occurs is not so much down here the genetic, the matter verse, but it's up here in the story verse. And this is what gets into our, as Bella notes, this is what for a very long time gets into our evolution, gets into our transformation. And again, if Holland's thesis is correct, you know, Christianity so dominated all of this that so many of sort of the fixed points had been set by Christianity, especially with respect to moral aspirations. Now, and what happens is there's always this process of sort of, you know, finding these pillars and then settling back into sort of the average succumbing to our desires, and this might, you know, get into some of this magical thinking. And it's so ironic that, you know, all of this attacking, well, institutional religion because you can sort of find them easily because they're actually getting in one place and they're forming institutions and they're propagating and maintaining themselves through time as opposed to all of this other stuff, which seems to always be in the background. One in which by listening to yourself, you can affect the force, the energy of the universe. And often this language of a kind of depersonalized nebulous energy was as common in the new thought as it is now. But there are, I would motion, distinctive elements of contemporary, that make it rather different and, for my mind, even more interesting to write about than its forebears. There's the internet, of course, and the idea that we are all sort of curating our own identities. We can mix and match. We don't have to. It's a phenomenon that the Harvard Divinity Scholar, Caspar Turcoila and Angie Thurston, call unbundling, kind of like a cable package. You can mix and match. You can get your sense of meaning from one place and your purpose from the other place. And you can do a bit of yoga and a bit of tarot and go to Christmas and Easter services, but also your friends should have dinner. And that the way in which you create your spiritual life, as someone I interviewed, Phil Zuckerman, who wrote a wonderful book on secularism, said, Well, you curate your Facebook feed. Why shouldn't you curate your spiritual life? And I thought, well, make of that what you will. There now exists something called the Ritual Design Lab, which is founded by designers Croissants-Ausenche and Margaret Hagen, which basically, if you tell the lab what you need or want, they do this for people. They also do it for companies. Microsoft has used them. They will create rituals for you to enact, somehow, I don't know, maximize your spiritual potential. And this is how they describe themselves. The new generation wants bite-sized spirituality instead of a whole menu of courses. I'm afraid this is a good thing. So the way in which the internet culture of this kind of curation culture, the freedom that we have not just to mix and match, but also to create, to respond to an existing text or an existing idea, not simply with acquiescence, but with a sense of entitlement that we should be able to tell our own stories. All of this has, I believe, resulted in a spiritual landscape defined by a kind of obsession on the part of many believers and would-be believers with agency, with creative ownership, with, you might say, control. I'm going to skip ahead because I realize that I'm going on a bit. And I think the last point that I do want to make before I wrap up is that it's possible to be a bit cynical and row one's eyes at this, and I certainly have been guilty of doing that bit in the talk. However, it's also vital to mention that for many people, this is the only access to a spiritual life that they feel they have. People who perceive that they have been marginalized or left behind or mistreated or abandoned by their faith community or... Now, notice again, now we're introducing the assumed moral view of this group of people. And again, as Tom Holland would note, classics, people in antiquity wouldn't see it this way. This perspective on this group of people, we had rather a haughty view of all of these silly people and their buffet spirituality. And well, now we're going to remember that these people are deserving of mercy and pity, and well, we have to insert Christianity into that posture. Or in which they were raised. Iterations of spirituality that either are apart from or consciously, as in the case of elements of modern paganism, stand against the Judeo-Christian cultural tradition, are seen as sort of desirable and even acts of political resistance. I'm going to just close with a quote from a zine by Dakota Stockfleet, who is a non-binary witch at Catland Books, which was behind the Hex Brett Kavanaugh event in 2018. And there's a zine called The Ethics of Cursing that I bought in Catland, which talks about how black magic is for them a very necessary element of fighting against oppression. The code of oppression is both Christianity, colonialism, white supremacy, patriarchy. Cursing becomes not just something you kind of do for fun or as a fun witch aesthetic, but a way of reclaiming a spiritual life in conscious political opposition. If you practice witchcraft, they write, and you have never considered cursing someone, I have to assume you haven't been through much in the way of violence, trauma, or abuse. Folk magic is what arms the poor, the downtrodden, and the outcast. How could anyone fault me for cursing my rapist? Even if I was to subject myself to the terrifying police, the exhaustion of telling and retelling and retelling the story of how I was attacked and robbed and violated to people who will blame me or not believe me, there is almost a surefire guarantee he will not be caught or brought to justice. How could anyone blame me, let alone shame me, for seeking to be the arbiter of my own justice by cursing that evil maid? Notice the grabbing of the story, the molding of the story, and always the connection between the matter verse and the story verse, and how I am going to change the matter verse by way of the story verse, even if the details don't change, even if the history doesn't change, I am going to take it, and this is all part of the agency of the self in pulling this off. Now, the next talk is excellent, too. I'll stop there. Be here, in this distinguished company, to talk about some pretty interesting questions, I think. In my remarks, I'm going to try to do a couple of things. One is, as Ross asked me to do, to give a bit of a sense of the argument in the book that he mentioned, that there are non-Christian pagans and Christians in the city. But then I also want to offer a few thoughts, speculative thoughts, on the significance of that argument for the question that's most central, I guess, to our discussion. This is Stephen Smith from San Diego School of Law. We have, or are we on the verge of settling into, some new American religion that would be post-Christian, maybe describable as some kind of paganism, something that would serve the role that maybe non-sectarian Protestantism did in the 19th century. And again, we've seen this in many people, this search for a new religion that isn't a religion, or Alistair McGrath noting to Brett Weinstein, it almost sounds like you're wanting to start a new religion. And this, again, you remember Tom Holland making the comment that we're sort of post-Protestantism, and Steve Smith very much following up on the same line of thought here in this video. So, in the book, I try to develop and defend an idea that was proposed by T.S. Eliot. Eliot argued at one point that the future of the West would be determined by a contest between Christianity and what he called modern paganism. He thought Western societies are currently Christian, or classifiable as Christian, not because they're Christian in any very deep sense, but because they once had been Christian, and sort of by default they would remain classifiable as Christian. Now, don't forget here what Tara had said too, that remember in the 19th century, church attendance was perhaps something around the 15% of the American population, which is in fact lower than it is now. And I've made the point a number of times that church attendance reached its peak in American society during the Cold War. So there's often this mythology, this subtraction story, that everybody used to go to church back in the old days, and then in the 20th century it's sort of been constantly going down. That's by no means the truth. And what Stephen Smith is going to do is make this whole picture quite a bit more complex. Until that was replaced by, I think he said positively something else, which he thought had not happened yet. But maybe it has happened by now, not because they're Christian in any very deep sense, but because they once had been Christian, and sort of by default they would remain classifiable as Christian, until that was replaced by, I think he said positively something else, which he thought had not happened yet. But maybe it has happened by now, maybe the modern paganism that he mentioned has now prevailed, and that would at least be another way of raising the question that Ross raises here, I think. Now, Eliot offered this suggestion, he said, as a help with, he said, immediate perplexities that fill our minds. He said, the current terms in which we describe our society only operate to deceive and stupefy us. And that seems right to me, and so that seemed like it was an intriguing possibility to investigate and see whether his diagnosis would help with that. In particular, it does seem that the prophecies that were once almost universally believed about inevitable secularization have by now been pretty much discredited, or at least heavily qualified. But we still tend to describe constituencies or movements or positions by putting them into the boxes of religious or secular. And yet these descriptions often seem to obscure as much as they illuminate. On many issues, the parties on both sides of a controversy seem religious. They reflect a kind of evangelical zeal, a sort of good versus evil view of the world, a tendency to want to anathematize their opponents. Secular and Christian doesn't quite seem to capture that. It seems to, over a century ago, Chesterton said, what we see in the world is a quote, a fight of creeds masquerading as policies. And he went on to say, we've contrived to invent a new kind of hypocrite. The old hypocrite was a man whose aims were really worldly and practical, while he pretended that they were religious. The new hypocrite is one whose aims are really religious, while he pretends that they are worldly and practical. That seems to me, if anything, more true today than it was when Chesterton wrote it. But the question is how to describe these religious divides and Eliot's diagnosis that might seem to be helpful in doing this. Now, that diagnosis, I think, generates a major objection, and that is that paganism just doesn't seem to be a term that describes important positions or movements today. And again, I thought it was really helpful in Whitecart's book where he notes, was Hitler a Christian? No. Was Hitler an atheist? No. Was Hitler an occultist or an occultist? No. Well, how do we categorize? And in fact, what you'll note here is that we even have difficulty categorizing ourselves, because what's interesting is that in this particular setting, even though there's a heavy religious background to it, it's also deeply secular at the same time, that these layers are coexisting. And in fact, these layers are always coexisting. And as I wanted to say before, we would expect from this group of people to be both highly secularized, highly educated, and at the top of the class game. And if what is true for these people, the people going to read this uber-exclusive salon where, you know, yeah, you're getting your hair done, but it's a spiritual experience and it's a spiritual upgrade and your hair is infused with spirituality. These are people that we would imagine, these are people that Sam Harris would imagine, well, these people should all be rational and non-religious. And what, again, we find is, as Stephen Smith said, that thesis is dead. It's gone. I mean, it's not even taking seriously this rationalistic eschatology. There's no evidence for it. And it simply should be put away. It is true. We hear more about Wiccans and Satanists and so forth. And these are interesting movements and so forth, but not really politically and culturally salient. And so we notice, well, we've got kind of Christianity lurking around here, and we've got secularism and secular-ish kind of all over. And then we have the spiritual all over, but they don't coalesce. They don't. I really like the institutional versus intuitional, because institutional, you know, we're always talking about these propositions. Institutions and communities need propositions to sort of find each other and locate each other and hold each other accountable and have a structure where the intuitional, where they're all over the place, but they'll never become a community. And so they just sort of, they sort of gig their way to a community. I need a little community here. I need a little meaning here. And so they're just kind of, you know, doing the salad bar thing and piecing it together and fill their plates. Oh, there it is. At least politically, let's say. Actors, it seems. Especially in the academy where I live. My progressive friends in the academy who have managed to read the book find the description of some of them as pagans as just either amusing or insulting, but just not plausible at all. Now, my response to that objection is to suggest that they're right in rejecting this if you equate paganism with myths about Zeus and Apollo and so forth, or with sacrifices and auguries and that sort of thing. But I think it's more helpful and really, in a sense, more perspicuous, let's say, to understand paganism as imminent religiosity. Put it this way, you know. Imminent religiosity. It's really good. If religion, which of course is a much disputed term, is taken to refer to an orientation toward the sacred, then we can add... Again, that's far closer to, you know, to something Robert Bellah would be pursuing in his book, an orientation to the sacred or, you know, the item of our chief concern. You know, again, much more of a sociology of religious, a functional definition of religion rather than stories about supernatural things. Ask for somebody, what is the sacred for them, or more specifically, where is the sacred? And the pagan answer is the sacred exists within this world. It's imminent. It's an imminent religiosity. Now, I don't think that in defining paganism this way, there's anything really contrived about the definition either. Basically, that's, I think, the same conceptions used in the really remarkable recent book by Anthony Cronman, Confessions of a Boringan Pagan. But it's also, I think, really faithful to ancient paganism. In the first century BC, the scholar Marcus Varro distinguished among mythic religion, basically stories about gods and goddesses and so forth, civic religion, the sacrifices and auguries and so forth, and we might use the term philosophical religion. And it was possible, he said, to scoff at the mythic religion, as Varro and many others did, even perhaps at the civic religion, as Seneca did, at least according to Augustine, and still embrace the philosophical religion, then treating the stories about gods and goddesses and the sacrifices and so forth as kind of symbolic or expressive manifestations of this deeper, you know, imminent religiosity. This probably was actually the position of many educated Romans at the time. Now in this context, the rise of Christianity and Judaism was a radical development, as scholars like Jan Ostman have explained, precisely because Christians and Jews believed in the transcendent deity. And I've been picked up in my habit of reading too many books at once, kind of looking at these two books at the same time. The Religion of Israel, which this is the Moshe Greenberg's translation of Ezekiel Kaufman and the Transubstantiation Book, especially the first chapter, very much getting into nominalism versus realism and the debate over transubstantiation. And this is going to go into the, you know, why Luther wanted to resist nominalism and the problems that he had with transubstantiation and on and on. So this question of the radical reworking of the playing field that happened with Judaism and Christianity. And this belief had revolutionary implications for views of the world, sexuality, civic obligation and life generally. Now, as we know, in the fourth and fifth centuries, there was a kind of on again, off again struggle between Christianity and paganism within the Roman Empire. And Christianity eventually prevailed as an official matter. But that's an important qualifier. This is sometimes described as the Christian Revolution. And of course, it set the stage for centuries of Christendom and so forth. And yet I think it would be a mistake to think that paganism simply disappeared. In fact, I would say it survived and even flourished in various ways. But I'll mention three. One is, I think paganism persisted and indeed was cherished in the sort of historical memory of the West. There was a longstanding, you know, ongoing admiration for and a desire to recover the glory that was Greece and the grandeur that was Rome, to use a post phrase. The Renaissance, of course, was a sort of emphatic manifestation of this theme. And that theme is easily observable in a lot of the paintings of the great Renaissance masters. Secondly, and kind of conversely in the Western imagination, I think there's been a persistent resentment towards often hostility toward the force that turned out the lights on, as Heinrich Hein put it, the merry dance of paganism, namely Christianity, a resentment toward Christianity. That's been an ongoing theme, too. But the Enlightenment is often, you know, seen as a conspicuous manifestation of that theme. In Peter Gay's Admired History of the Enlightenment, he emphasizes this anti-Christian theme and describes the Enlightenment as the rise of modern paganism. That's the subtitle for one of his volumes. But third, and perhaps even more importantly, I think it can plausibly be argued that paganism, or a tendency to sacralize the things of this world, is in a sense the natural condition of humanity. You know, we live in this world. This is the world we know firsthand that we're sure of. Anything beyond this world we know only through intimation or inference. And insofar as we are oriented toward the sacred, we naturally tend to locate the sacred within this world. And again, this gets into very deep things, a sacramental view of the world. There's a ton of stuff in his little talk here. It's actually a pretty familiar point. It's been stressed in scripture and a thousand homilies over the centuries by preachers and so forth. So I think it actually might plausibly be argued that despite the official triumph of Christianity in late antiquity, paganism actually remained a sort of dominant position or orientation throughout the intervening centuries. But even so, and this is important too, over those centuries of Christendom basically, Christianity has remained sort of the official position. It's supplied the regulative ideal for governing law and politics and culture and so forth. Paganism, I would argue, has remained strong, but mostly beneath the surface, not the official position. And this is where, again, I make the observations about class, that everybody on this stage is doing very well. And they are highly educated. They are the elites. Now, if you get down to the homeless guy that just came in and we had a little talk, I never meet homeless people that are atheists. They all believe in something, and they're very willing to talk about it. And I think, me as a preacher, I'm fair game, and off we go and off we go. And working class people and people with less education and people who have not been secularized as much in terms of the habits of demythologizing of the world. So if you're looking at bulk population, again, the people on this stage should be the most rational in Sam Harris terms, the most demythologized. But these people aren't. And again, people at that elite level, they're the, Sam Harris talks about people who are anti-vaxxers. Well, you know, there's plenty anti-vaxxers in Hollywood in Southern California who have oodles of money and oodles of status and plenty of education, and they're anti-vaxxers. And so, you know, again, I love this image that, yeah, Christianity continued to move through, but beneath there are folk religions. And it's just simply how we're made. And so obviously, you're going to want a religion that plays at the folk level, but plays with the elites. And again, if you read C.S. Lewis's A Severe Mercy, when C.S. Lewis in the end was sort of looking at Hinduism and looking at Christianity after he'd become some kind of a theist, he eventually sort of opted for Christianity because he said it just simply holds together better, both at the heights of the intellectual and then down into the lay person with the squeaky boots attending church, singing those silly songs that C.S. Lewis never liked much church music. But this may be where I think things have changed recently. I argue in the book that imminent religiosity is becoming more self-conscious and aggressive. You can see this in various places. In the book, I particularly discussed the work of Ronald Dworkin, especially his last book, Religion Without God, but it's apparent in other ways as well. And if that's right, then it wouldn't be surprising to see a more deliberate effort to throw off the vestiges of Christianity as the regulative ideal. And I argue in the book that this, in fact, is what we see in recent decades. I teach constitutional law sometimes and write about it. So I talk about this in the area of constitutional law, and I think it helps to illuminate developments in the area of new constitutional rights, reflecting the sexual revolution, things concerned with marriage, also in the area of religious freedom. And this can be described, I think, as a kind of pagan counterrevolution, as an attempt to reverse the Christian revolution of late antiquity. Now that discussion in the book takes up two or three chapters, and I won't try to summarize those here. But instead, I want to turn now briefly to the question that we're talking about on this panel. Do we see now the emergence of a new American religion? It's paganism as a sort of regulative ideal, replacing Christianity or biblical religion, Judeo-Christianity, as the regulative ideal. And I think it can only be tentative in addressing that question, but my answer would be yes and no. In one sense, more yes than no, and in another sense, more no than yes. So let me just... Oh, come on. Oh, these academics. I'm going to try to explain the yes part. I think it's plausible to say that an imminent religiosity has been the dominant if tacit orthodoxy for some time now. It's driven constitutional developments, as I say, and a lot else. I think it's dominant in the academy. I think it's dominant in the entertainment industry. This is not so much a prediction of what may be coming as a sort of fait accompli. But on the no side, I think that paganism or imminent religion may flourish best when it stays beneath the surface. It may be parasitic on something else. When it's camouflaged as secular neutrality or a kind of reverent scientific naturalism, or maybe as a kind of liberal Christianity, though that's a chapter I didn't put in the book, but it's a chapter that could have been written. That is such what he says right there is just such an interesting idea that all of these, both the Wiccans over here and Sam Harris over there. And you see this that liberal Christianity, none of them can sort of exist on their own. They have to feed off something that has more definition, something that has more substance, something that has deeper historical roots, something that has more enduring power. And so then they can sort of maintain themselves in a parasitic way at the at the expense of the host. But if the host were to die, it's really difficult to know how the civilization could actually have enough to go on and actually be productive and go someplace, which, of course, leads to real concerns. What if the host dies? We've certainly seen diminishment of the force of Christianity in the culture. What if Christianity goes away from the culture? And what we see in the Nazi illustration or the communist illustration that sort of a central, a different central ideology attempts to function as religion, but very much in the Jordan Peterson mode. It's a crippled religion and it won't be able to sustain life over the long run. And when paganism comes or imminent religiosity comes out in the open as its own thing, then it may need to defend and justify itself. And it's not clear to me that it can do that convincingly. Maybe it is just too spiritually and intellectually thin to flourish when it's actually viewed for what it is. Now, Ross, in a column a while back in the New York Times raised questions about whether modern paganism would have the cultic resources that a successful religion would need. And I think that is a good question. But I want to just quickly point to several other deficiencies, all of which are very debatable. But one, I think that as a philosophical position, the paganism, he doesn't call it that because of religion of somebody like Ronald Dworkin, just lacks the coherence and the rigor that either a hardcore scientific naturalism has or the Christianity has. Dworkin, he asserts basically that we believe in objective value, not merely subjective value, an objective meaning to life, not merely subjective. And it isn't really clear what these things even mean or what ontological foundation they have for him. Anthony Cronman's paganism, which is basically Spinoza, is a whole different story. And I don't have the time or, frankly, the competence to talk about that here. But I think that is one issue. A second concern, I think, is that the normative attractiveness of modern paganism consists in commitments to things like human equality and human dignity. But these are basically inherited, I would argue, from the Christian or Judeo-Christian, the biblical sort of tradition. Same point that Tom Holland is making. And it's not clear that they're sustainable if they're removed from that sort of foundation. In other words, again, there's a parasitic nature to their existence that, well, they can derive these things from, if Christianity is there to derive them from. But what happens when Christianity is, let's say, either actively toppled over, like we see in Nazism or communism, or just simply sort of erodes? And in some ways, perhaps, watching Europe is going to be the way to get a sense of which way that blows. Just the third sort of final point here. I think modern, imminent religiosity is primarily committed to secondary values, you might say. To things like human equality and dignity and autonomy. The goal, in other words, is sort of to enable human beings to live the kind of life that they choose or that we choose. But paganism doesn't have much to say about what to choose, about what kind of life really is valuable. Walter Lippmann talked about this years ago in a really important book, I think, written in the 1920s, A Preface to Morals. And then he says, here's a quote, having won the freedom to do what they wish, modern people, they do not know what they wish to do. These sort of secondary values don't really tell us what a good life consists of. So as I said, I think there is a lot to debate here and a lot to speculative. But these kinds of considerations lead me to be skeptical about whether there's a new American religion in the sense of an imminent religiosity or paganism that we could really settle into. I sort of think it's more likely that we're going to have an ongoing, continuing conflict and confusion over some of these things. So again, excellent talk and watch the whole talk. And as the point I made a few times, class is a big deal in this discussion, and it's not really talked about at all. And the conversation of the most secular class you've got here, we're not talking about ethnic minority communities, we're not talking about immigrant communities, we're not talking about blue collar working class communities, all less subject to the scientistic peer pressure. Now, Dathot, towards the end of this, so they both give their little spiel and Dathot kind of pushes in and then they'll have question and answer. And again, the whole video is worth watching, but I wanted to sort of wrap it up, connecting it to, I think I'm going to split this into two parts. The first part and the second part are going to do some little connectors because I think the whole video is going to be too long, even for me. So I'll release part one on one day and part one on another, give you a little teaser out there, but that means I've got to do some little connecting bits for it. But Dathot then, to sort of tie this up and bring it back to the Nazi question, which, you know, then I have to bring it back to the whole question. To bring it back to the Nazi question, Dathot kind of goes there and asks about that with them. It's quite interesting. He makes a good point. But since that ended where it ended, right, in National Socialism and everything associated with that, I wonder if there's sort of a permanent, maybe not permanent, but I think there's a clear desire in some quarters to move beyond Christianity, but never move beyond Christianity in that way. Again, and I think, you know, when you get all the way back to Matt Dillahunty and people like him, that's pretty much where they're at. So let's sort of stay parasitic, even if we're not really going to footnote it or we're not really going to care or we just say, OK, it's arbitrary that we say human exceptionalism, but let's just let's just stay right here. Let's let's stay right here and not move. But again, I think the argument is that they're tethered to something much larger and and they're they're they're not only sort of living parasitically off the host, but they're they're actually attempting to kill the host. And now many others such as let's say Adam, Adam friended think club. He's he's very he's much more. No, I like Christians and I'm glad the church is here and I like Christianity and I like their morals. I don't believe in their God, but I certainly want them to stick around. And I think there's a good number of people like that, too. And sort of unlike the well, you know, Sam Harris and and Matt Delahunty are sort of, you know, deriving their deriving their income by eating and feeding on the host, trying to get there. But they, you know, they they don't want it to go beyond. They don't, you know, they don't want they don't want communism and they don't want they don't want Nazi ideology either. They sort of want the status quo, even though they're preaching a sort of utopian eschatology of rationalism and godlessness that it can all be better if we get rid of the God. Do you think where sort of I mean, you've you've you've written about sort of Nietzschean sort of flirtations and forays and those are often on the alt right or the far right. But I mean, do you do either of you think that's at all a fair description of sort of today's relationship with the aristocratic side or the hierarchical side or the cruel side of a sort of pagan turn? I guess. Well, I think, yeah, probably that is a fair description of what a lot of people would like to do. But I guess something that's a point that I think is relevant to that and to this kind of make your own religion, you know, kind of boutique spirituality type of thing, you know, that we've been talking about is that that may be possible under certain circumstances and plausible. It might not be under all. I've been reading over the last couple of months. Some of the theologians around the early 20th century who were involved in the sort of fundamentalist modernist controversy. And I don't remember which one said this, but someone said during good times, Christians tend to favor the Greek side of their religion. And during bad times, they shift to the outside of their religion. And there's something about this kind of spirituality that it seems to me is available when things are relatively prosperous. You know, and people have their good life, you know, their job or their position in the university or whatever. And then they can go down and enjoy a little spirituality of this kind or another. And, you know, I think about Sam Harris and OK, there's no free ride. But I got my little app for meditation and meditation is, you know, meditation is my and meditation is my hobby. And, you know, it's OK to have this as a hobby. But I'm not sure that's sustainable under other kinds of circumstances. I think there can be circumstances that can push things in the direction of something more of a choice between. And again, I think that's something like the scientific naturalism or the full blown Christianity or other kinds of transcendent religion are just more intellectually coherent and rigorous positions than this kind of mushy middle fashion known religion thing. And I'm not sure that things may not occur that might push us one way or the other. That's why I'm just skeptical that that kind of thing that can flourish now or, you know, when most of the middle class people and so forth that are probably doing relatively well off will necessarily be sustainable over the long haul. Now. And I think, you know, looking overseas, we don't. You're going to find in in Africa and Latin America and Asia in again these these other communities, you're going to find that they do hit full blown religion usually and and inhabit that. And often, you know, folk religion alongside of, you know, the more developed, more institutionalized religions like like Christianity. And so here we get to the question about what do you need? I mean, is it is secular humanism more fragile than Christianity? And I think what we're seeing is there's a degree of of a parasitic nature to it. And and what you really need over the long haul are are religion that has all of these elements. And I say you, I mean us as a group, as a society, something that's scalable. It has to it has to work for the it has to work for the academic and for the philosopher. It also has to work for the truck driver and the and the the person. It has to scale up and down the social spectrum, up and down the classes, has to be emotionally satisfying. In fact, it has to be emotionally engaging. So it has to bring a tear to our eye. It has to move our heart. Our heart has to be warmed. It has to move us to give our money. It has to move us to sacrifice. It has to move us to do what we don't want to do. It's got to grip us in a way that that can't be, you know, it has to be all four P's. It has to be perspectival and participatory and procedural and propositional. I think they all come together to for a cohesive, cohesive, stable thing. It has to be communal. And again, when all of these things line up and they're all working together, not just, oh, I have my little community over here. Oh, I have my ideas over here. Oh, I've got my institution over here. When it all comes together in one package, there's sort of a Voltron nature where the the the sum of its parts is the the whole is much greater than just the the sum of its parts. So it has to be communal, has to be institutional, has to be personal, has to be generational, has to be rich, deep, diverse, but not merely psychological. Also has to be material. It's got to basically pull the whole thing together, yet stable enough, yet diverse enough that it can handle the the ongoing and especially as as science and technology change. As as things turn, as cultures move, it's got to be able to hop cultures. And of course, you know what religion I think does all these. And I do think it continues to be more than viable. And I think it frankly isn't going away and will even suffer and endure the parasites upon it. So this has been quite long. And so I think I am going to cut this up into two pieces. And by the time you hear this, you already know that. So I don't know what I'm saying to it, saying it. So thanks for watching.