https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=8pwZpgHlB3o

 Hi, this is Paul and many of you remember Roland. Roland and I have talked about philosophy. Roland is a citizen of the Netherlands and one of the things that I wanted to talk about today because I know nothing about it is this system of pillars in the Netherlands. Now you might not have heard of this system but this is, well Roland why don't you explain a little bit what pillars are in the Netherlands and how they came about and what they were designed to do. Alright, pillars are basically, or pillarization or a system of pillars. So it is the institutional segregation of different communities, different communities based on worldview or religious or ideological. So basically what happens, it started in the 19th century and you had basically the liberals or the classical liberals we would say right now, you had them dominate the government institutions and the socialists were also quite organized but not in the, they weren't very powerful yet in the parliament. So and the schools, even though the Netherlands was very religious at that time, all the schools were just government secular schools. So what happened was that different communities started to organize themselves along religious and ideological lines to, for different objectives for example to let their voices be heard in the political sphere, to increase their influence on the community and on the country as a whole, to keep people inside the faith for example or the ideology, to train people in their, their worldview. And so these pillars were just basically really in the end they became a total segregation of almost all institutions people ordinarily participate in. So the most important were the churches of course, I mean that was already the case but it was mostly based on the churches. So you had a Protestant pillar, it wasn't perfectly the same, there were actually, it was kind of, there was different Protestant communities so it wasn't all one monolith and then you had the Roman Catholics, the socialists and eventually also the liberals, we were basically, well I mean they were a smaller group, I mean the upper class basically, the capitalists Marx would say. And so they started their own schools for example, their own political parties eventually, the newspapers, magazines in the 50s and 60s, they had their own broadcasting corporations, state fund actually, university, the Free University in Amsterdam, where I'm studying at the moment, started as such as a pillarised organisation by the reformed pillar of Abraham Kuiper and it was founded on this religious idea and it trained young reforms people to for example become ministers, that was one of the first objectives but also all kinds of other jobs. So there were even more, I mean labour unions for example also, they were segregated, at the moment there's even an insurance company that's basically pillarised, hospitals, other associations, youth organisations, student organisations, all that kind of stuff. So it was, and in the past, I mean the heights of pillarisation was basically at the end of the 19th century and the first half of the 20th century. So after the Second World War, especially in the 60s and later, most of the pillars, pretty much all of the pillars collapsed. But before that, you had, it was so segregated that you could live, just live in the same town but never really interact with people of a fundamentally different persuasion. And so you could even go to the, I mean you were reformed, you would go to the reformed baker and the reformed grocery store sometimes and that kind of stuff. So it was really, it was very deeply embedded in the society in the past. But yeah, I mean, and what I am myself part of is, you could say the last real pillar that's still left at the moment. And that is the small reformed churches. So basically Calvinist churches of course, they're not that big, a couple hundred thousand people in total I think. And the interesting fact is that their pillarisation actually seemed to have started more in the 60s, 70s and 80s. And because the rest of the Netherlands was rapidly secularizing and schools were secularizing and all institutions were secularizing and suddenly these small churches, well just they were out alone almost, not entirely of course. But so they started their own organizations and right now they got their own schools. They got primary schools across the Bible belt mostly, but also at some other places. Even secondary schools, middle schools, high schools as well. So for me what it meant was that I was in reformed schools from four to 18 until I went to university. That's really really really important and weird. I was too. The Dutch who immigrated to the United States, now you mentioned that these pillars, these weren't a government program. This is what people did privately and on their own. Because it's interesting when the Dutch immigrants came to the United States, they formed a pillar. But I had never heard the word. But that was what the Christian Reformed Church did. We had the Holland Home, we had Christian schools, and then especially when the immigrants came to the United States after the war, these Kyperians were very much about, you know, we're going to have Christian this and Christian that. And so when I heard you describe the pillars, I thought, oh my goodness, I grew up in one, but nobody told me I was in one. Because that's what the Christian Reformed Church did. That's so weird. Yeah, of course. I mean, it's logical. I mean, if you migrate, but you take your ideas with you and your practices. And I mean, it is really effective, I think, in keeping the community together, in binding people together. It's also sometimes a way, in some sense, a way of social control over members as well. I mean, so it is positive. And I mean, and sometimes, I mean, you need social cohesion as well. So I wouldn't qualify this as negative necessarily. But yeah, I mean, that does mean that you're very protected. And you don't, for example, I grew up and I had no Christian friends. I mean, I sometimes played with like, the neighbors. You had no non-Christian friends? No, no, no non-Christian friends. Yeah, that's right. Yeah. But yeah, luckily, I did have friends. But yeah, I mean, we sometimes played with the neighbors, the kids. But that was pretty much it. There wasn't really any deep friendship or anything. So you and in school, you were taught the same thing as in church and as at home. And like, so it's really, it really forms you in a deep way. And yeah, I mean, that's also partly the point of it. It is the point of it. Now, have you heard? I mean, there are some other purposes, like political influence and culture influence. But I think especially in the case of the small reform pillar, the biggest purpose is protection of especially of young people, but also of older people. Yeah, well, protection of young people. And then in the Christian Reformed Pillar of the United States, we were all went to school in it, we were formed in it, then we went to Calvin College, so we can make sure we married in it. And yeah, that's important, too. Yeah. Yeah. And you just, you know, I didn't, I my wife wasn't a member of the Christian reform while she did join. But yeah, you stayed in your pillar. And what's interesting, have you heard of Rod Dreher and the Benedict option? I've heard talk about it on YouTube. And then basically, as far as I mean, people take it to be that Christians should like self set a sacred gate and just retreat from from all sexual institutions. And I mean, a little bit going like the aim. Yeah, I don't think he actually recommends it that far. But whenever I listen to talk about the Benedict option, I think about what the Christian reform church was, really until the 60s and 70s in North America. And at that point, it, you know, it's very interesting that the Christian Reformed Church in North America, we often wonder if we're 20 years behind the Dutch Church, because we and listening to you describe, you know, the, you know, the giving up in the broader society of this pillar dynamic. And again, I want to stress this wasn't a government program, this was from the ground up. This was these were individuals self selecting, building their own institutions. That's my understanding of it. Correct? Yeah, I mean, not not strictly grassroots, but you had visionaries like Kuiper and others. I mean, Roman Catholic Church had its own organization that could help. So there were socialist organizations, and there were some organizations and people that took the lead and, and organize and support and made make sure people made people enthusiastic about it. And then to, for example, to fund the free university, it was really, I mean, the school ran for a long time without any government funding the university and it was all paid for by by donations by the performs little people or client allowed and was it in Dutch, and they paid for it. And so it was, I mean, it wasn't like coming from from in from the people like purely grassroots, it was also you need sometimes you need leaders, you need visionaries that set things up and people follow them. And I think that's, that's very much how it went. Now, it, except for some of the small conservative reform churches that as you said, ironically, got into the game late, probably to try to wall themselves off from broader secularizing forces in the Netherlands. What's your take on the end of let's call it mainstream polarization in the Netherlands? Why did it break down? Was it a good thing? What's your take on that? I mean, why did it break down? That's pretty difficult historical question. And I'm not necessarily qualified to give a very sure answer to it. But as far as I, I have done some historical investigation that was not strictly about this topic, but it touched on it. And what it seems like is that there was quite a big gap between practice and like, what what people were doing and what they believed or what they were supposed to believe and a lot of these churches were basically becoming, I mean, what would you call it? Just the rituals, the institutions were there, but they weren't really alive very well. The conviction that the, it was more complacency and just, I know also, I suppose, I mean, what's often said is that the war made a big difference, a spell because the Netherlands was under German occupation for five years, roughly. And it's a very brutal occupation. Yes. And then we lost like over 70% of our Jews, the Dutch Jews. And that was really, really, I mean, bad, but that wasn't even the most important just post-war period. Later, there was more attention, more attention was given to the Jews. But I mean, it is difficult to say, but at least what it was is that the churches weren't really, they weren't really, the conviction was gone, the commitment. And that made people very vulnerable to sexualizing forces like the television and movies and which were often, well, I mean, deliberately, or at least anti-Christian traditional morality, I would say. So, and if there's little, if there's just little that binds you to the pillar, then I mean, why say? And then it seems that's kind of the process that happened. And it was true collapse in some sense, especially the Roman Catholics, but also the socialists in a way. Right now, of the Catholics that are still registered as Catholics, like one in 20 regularly attend mass. Wow. One in 20. So nominally, there's like still a million Roman Catholics in the Netherlands, or maybe no, I think even much more, but I'm not entirely sure. But I am sure of the figure that one in 20 is serious about it. And I mean, there's lots of stuff happening in the Catholic Church right now, but that's not helping. And yes, so it really was a total collapse. And the reformed churches didn't do much better, the Kuybers Church, only the small churches in a way, probably because they were more insulated in a way, there was more of a sense of conviction maybe as well. And maybe also a kind of a more instinctive reaction against the outside world and the secular world. So, well, I mean, I can't say exactly why, of course, I mean, that's very difficult to determine with any degree of certainty. But right now, as I grew up, people are taking in our churches, many people take their faith extremely seriously. And that's a really important part of it. And if people stop doing that, then the pillar is gone. When you say they take their faith extremely seriously, what kind of practices do you mean? Well, especially going to church twice a Sunday, for at least one and a half hours each, with a sermon, which is often an hour with maybe one small break for some singing. Longer preaching, yeah. Yeah. It gives me lots of time, more than the service gives me. Yeah. But that's actually, I mean, people, when they hear that, it's amazing. I mean, how do you get used to listen to a sermon like for an hour? That's crazy. I mean, but it happens. But also other things, I mean, it's also kind of, you're a tight group. So people, yeah, you look after each other in both ways. And what is also part of it is a lot of, I mean, it depends on whether your faith is really a conviction or whether it's more like a habit and tradition. Because in that way, I mean, you could describe it as following a lot of rules, like no television and no pants, trousers for women, for example. And then jewellery is often was like earrings. And so it was a little bit not, I mean, it was not very accepted. And there's many more and just clothing and activities you could do. So, but that was probably for quite some people, that's rules to follow, I would say. Yeah. But now that now you're a student at the Free University now. Yes. And you mentioned that the Free University used to be supported solely by the church community, by its pillar. And now it's a public school? Basically, eventually it's got government recognition and funding, so it no longer had to rely on its own funds. And even though, I mean, at the same time when the reformed pillar was collapsing, I think the food for the Free University, it also sexualized. And I mean, just a couple years back, they changed the, what's it called, the foundational statement or something of the university. And they removed that it was based on the Bible and the reforms of faith or something. So basically right now, it's not really a religious university anymore, even though in practice it hasn't been for a long time, probably. So, but I mean, you get the dead boot, the articles that aren't changed, but don't mean anything anymore. And so a couple years back, they just felt, well, this article doesn't mean anymore. Let's just mean anything anymore. That's just a move it. So basically it's a secular university, but it does have the most important, it is the most important seminary for Ministers in the Netherlands. The theology, and they studied theology there, most of them, not from my church, by the way, their own university, which is more orthodox because I mean, the theology, it's pretty broad and it's pretty critical orthodoxy. And there's also quite a lot of Christian philosophy as well in the philosophy department, which is of course, in a way closely linked to the theology department. But yes, so there's still a little bit of Christianity left at Free University, but we're very diverse and multicultural as well. A lot of Muslims students, for example. So yeah, that's basically what it is now. Now, probably in English, a lot of people are confused by the name because when they hear Free University, they hear Bernie Sanders promising Free Community College, but Free doesn't have anything to do with whether or not you have to pay to go, does it? No, that's right. I mean, even in the Netherlands, college isn't free. I mean, I paid 2000 bucks at least, like 2000 bucks for a year for just tuition, which is doable, of course, it's not crazy. But I have to pay for my own books and the like. And I do get, get some funding from the government because my parents can't really support me. So that's very useful, but it's not like I'm getting a free lunch. But it's not like I've got three kids in college this year. And one of them is going to a state school. And if he were only paying 2000, we'd be really happy. 2000 plus books. So the American audience is going to hear this and just kind of roll their eyes because my daughters, you know, for Calvin College, for example, 20, 20 to 30,000 a year is pretty much what you'd pay. That's crazy. It's crazy. I mean, if you, for example, if you in the Netherlands, if you, I mean, there's a point if you have finished your bachelor degree on the university in Netherlands, you can't get another one for, I mean, not with government funding. So if you do a second degree, after you've finished your first, then you have to pay just what it costs. And that's 10,000, around 10,000 bucks a year. Yeah, basically. So that would be, I suppose, comparable to a private college in the United States. No, that's comparable to a state school in the United States, maybe. Yeah, as a situation, but not as the cost. But our taxes are lower. That's the trade off. Yes, we pay for it. I mean, I don't pay for it. So I'm not. No, Americans, if Americans knew what you paid in taxes, because I've had that conversation with others who have lived there. Pretty dramatic. Yeah, the highest income tax rate is 52%. Most people don't really pay that because you get, if you can subtract your mortgage interest payments from your taxable income. So most people don't really pay 52%, luckily. But it starts at 52%. It starts at like, I think, less than 60,000 euros. So that's pretty early. Yeah. That would be considered middle class in America, I think. And then you pay 52% normally. I mean, not technically, but it's still a lot of money. And you've got the VAT tax as well. So yeah, we do pay for it in a way. Pretty heavily taxed. Well, getting back to the pillars, you know, any other, I mean, because it's interesting to me, this, you know, because I'd never heard about this. And then I heard a couple of people talking about it. And you had mentioned it once. And I didn't quite know what you were talking about. And then as you describe it, I think, how do I not know what he's talking about? I grew up in one. But of course, they didn't call it that. That was just what Christian Reformed people practiced when they came to the United States at our schools. We had our churches, business, you were kind of out in the world. But then again, in the 70s and 80s, really, it broke down. And the Christian Reformed Church, you know, much more assimilated. And the church had a, you know, it was a very complex process, very much tied to other social changes going on in the United States. So what are your reflections on this? Do you think this is something that the Dutch should relearn? Or is it good that it's gone? Or what do you think? I mean, from the viewpoint of a religious community, it has big advantages, of course, but it also has disadvantages. And that's that you can you get a lot of people that yeah, I mean, basically, you don't need to, you don't need to come to terms with your own faith, if you don't really want to, you can stick to your tradition and, and your practices and your habits. And you won't really be confronted with the outside world with all challenges and dangers and the problems it presents. So insulation can make people weaker. If you don't get challenged a lot, if you do get, for example, if you move to your 18 years old, and you've always been to reform schools, and then you go to university, that's a huge shock. Because I mean, high school is, it was really, really reformed school. So it does have quite a lot of advantages. I mean, I think schools, I mean, it's not like the schools are religious in the sense that all the all the all the courses and all the stuff that people learn that students learn is religious. I mean, you just get math, you're held to the same standards as other schools, actually in the Netherlands, schools based on some kind of worldview, either religious or otherwise, that's like two thirds of all schools. So most people, most children in the Netherlands go to schools that are based on some kind of religious or other worldview. It's just that most of those are just they don't really do anything with it, especially the Protestant and the Catholic based schools, that's just remnants of the past, basically. And maybe sometimes you have a little bit of religious education and the like, but it's really the reforms, pillar schools that really take it seriously, and those are rather small in grand scheme of things. So and but I mean, apart from the question whether they're good or not, I think they are very difficult to uphold in the 21st century. And what I've seen also around me and while I grew up, because when I was young, I was like six or something, the first computer started to get into the to make their way into the homes. And smartphones, basically was while I was in secondary high school, slash high school. So I've seen the change and suddenly everyone got their computers and then me and my friends all got their laptops and PCs and then. And right now everyone has got a smartphone, of course, and it's like 10 years ago, the first one was was released. So the forces of both internet smartphones and social media, they make it if you if you look at a pillar, it's just like a sort of protective layer, you could say. But but there are three giant holes in it. And first of all, is the internet. The second is social media. And the third is smartphones. And you can't keep I mean, you can't keep your TV, for example, that was a big deal in the 70s, especially before people refused to buy TVs. And that was socially enforced in some ways. And of course, socially enforced, not government enforced. No, no, no. Jordan Peterson's enforced monogamy. No, no, definitely not. But that's doable. But you can't keep computers. You don't really want to in many ways. I mean, I couldn't be talking with you if I didn't have a computer. And so and I'm, I don't really spend much time on social media that most people find them indispensable. And I mean, the internet and I do have my smartphone, I do do a lot of WhatsApp, for example. But what you see is that even I mean, it starts even the age people, children get their first smartphone, for example, it goes down every year. And so you know, primary school children like 10 years old, they have their own smartphone or even earlier. And I mean, how are you going to protect them or to keep keep outside influences out of their lives? It's just impossible. So so at this point, I mean, this development is still on the way. And I mean, what it ultimately will bring about is still unclear. But it's probably going to be less like a pillar, because you just can't protect your children against the outside world. And you've got your young children that watch YouTube videos, for example, and you know, with all the clickbait and, and the dubious things people do to get views. Sexual, for example, but also violence and all kinds of gossip and the like. I mean, those are all things that are problematic in for Christians. And they're all there. And then I mean, how are you going to control there are some applications that try to do this and to help parents and young people to actually keep their internet views in check. And that's very useful. I got on my phone, I got an app that monitors how much I use it. And it was pretty, pretty shocking, actually. And it has gone down significantly since I use that app, because I just didn't, I didn't I couldn't live with myself if I spent two or three hours each day on my phone. That's just ridiculous. But those are I mean, most people aren't really like that, I think. So I think the pillar is just, I think it's going to be a thing of the past, and people will need to rely on their inner proficiencies and their social, their social community to stick to their faith, and they can't, they will need to learn to fight or they will lose. And so they need to fight young and early. And if you don't then well, I mean, there's so many temptations, you got a little box in your in your pants, and it is all the temptations of the world, just a finger click away. And I mean, it's probably for everyone, not just Christians, and not just before, before I was protected youth. So it's one of the biggest challenges to society probably right now. So the pillar is going to be going to be destroyed. I mean, it's not certain that the institutions are all going to disappear or something. We'll have to see but it is possible that do that things will get smaller and only the people who really believe in their in their principles will stick together and others will leave. Well, I think, you know, one of one something that's interesting to watch is, you know, when you mentioned people are left to their own resources. I mean, part of what especially small churches, often why they form in terms of countercultural groups is that we realize, if I'm left up to my own resources, I'm in trouble, which is why you have accountability groups, you have a you have a lot of new you have 12 step groups, you've got a lot of groups that say, here's a common thing that we need to covenant together with, because if left up to my own resources, I'm going to fail. And, you know, there's a whole movement, an anti technology movement that goes on. One of the most popular some of the most popular schools in the Bay Area where the people who are actually producing this stuff send their kids are Waldorf schools, which are dramatically anti anti technology, you know, knows, although, yeah, yeah, and my wife teaches in a Waldorf school, and this is this is a constant battle that they have underway, but you're exactly right that this is, you know, this is a battle. And I do wonder if actually, the increasing realization of our vulnerability to ourselves might in some ways, and this I think is where Rod Rear comes along, might in some ways, motivate individuals to form communities to, in a sense, repillar because they realize, we can't do this by ourselves, that we we need accountability, we need a community around us. Otherwise, we're simply going to fall victim to corporations and the technologies that they are employing to penetrate more deeply into our heads and our eyes and our wallets, which is what's motivating them. So I would immediately send my kids if I had any to such a school, right? If I mean, it's, I mean, it's really, it seems to, to really destroy kids ability to focus and to, to, to stay focused and then concentrate it then. That's just, I mean, I'm doing my studies right now, I'm mostly on my own, I, I don't have that many lectures, a couple a week. But if I don't keep my phone use and then my, my other things in check, then there's gonna come nothing of my degree. That's right. It's going to go up in flames. So, but the difference with the past is that you got to, you got to choose voluntarily to, to join or to stick with a community. And there's no longer, no longer anyone who can make a choice for you if you, if you don't really yourself. So if you, if you, if it corresponds with your real commitments and if you're, if in practice your commitment is to your social media or whatever you're, you're, all the kinds of temptations that fly around. There's no, the school isn't going to stop you, the church isn't going to stop you. No one really is except for yourself. But, but if you're, if you're- Or God, of course. But if you're all alone in it, I mean, and that hopefully is, is part of what we want from the church is to, is to help us fight against ourselves in some ways. Because, you know, I can sit and make resolutions all day long in my head. But if I'm not living in community and, and in, in some kinds of accountability that forced me to do the kinds of things I really don't want to do, then I'm going to become the kind of person I really don't want to become. And I know I'm capable of that. I know, I know what's inside of me. Yeah, it's very easy. It's the path. It's the broad- You don't have to do anything. That's right. It's the broad path, as Jesus calls it. And instead of the narrow path, and, and I don't think, you know, I don't think anything, I don't think there's anything new about this. I think that the capacity of, I think the capacity to penetrate what had been traditional boundaries has just gotten greater, which then you have, you know, you push and push back. And so it'll, it's, it's very interesting, again, to see, listening to this pillar conversation and thinking about Rod Rear's Benedict option. And, and I don't, you know, I've got mixed feelings about his Benedict option, because again, I grew up in a Christian Reformed Benedictine community, as it were, because we, we stuck to our own. And, and that was a buffer. And many ways I look back and say, I was really blessed by that. But like you say, I was a hot house tomato, hot house plant is in some ways weaker than the one, I mean, this perpetual dynamic of inside versus outside. We've got just a couple of minutes, any final thing, and then we'll shut down the recording. And you and I can just touch base a little bit after that for a month of my next conversation. So, yeah, sure. I did just one one thing, I suppose. I still see a lot of value. I mean, I totally agree with you that the communities, they kind of longer protect you against all the threats of the outside world. And then that goes for everyone. And what they can do is they can, they can help you fight it. They can give you the resource, they can support you if you're down. They can help you stand up again. And they can help you find meaning in what you do and then and love you give you give you the, the support and love that we all need to lead a truly good life. Yeah, yeah. Well, thank you, Roland. Thanks for being willing to talk on the air with me and just stay right here and I'm going to end the recording and my pleasure.