https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=JhoxbMA9X74

 All right, here we are. Job said I should be enthusiastic. That's after my jet lag. I just got back into Sacramento and we've got about a week until the great Euro trip starts. One of the first things we're doing is in the Netherlands. I've gotten questions. A guy from Friesland emailed me and said, are you coming here? What's going on? So Job, what's going on, Job? Well, there is there's a whole bunch of stuff going on. There is Friesland is involved, copious amounts of herring consumption, if John may be believed, even specific detours for that. But the main thing I think our dear viewers will be interested in is this going to be a Dutch community event in the beautiful city of Utrecht. And that includes a panel discussion during the day with John and Paul and two theologians and a well, let's say, Christianity affiliated media person. I hope he never watches this. We had to find him like that. But anyway, Christianity affiliated media person, I thought that was beautifully said. Let's just call him a podcast host. That works. Yeah, I sometimes call them celebrity Christians. And if we have celebrity atheists, we should have celebrity Christians. Paul, I just church adjacent. It's like a Dutch Glenskrivener, let's say. Yeah, aren't we all Christian affiliated media people by now? Anyway, back to the subject at hand, there's a panel discussion about estuary and it's moderated by Sarah here and it will be primarily about, well, Sarah, why don't you tell us? Yes, so there will be a panel discussion and it will be primarily about estuary and what the church should do with estuary and some of the theological problems maybe that may arise around a concept like estuary, which is, of course, neutral. And as a church, we are a missional people. So those are topics that we are going to discuss. And maybe there will also be time for a question and answer. So any questions that people may have, I will put a message on the Discord server that they may be asked and we will select probably a few to be answered during the discussion, which can unfortunately not be live streamed due to the internet connectivity in the building. But we will post it afterwards, of course. OK, and there is there is a link that you will give me, Job, that I can put down below in the notes. Yes, that's bridges of meaning one word dot nl for Netherlands. And that will direct you to a meetup dot com page. Please RSVP. So we know if you're coming in the evening, starting at seven in the same location, there is basically a community gathering. We're kind of trying to bring people together, see if people are interested in attending or hosting an estuary. There are dozens of us, dozens. And we we need to get in touch and start these offline groups like we've always tried to with the Discord. Isn't the Lowlands just one big estuary? It's a matter of perspective. You know, our expensive gasoline is. It's like 10 bucks a gallon. Well, I hear your country doesn't even want to grow food, so I don't know about your future. I'm not going to you're ruining the comment section. Don't do that. I heard the Netherlands is the second largest food exporter after the United States. It's an astounding thing. Well, yeah, but that's also because we yeah, there's a caveat there because we also import a lot of food, which is counted towards the total export number. So I'll just say. Yeah, yeah. Still, it's a very impressive thing for a country that's so small. We bring it here, fatten it up and send it back. I mean, make of that what you will. I hope I don't leave fatter. Help me. They don't leave any fatter. I have a re-intention. I have a re-intention of blowing my day. Oh, yeah. Oh, Paul, this never had to bother. It has to have some. Boy. Anyway, that's for the rest of the week. There's likely on the Friday a show being recorded for a platform called the Newer Wereld, the New World, which is about philosophy, theology, you know, stuff people read thick books about. And that should be interesting. And yeah, apart from that, there's probably going to be some beautiful sightseeing of the Netherlands. We're going to see Paul's roots all the way up in Friesland where I can't speak the language, but we'll just point and grunt. And yeah, we'll see how that goes. And herring. Herring, yes, yes. I was looking at YouTube's about people eating that. So we'll see how that goes. I know the doc is going to set me up mercilessly. All right. And anything else? So this is amid a whole constellation of European events. And I'll put more of those notes, links down in the note. But this specifically is on the conversation. And I'm not going to be able to say all these words because I know that the real Dutchman in my midst complain when I try to say like Utrecht. But. My Dutch neighbors always complained to my mother, she had she had an American throat, so she just couldn't say those words. So anyway. So my question is, are there any plans to close ticket sales soon as they are doing in Great Britain? Not really. I mean, we don't really have the concept of a ticket. You can you can show up. And we'll see. I mean, right now, not too many people are coming so far. We'd like more people to show up, of course. We'll have some some basic availability as far as drinks are going. But do consider that you should probably bring your own food or get something in Utrecht. And that's as far as logistics are concerned right now. We're not as professional as the club doing the festival in Germany. Though it's probably a smart idea to keep an eye on the website that you'll be linking to as we will be sharing updates there if necessary. Right. There is limited space. There's always limited space. Yeah, but it's a pretty big building. I mean, at some point. Yeah. So we're up to 100 people would fit in the in the largest room. So I don't think 100 people. We're hoping to run into the issue of limited space. So the concept of scarcity marketing is lost on Jove, apparently. Completely. I refuse to lie. It's tell the truth or at least I stick with that. Yeah. Yeah. OK. All right. Is that it for our promo? Then I'll stop the recording and we can talk details. Yeah. Do we have an extra jingle? No, like this. One love. It's probably something obscene in sign language. No, no, no, no, no. It's from the Freddie and Paul show. Yeah, I know it's a letter. All right. So there it is. Check the notes below for links and details and hope to see you there.