https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=HiRWNWXFJRY

 to come on. No, there he goes. So Paul, we were going to talk about psychedelics, right? Yeah. I thought we were doing psychedelics. I thought that's what we were signing up for. I'm, I'm leaving. Luke, if we want to. That's something. Yeah, he's still Josefina. I didn't even mean to do it. This is such a good start. Okay, Josefina. Did you turn off your camera? Can I just not see Luke anymore? Where is this? Camera's not on. I don't know what I'm doing. My first time doing a Zoom chat. Okay, so Luke, there's three dots. If you hover over your own screen, there's two dots to the top right. You can click that. Then there's a pop-up window as rename. You can change your name. Okay, more chat record. It doesn't, when you record with Zoom, it doesn't even show up in the video. So you'll be fine. It matters Paul so much. This is such a Josefina thing to do. Oh my goodness. Cheers everybody. It is a good start. Well, for those of you who are watching, I welcome you to this, the original Rando's and Andrea on my little live stream today complained that Sherry isn't here and would have been fun to have Sherry here, but we'll have her in some time. But I asked these August fellows to join me for a conversation because we've been at this thing for a few years now. And I love, you know, Job, I don't see enough of Job. He's busy now as the father of a beautiful little boy. Sam is doing really good work on his channel. And Jeff, of course, is the face behind the Rando's United channel, even if his face isn't on it. And Luke is on Rando's United fairly often. Are you the number one number one face on Rando's United, Luke? Oh, I don't know. Probably. I bet that's true. I think it could be true. As the content curator, I would say yes, I think Luke has has the record for most appearances. How do you feel about that, Luke? I don't know. I think it's probably inevitable. I've I assume I will be eclipsed at some point. I mean, I was just, I think, I don't know, Jeff, tell me if I'm wrong. I mean, I thought it was our idea to start it and you and I was just like, if this is gonna, if anyone is gonna actually do it, you have to be in charge of it. If I'm in charge of it, nothing will happen. Yeah. And so we've just been doing it a long time. So I mean, all the, you know, I went back and looked, I was trying to figure out who are the like the oldest girls that were in it after Andrea's comment. And it was like, I was trying to remember when Sherry was around. Sherry was Sherry's OG. She's been around a long time. Sherry is very early. I don't know. I imagine though, Job, you are the first of this group that I had a conversation with. I think so. Yeah. So was Julian was Julian before Joe? No, I was looking this morning. It was Joe. Yeah. Yeah. Before there, there are less than five rando conversations at all before Joe. Yeah. Yeah. First, there were nothing, no videos, then there was job basically. Yeah, there was Nate. So Nate, who hasn't, you know, been around that much, but he still watches because I still get comments from him. So but that was the first time, you know, I had done a conversation with him and then it was like, well, what if we record it? And then it was like, what if I post it on the channel? What happens then? I mean, it's just all been experimentation. And so you talk to Roland. Roland, of course, was very early. Another Dutchman. What's with you Dutchman? You know? They saw no one. That's right. We've got another one. There's another Dutchman in the world now. So then Luke leaves. I have to put things in the oven. Listen. Okay. Okay. So these are his work hours. So I wanted I wanted to get us together and I wanted to ask, okay, we've been doing this for a few years. What are we doing? Because we're doing something and it's happening and it continues to grow. I was just watching. I was just watching Karen's conversation with Michael Martin, the sociology. I was watching that today. And of course, there's these young guns out there like Grim Grizz and Chad the alcoholic and Chris Pacow who are, you know, doing like a lot of the work. And so I have a lot of friends from a lot of the young guys from the town who are, you know, doing wild things. And I you know, anybody who isn't, I mean, Sam your conversations with vervecky have been just amazing. I mean, I thought you two really pushed each other and I thought those have been great. I mean, Sam, Sam has some puts out some really amazing stuff. So so what are we what are we doing? Does this matter? How Well, I think this little corner in particular to what has coalesced around you, Paul, and the stuff that I'm most interested in and most involved in, and these guys here, the little boxer group that I'm a part of. This to me is a real community. It's not primarily about ideas, it's about people. And I think that's what's different for me. If it was primarily about ideas, I would be interested, because I'm interested in ideas, but it would fizzle out. It wouldn't have longevity for me, because I would move on to something else. I mean, what really has become, and it's interesting, because I'm such a technological cynic in a lot of ways, but it's been interesting because, I mean, it's almost weird to say, but some of my best friendships now are people that I've never met in real life, which is weird. But it's not, and we talk about ideas all the time, but I often say, like in the bigger box group, I mean, we talk about ideas quite a bit, but also like we talk about very practical life things. We talk about very personal things. We're usually just, we're messing around and trolling each other quite a bit. So it's some kind of a new genuine community, I think. I took, there's a video, I'm releasing a video tomorrow morning. It's just a little 20 minute one. It's got some clips of things, but it's about the churn. Now with wireless companies talk about churn in terms of they try to keep their customers. Streaming services talk about churn because people get a subscription to Disney Plus if they want to see the Mandalorian, and then when the season is done, they're off. So these companies want to try to trap people. And over the last, I realized the other day that my first video was four years ago, not three. It's like, yeah, COVID, I lost a year. And I notice people who made comments three, four years ago, they're gone. Other people make comments now. And then there are people who have been here all four years, like the four of you, like Sherry. Obviously, the Discord has had a role in that. I'm not counting the people at the local meetup because, again, I have much more physical relationship with them. And so in this virtual world, we're trying to get a handle on persons. I dare I say that with great fear in front of Luke. And so that's just don't say individuals. If you say persons, Luke will leave you alone. If you say individuals, they'll write you for five or 10 minutes. The distinction is important. So again, that leads me to question, what are we doing here? You know, Job came out to California and we started the tour that got preempted by COVID. And I knew that once Job had his baby, it's not going to be so easy to fly to California and have fun with the VanderKlai and the Vendant. You know, mama's like dependent on Job for work around the house and childcare and all those things. So, yep. I thought part of what we were doing was revealed or hinted at a little bit in the Four Horsemen of Meaning video where Bishop Barron seemed originally out of place and then sort of found himself a little bit. Because the first conversation with Bishop Barron, when Bishop Barron was first on Jordan Peterson's channel, it wasn't a conversation with him. When Bishop Barron was first on Jordan Peterson's channel, it wasn't honestly very interesting. Right. Like Bishop Barron was like, OK, I've got Jordan Peterson's audience. I've got like my five or six doc story idea things. Jordan's going to ask me a question. I'm going to say one of these things, no matter what the question is, like a politician in a debate. And I'm talking to his audience and Jordan just happens to be the face that's mediating my interaction with his audience, which was a much more like broadcast kind of previous generation form of interacting with like like it was like getting interviewed on a cable news channel. Right. Not like kind of whatever our more interactive social form of whatever we're doing is. And then when Bishop Barron was on with Vervecky and Peugeot and Peterson and they were much more interactive with each other and some of Bishop Barron's first interactions didn't quite land or seemed out of place. It was like at some point he had a moment of like, well, something different is going on here. A, this isn't the atheist debate that I'm used to having. And B, the interactions are different. And I thought that that was sort of revealing some form of distinction that is unique to this corner of the Internet. And I don't know exactly what that is, but it was a revealing moment. There I say that he had the realization that, oh, this is real. This is an actual conversation with people and it's not just talking heads with trotting out the usual points like because that's that's essentially Peterson's definition of what an ideologue is. You know, when you're talking to an ideologue, they just repeat the pulled parrot points. I'm going to tie back into this later. Tie. What are you tying? I'm going to what you said, I'm going to reference it later because I think I think you're onto something. Well, I think he is, but I think the language is impoverished because real is used too much. We have to get higher resolution at this. And I noticed that it's specifically specifically in The Four Horsemen because I saw John and Jonathan really connecting and Jordan also. So in terms of those who are in sync, John and Jonathan were much more in sync because they've in many ways done the reps. They know each other. They know each other and Jordan and and John have some relationship. But I mean, their their conversation was I have no I still have no idea what was going on with that conversation. And so there's that there was a hierarchy there. And John and Jonathan, they really got in sync quick and they could really do some work. Jordan was part of it. But and and Bishop Barron and Peugeot said this in his kind of right at the beginning of his conversation with with John Verbecky that Bishop Barron comes into there is like something's going on here and real is fair. But I think we need more. I think we need better language. I want to dig down and say, OK, can we do we know what that thing is? Well, I have ideas. Do you, Joe? Is this where you want to tie in? Well, the question was about what what. Baron saw right or what he noticed or what kind of caught him off guard. And. Paul, you asked what we were all doing. What we're all doing, I think, is. It might be too low resolution or too high. It might be too vague. What we might be doing is in our own ways, taking faith very seriously and and sort of together in this in this strange YouTube land and discord land, move forward toward greater glory. OK, that's kingdom talk. I get that. But. Baron keeps saying how. You know, the church didn't respond right, you know, didn't bring out the big guns, didn't, you know, slam the village atheist to the copy of the summa. Um. Didn't build copies of Shark Cathedral in, you know, New York City. Right. I just kept thinking Hagia Sophia, Hagia Sophia, Hagia Sophia. Never mind. Sorry. Right. No, but. I think that's what. I think that's related. Like what is going on? OK, we see we have a whole group of people here. Who? Who seem to be. Interested genuinely in that sort of thing, in that very serious faith, but also are not afraid to kind of poke it out of weird things. And then suddenly the conversation turns to psychedelics. And some people like, oh, I don't want to go there. But it goes there anyway, because that's also something people want to take seriously, even though they're not entirely sure what that means. Yeah. And in my own ways, I'm trying to apply that to my current church and and how that works. So I'll stop talking for now and let somebody else take the mic. Did you slip a little LSD into the communion wine there? I took some psilocybin 15 minutes ago, if that works. You can tell. I mean, could be. I think part part of what's happening is that technology is changing a lot. That I mean, that's obviously a big part of this. Like I had no idea what Zoom was when I signed up for a convo with you, Paul, the first time. It's like, Zoom, what the heck is this business? Right. And well, thank you for introducing me to Zoom, because I felt like I had a leg up on the entire rest of the world once COVID got going. So Zoom was a new thing. Discord, my own. What's this weird discord thing? I'm not a video gamer. Like, you know, I mean, what's this going to be like? So obviously, the technology is opening up a lot of possibilities that weren't there before. And no one is omniscient enough to know exactly what effect that's going to have on things. So clearly, some combination of technology is enabling us to talk from four different states and two different continents altogether at the same time. And so I think part of it is some intersection between, you know, age old stuff and new stuff and kind of figuring out where in the world that's going to lead and what's that going to enable and cause and what are the dangers there? But it's not just talk. You should have been a live stream. We could have live streamed this, that's true. But it's not just talk, and that's, I think, what I'm really getting at, because, you know, Luke made a comment in one of my videos recently was too recently when he basically said, wow, this is the first PVK video I've watched all the way through lately. And, you know, I don't, you know, I don't have that much ego in my videos. I make so many of them. But, you know, that that that that signal to me about and I certainly don't expect everyone to watch all my videos. It's. That's a lot. But it signals to me what we're doing in terms of it is it is it is community. But then it's also then questions about what what is community? Because again, I'm a pastor of a local church. And so I play with this on this level and I'm always attuned to. You know, are we are we as a community strengthening, are we diminishing? You know, then then in church, it's what event? You know, you have a certain range of, you know, if you were to turn this into a board game or something, you have a certain range of plays that you can make in order to sort of approach something which you can't quite measure or articulate. I've said this before. The spirit of the discord is that now we see through a monitor directly, but soon we will see face to face. The goal of this, what makes it community is the the wanting to meet each other in the flesh and and. Have a drink, have a chat, that sort of stuff. Well, and to that point, Job, I think more broadly, it's. Real community involves. A higher percentage of the multiplicity that makes up a person. And so and that's what I mean, like when I was even talking about the places where I'm an engaged, it's like I want to talk to people that want to joke around. I want to talk to people that are telling me about their personal life. I want to talk to people that are being transparent about where they're failing and having successes. I want to know these people in the fullness of who they are as people. And real life is one of those, like in their body, in their flesh, you know, like I want to touch them. That's part of that. But and I think that's what's different than a community that's just centered around ideas. It's it's in a. It's in a land that is theoretical and at best potential. It's not real. I that one of the videos, little short videos that I haven't made yet. I had a conversation with a rando that I really hope he gives me permission to release. And he was, you know, do it. Is it not? He he was struggling with the question of a personal relationship with God, that language, that evangelical language. And he's an engineer by trade. And so I know engineers, you know, they they they're they're focused on objects often more than, you know, relationality between physical objects, let's say. And I. Part of the reason I love doing Randall's conversations is that you all prompt me and spark me in ways I can't predict because you you're not fully random, but you're semi random and you've had enough of me that actually you're going to be sparking off of me in some ways that aren't it isn't going to take me forever to get up to speed. So anyway, Peterson, again and again, says we don't see objects or even people. We see patterns and. And you think about that, I'm seeing a world full of objects. No, and even at a physical level, technically, he's correct. We're seeing patterns. There's more there's more space. Here's the here's the famous cell phone. Hey, there he is. Yeah, give him a little name. It had been replaced by the Sharpie. I was getting worried. But, you know, there's no there's more space in here than there is matter or particles, let's say. And so. So then I was I was talking to him about the fact that, well, why can't how can I have a relationship with God when I can't see God? Well, if you see patterns, people who are very relational and are always having a relationship with God, they're seeing patterns. That's what they're really seeing. And in this virtual space, what we're seeing of each other is patterns. And I think you're dead right, Jobin. Now we see through a monitor darkly, but we, you know, we want to see face to face. We lean into that. We long for a certain consummation of fellowship because we have a sense that we're seeing patterns and and these these low resolution. Merely visual auditory patterns sort of sort of incite within us a hunger for more. And that, of course, is some of our relationship with with God. And with God, it's not only, let's say patterns, but it's also bread and wine, let's say. So. I think there's some of that. I mean, Jeff, if you haven't said anything, yeah, I know. I'm not talking to Jeff talks. Now I keep I keep hearing things here and there, and then I start listening to what everybody else is saying, and I just completely forgot what I was going to say. So say something. So see us, Lewis, come on. Well, actually, something that you remind me of. Well, with with the question of, you know, what are we doing? I feel like a part of what we're doing, maybe somebody has already said this before, but I thought the Cambridge Union talk that Peterson gave where he focused in, I think they asked him the question kind of like what has changed about you or what thing are you learning or something like that? He talked about like he's trying to learn not to win. And I feel like what we're doing here in a way is sometimes very poorly modeling how not to win. We're we're modeling it, but we're also like learning how to do it. If that makes sense. You know, Paul, you sent us a few questions and I know this is one of them. But one of the other ones that I was trying to think about is, you know, how have I changed? And I feel like that is one of the ways that I can sense that I am changing is it's not necessarily that I was always trying to win in any types of conversations, but I felt like if I wasn't trying to win, I needed to try to win. And I felt bad that I was not trying to win a conversation by proving points or, oh, you should have said that. You should have contradicted that person. You should have shown them, you know, why they're in error. And I believe that there's a time and a place for that. But no longer am I feeling as much pressure of, oh, well, I really have to say, you know, what I think here. And this happens to me more in like very personal conversations, particularly with family members of, you know, I do actually do a lot of that, of feeling like, oh, I need to correct this person, especially when it's something that's that I'm very passionate about. No, I need to let them know what is right, as opposed to the junk that they're saying. And I do find myself. Listening more. And not jumping to act on my reactions, but instead, really trying to hear the other people out. And since I don't know everyone or really anyone in this community, clearly, as well as I would know, you know, my spouse or my kids, parents, something like that. I do get a chance to listen more and not really say anything whenever I hear, you know, honestly, in this community, I don't hear a ton of opinions that I'm just like, oh, I starkly disagree with that. But I guess a good example is Sam. You know, when when Sam first came into this community, Luke and I and Job had already been in contact with each other. And I don't think that I've ever told, you know, this story before. And I'm not sure that it really even connects to the point that I was making before. But I recall early on, I think me and Luke voxed about Sam after his first appearance on your channel, Paul. And I like I asked a question to Luke because, you know, I was I was raised fundamentalist, evangelical. And, you know, the idea of somebody not, quote unquote, believing in the Trinity, well, well, they're not a Christian. You know, and I didn't ask that question of Luke. But what I did ask in the question to Luke and looked, I don't know if you remember this or not, but I sent Luke a message and I was like, yeah, the guy who was on there today talking about Sam, I said, I found it kind of interesting that Sam, you know, he was a Christian. That Sam would think, oh, well, this I can't remember Sam in your story. If it was like a youth leader who had become well, who had announced that he was in an openly, you know, same sex relationship. And I don't know, I just got the impression from your story when you were telling it to Paul the first time, that part of your story. That, you know, there was a part of me that reacted to that. I was like, well, that's no different than what you're doing, Sam. That from a traditional fundamentalist category is just like, oh, well, that's breaching, you know, I guess some doctrines or something like that. Why would I ask Luke this question? You know, I don't really see what the difference is there, you know, between not being a Trinitarian and also being like, affirming on the same sex relationship side. You know, to me, those seem like they're in the same category from a fundamentalist evangelical background perspective. And so anyway, you know, I'm not going to say the answer that Luke gave me. I don't know if he remembers or not, but I don't. I was kind of curious. Save it. I know you're curious. I don't know. This is kind of hot water, I guess, to be delving into. Maybe I'm overplaying it. But essentially, Luke, you said, well, I think one is rooted specifically, this is very Luke, or actually, this is very Josephine, I think, looking back on it. One of those two things is rooted specifically in behavior, and another is rooted in belief. And so Luke said, that's how I see that as kind of two different things. One is embodied, one is thinking. Right. One is embodied, and one is what you think. There can be a lot of discussions around both of these topics on that way of looking at them, even. But the reason that I think that I'm bringing all of that up is I don't feel like I think the way that I thought when I asked that question anymore, where I was just like, well, isn't that just the same thing? Or isn't this person, you know, on the outs, this person is in, and that kind of stuff? And I don't think that I really ever like always thought that way, but I feel myself having those inclinations like creep up in me happen less and less. And I also think that, you know, in that Cambridge Union discussion, Peterson said, you know, I don't really necessarily feel like I've completely done a 180 on anything, but I've just like gotten, I've deepened on some of the things that I think. And I think what he meant by that in Petersonian terms is he's gotten a higher resolution on some things as well. You know, he's started to see more than he could see before. That's my interpretation of some of what he was saying. And I kind of feel like, you know, since I've been involved in watching your videos, Paul, and meeting people who watch your videos and watching their videos and having conversations with them, that I haven't necessarily done 180s on anything, you know, that was there as like a axiom, I guess, or foundational at my core. But I feel like that foundation has started to broaden or expand, if any of that makes sense. You're just making me scared about millstones and the bottom of the sea. Well, I'm still breathing. Well, and, you know, it was very interesting, you know, when we first started, because of course, Job was very early on. And it was absolutely cool for me to talk to a guy who was, you know, a crumbling atheist. But I remember when Sam came on the channel, it was like, oh, and there were a number of people in the group that it's absolutely okay to someone who doesn't believe in a God, but someone who is deficient on the Trinity, then the knives came out. And I remember some of those moments and some of those emails and some of those comments. And so, Luke, you're or Jeff, your point here is, I think, really quite profound and instructive about what, you know, what we're doing to ourselves in this black mirror. I almost feel like part of the reason why I'm here is a little bit sort of like the apostles at the end of John six, like, where else would we go? I've got you. Right. And I think that, I mean, there is a bucket of misfit toys aspect to the community that has grown around you, Paul, you know that better than anyone. That is a little bit because there was no other place to fit in. And a lot of us, I feel like have some sort of inherent urge to contribute to something, to be part of something, to feel like they belong and are bringing something to the table. And for whatever reason, there's a lot of closed doors elsewhere out there in the real world, whether it churches or ministries or, you know, traditional Bible studies or what have you. That weren't closed here. And that sort of selected, like kind of combining those two things, I think part of what our community is about is that there's an inherent openness to where it is that we're going, that no one seems to be in charge and no one seems to know exactly what that destination is. And that's sort of the point. And when people start to be too closed or too fixed about where either a conversation is going or something, that kind of violates the ethos that people have come to know and recognize. And sort of, I don't know, piggybacking off of some of the things that Jeff said, I've noticed that like in real life, whether I'm talking with, you know, friends or family or strangers or whatever, and if it's a conversation about ideas, and I feel like someone's not doing it right, and they're being too close minded or too filea nocea or whatever, I'm like, you're not doing it right, bud, like, chill down, you know, like, back off. Get with the program. Haven't you been part of this transformative conversation molding exercise that everyone else has been doing for the last three years? Like, you know, stop being so full of yourself. And sometimes when new people come to the Discord, they need to have their edges sanded off of that sort of thing. And sometimes they just need a couple good punches in the nose, you know, before they like kind of get what's going on. But, you know, those that stick around seem to notice. We've had people who showed up with very strong convictions, and either they leave or they're made to leave or they try to figure out what makes the other person tick. And, I mean, I much prefer the third option, of course. But, I mean, I've seen that happen a lot where people are like, oh, you know, oh, there's always somebody who's read some obscure book of some obscure guy like St. Frank the Hutt Dweller that you haven't read, and there's probably some wisdom in it. Yeah, no, that's totally true. What I was reminded of with everything that's been talked about recently, we, most of the people in this community are relatively high in openness. We've talked about that. That's a character trait. That's bullshit. And low in agreeableness. Yeah, except Yobe. And low in intelligence. Low in intelligence, yeah. And I feel like I've gotten even more open. And some examples of that are, it's such a diverse and yet, I mean, it's the estuary thing. It's a diverse and rich community in that, like, I think some of the, recently in the box, there was this big, every once in a while, there was these flare up debates. Like, Nate and I had a big debate on whether or not God the Father is beyond being once. That was like a two-day debate and going back and forth. And then recently, we were talking about reincarnation, because that's come up somewhere in just like different things people are listening to and talking about. It's origin. Origin is bringing that up. Yeah, and pre-existence of souls. So it's connected to that. But then a lot of these other influences, and Nate was getting fired up because he was like, you guys are completely mis- Which Nate? Nate Heil. So he was saying, I'm not defending reincarnation. I don't even hold to that position. But the way you guys are character, you're straw manning it. This isn't what's going on with it. And even recently, who's hero, what's his name, his real name? Hero, LFG. Gavin. So I've been interacting with Gavin a little bit as well. And he made some comment the other day of like, I don't think Jesus was really perfect. So when he's flipping over the tables, I think if you talk to him later, he'd be like, that wasn't the best thing to do. And immediately, that's like, Jesus not perfect? Not okay. Right. But I've gotten to a point where I was always incredibly open. Like he was Sam. I've never been the slightest turned off is the word that came to mind. I'm glad that I turn you on Luke. Sam has always really turned me on. You don't turn me on, but you don't turn me off. Right. But I've never, he's never made me uncomfortable theologically at all. Like I've never cared one bit about, you know, his affirmations of things. They're cooling down. My daughter's very excited about some burritos being warmed up. As well she should be. But so in this like reincarnation thing, this came up and I was just thinking, you know, I have some opinions and thoughts about reincarnation and maybe how that fits within a Christian narrative and how you can, you know, combine them or whatever. But then I also, I also just got to the point, this is how I related it is because one of the things that started my deconstruction, which was never actually an existential deconstruction, it was more of just like a logical deconstruction. I never had an existential crisis of faith in my deconstruction. It was more just like, because it started with the doctrine of hell. And I just basically found out like, you don't have a clue about this thing, which is a fairly central piece of your whole understanding of God and theology. And the more I learned about that, the more I was like, I don't have a clue. And that just made me say, why don't I have a clue about a lot of stuff, probably. And so, and then, but then I took that and I apply that combined with this community to your guys' points. With reincarnation, I was just like, you know, I could come out really strong and kind of like a phylo phylo Nokia attitude of like, this is not a Christian thing. And, you know, defending it, and I'm like, I don't have a clue about it. You know, like, I have no, I have no clue really about reincarnation to speak with any degree of wisdom or certainty. The way that I describe it is like the Dunning-Kruger thing, right? Like the peak of Mount Stupid, where you, the less knowledge you have, like the more confidence and certainty you have, and then eventually you fall off the peak of Mount Stupid, and then you slowly start working your way towards wisdom. I've just, there's certain things where I've fallen off the peak of Mount Stupid with, and I don't, I feel like there's a lot of, the talking head thing is a lot of people just on the top of peak of their different peaks of Mount Stupid yelling at each other. And I've just seen like that, I don't like that game. That reminds me, Luke, of something else that you've said before that really has resonated with me, and that is, I think it was in your, I asked you for a link to this last week, but it was in your first appearance on Preston's podcast. Oh, yeah. And in that conversation, I believe it was in that conversation, you said, you were talking about like Catholicism and growing up in more evangelical circles. You were just told certain things about Catholicism, or maybe I'm completely mistaking your conversation, but I swear that you have said this, Luke, and that is, I've come to learn that I would rather learn about Catholicism from someone who takes it seriously, rather than just hearing about Catholicism from somebody who's not even in it, doesn't even practice it, but just tells me everything that's wrong with it. Right. You know, that's something that resonated with me, obviously on Catholicism, but also just on anything. I'd rather hear from a Unitarian who has been a Unitarian his whole life and tells me what it is and what he thinks. And he knows so much about it because it's very serious to him. There's a lot on the line. And so he gets attacked a lot and gets thrown onto the bus a lot because people assume they already know what it is that he thinks and what he believes, and they know that that's bad. And so I don't need to know anything more about it. I know what I need to know. So yeah, I would rather learn about reincarnation from somebody who takes it seriously and has the quote unquote steel man position. That's how I'd rather learn about all of these things that I just know very little about just because I've heard of them. And I've heard some of these things just talked about disparagingly because they're so dangerous, you know, quote unquote dangerous. You need to watch out for these things. You need to stay away from them. And, you know, I think that's just like a, there's a broader context, you know, there's a balance, I guess, or there's a spectrum, maybe, I don't know. I don't know the right word. But Paul, you know, you've talked about how, yeah, that wild moose that you meet at the National Forest or that wild elk or something like that, if you just walk up to it and start playing with it, it's dangerous. You could get hurt really bad. So there are lines that you need to be careful about crossing and things that you need to be careful about doing. But at the same time, you know, that doesn't mean that everything that is unfamiliar gets thrown into this box of things that, well, I just don't need to hear anything more about that. I need to be defensive about it. I've been told that it's a bad thing or, I don't know, maybe sometimes I've experienced the bad and I associate it with that thing. Maybe there's a way to reintegrate or see another side of that thing where I only saw the negative or the harmful aspect of it. So I don't know, that just reminded me, Luke, of that thing that you had said, which was, I'm not interested in learning about these things from, you know, people who have a cursory understanding of them. I'd rather learn about them from people who are in it and people who do it. Well, two things to tackle that real quick. Sorry, Joe. That's right. It's just, it's kind of the Peugeot point of, if you're uninitiated, if you haven't been in it, if you haven't been practicing and ritualistically embodying certain things, you don't understand it. You can't. You can't understand certain things from the outside. You just can't. And so I think in that sense, it makes you, you have to remove judgment somewhat. And that doesn't mean then that you, because the world's a big place and you are embodied, so you can't practice everything. But then the other piece that I'd bring in is the personal piece, which I remembered. It's back to the Matthew McConaughey talk with Peterson and Matthew McConaughey said this, and I'm going to say this, and it's stuck with me ever since. But he said, it's when he was writing his book, he said, he kept trying to make it more generally appealing, but then he just decided that was just a dumb, a dumb route. And he just made it very personal. And he said, the weird thing happened is that the more personal he made it, the more universal it became. That's, that's a lot of my theology right there. He sure looked that he didn't say the more individual he made it. I'm pretty sure. The more universal it became. I'm pretty sure the more personal he said. Yeah. All right, Job. Yeah, now I can't remember it. What time is it for you, Job? Thank you for staying up late. It's quite a midnight. Okay. It's not too bad. Nah, it's okay. I got to like 2 a.m. so we're good. Yeah, I have no idea what I was on about. Sorry, Job. No, it's fine. Sam, we talked about you, so you should respond. I don't know why I get stuck in people's heads the way I do, but. Because. Because why? So pretty. This sort of stuff is the death of the church. That's yeah. Sorry. So I can tell you why you get stuck in my head. And a lot of it is, I mean, all of it is related to this personal stuff, but I mean, I would consider us friends for sure, even though we've never met. And. You're working my way into my good friends. Okay, thank you. But there's, I know a lot of facets about you. I know a lot of things about you. I've seen the way that you interact. And so this is like, this is the thing for all of the details that I know about you. In an abstract conceptual thinking credo, credo versus religio way. I know Sam is a Unitarian, but you and I have had enough conversations about the Trinity that I'm just like, what you mean by Unitarian is probably a lot closer to what I mean by Trinitarian than a lot of self-professing Trinitarians. So. I don't care about that. Like that doesn't bother me in the slightest. And so in all the ways that I see you interact with people and I watch your channel and all your interactions with me and in all the things, the personal things that I know of the experiences of your life. I see a very genuine person and whatever that is, like you can extract a credo or a religious or a religious label or a word to put on it. But like when you broadly just look at it, like I can't, what I know about you as a person, I can't critique in a way. Like I could put it into a logical theological category and be like this good, this bad. Like I'm a caveman. It's easy. Look, you respect Sam and you're willing to think that he came to his conclusions the same way you came to yours. Right. And the semantic and really to me, like the disagreement, I've said the same thing to Jacob. At the end of the day, to me, the disagreement is semantics. Like I don't, this came up in a, I found a clip, I posted on the discord, the Rupert Sheldrakes, the physics of angels. And he was talking about how angels are like quantum waves, essentially, and it's tied to more fields. And he was talking about how your mind is almost more like the future of the wave, whereas the body is the past. And this makes a lot of sense with cognitive science and mapping and evolutionary theory and things like your body is what is, your mind is what is, will be. Like the mind is the future. And with Sam, like everything that I've observed with you, your embodied life and all your interactions with me, what is in that sense is fine. So all of your professions and your credo of what will be, like I don't, it's secondary at best. But I want to hear this out of Sam narcissism. No, I want to hear what I want to hear Sam, because it sounded like you were saying, it sounded like you were saying, I don't know why I get into people's heads, but in a negative way, right? Was that the question that you were asking? Because it seems like, it seems to me like, as soon as people hear what you are, like you are an avatar for something that already exists in their head. You are not in their head, but you are, you are triggering that thing that's already in their head. Sam represents our potential wrongness. Yes. So anyway, I just wanted to say that and Sam hasn't gotten to talk, so I'm going to stop. What if Sam's right? What if I am? But I think that part of the reason why, I guess part of what my example says about whatever is going on in the bigger picture is that like our estuary bridges and meaning the people that are around Paul VanderKlaai, there's no solid definition of what it is. There are no clear lines. There's no propositional clear lines. It's not like we all, you know, a lot of people maybe listen to your videos, but not necessarily everyone all the time. Maybe a lot of people tune in on your Friday question answers, but not everyone all the time. So there's no, of any of the four Ps, there's no clear boundaries in any of them that demarcate the community. And that's why I think, you know, that's why estuary is somewhat of a good analogy, because there's no clear boundary between the freshwater and the saltwater in an estuary. It's more of a gradient. And so there's a gradient of belonging, but there's still sort of a root or a source at the top that kind of marks, you know, something like the center of the group. You know, the river is more the center than the ocean is, right? Or something like that. And I think that because I'm such a weird landmine, right, for a lot of, you know, old Christian code that seems to in some way point to its failure, right? That the group boundary doesn't seem to be working, right? Like, you know, I'm like some weird false negative in the, you know, I'm like an autoimmune, I'm like a symptom of an autoimmune disease, right? Like, you know, the immune system is supposed to attack what's on the outside and protect what's on the inside. But it's like, am I on the inside or on the outside? And why should I be or why shouldn't I be? And I'm not, I'm trying to talk about myself in like, of what I represent to the community, not just the individual sameness. But I think that that's part of what's going on, is that I'm this weird thing that's showing the breakdown of the old thing that also points to what it needs to be going forward or something like that. To be honest, Sam, I mean, I don't really see you as somebody who happens to have the theological, to me, just Sam, that's fine. I mean, I can point to somebody else like, you know, like Colton, hi Colton, I know if you listen to these things, but it could be like, you know, I find myself really into Catholicism, but and I really like that. And I read a lot about it. And but then I called this really into Calvinism and maybe I'm wrong about my Catholicism and maybe the Reformation wasn't such a bad idea. But half joking, but honestly, I'm thinking, okay, well, he probably read a lot of books about it. And probably watched way more RSC sprawled than I have. So, you know, sorry, not me. Well, you don't have to, but it's, I think we keep circling around the same point. It's that, okay, you know, in this community, we all have a willingness to be wrong, because we know if we have a willingness to be wrong, something good will eventually come out of it. And the reverse is almost never true. And I think we could just keep repeating that thing over and over. And it's what Peterson says, because, you know, it's like a negative theology of, well, I know what I'm, you know, I have some things I might be right about, there's a whole bunch of things that I could be wrong about. And there's a lot more of those than of the others. So, oh, God, I sound like Peterson. That's bad. That's kind of all I had to say. I mean, I keep wanting to talk about my church, because it's all I can think of the last couple of weeks. But it's the same like your church, my church is terrified of dying. There's this narrative that it will be gone in 30 years. I've been talking a lot about this. It's got 30? Time to burn, my friend. It's such a weird idea, like 30 years, you know, what can happen in 30 years? You know what COVID has done to our world in like three? So, that aside, there's this strange idea that, well, just look at the statistics, look at the numbers. So, I've been talking to people, you know, one of them being Rod, Pastor Rod, for instance. And, yeah, and, you know, he advised me like, you know, you need to say what you have to say, like, okay, maybe I'll write a letter, because, you know, we've been working with these, in these efforts to retain the youth, there's other efforts to, you know, if we do this, maybe the youth will say, you know, maybe if you play more of these, you know, diabetes inducing songs about Jesus, you know, these diabetes songs. It's shirtless volleyball. Shirtless volleyball. Yeah, well, you know, that'll really bring that'll really bring in the youth. Yes. But if YouTube songs in the liturgy and, you know, who knows, maybe it'll work, but I doubt it. But, and so I'm thinking, wow, I should write a long letter, you know, honestly portraying how I feel about it and why I think it's a bad idea, because I've been interviewing people about this initiative, my podcast, I've been saying, well, giving a tiny bit of pushback saying, I actually know quite a bunch of people who are really into sacramental liturgy, and they're all pretty young, and they tend to take these things extremely seriously. And I sort of fear that where this is going is less and less serious and more about being entertained. Yeah, but if kids have to sit down for an hour long, they're not authentic. Like, well, then what makes the church authentic if kids have to be authentic? And it's all that stuff. Anyway, the point I'm trying to get to is while I'm trying to think of this letter that I may or may not write, I'm trying to continually figure out how I might be wrong. This church has been around for a lot longer than I have. Generations of people have grown up in this church and have baptized their kids in this church, and I'm just, you know, coming in with my ideas. Doesn't mean I'm full of shit, it's likely, but then I'm trying to figure out how do I... It's very easy to always think you're wrong, but that also makes it completely... How do I phrase this? You know what I'm getting at, right? It's sort of a very easy other end of the spectrum to always think you're wrong. There's something easy about skepticism. I have no opinion. I'm just this vague mist of cognitive nothingness. Yeah, skepticism can be just as lazy. Yeah, it's an easy way to abandon responsibility, too. Yeah, I mean, it's the same with disagreeing theologically with somebody. I can say, well, you do you, I do I, and it's expressive individualism on a theological level. We all pray to the same God, like nobody gets anywhere because you're still not engaging with each other. So yeah, I'll cut off my sermon. You were going to say something, Paul? Well, I love that you brought in the church because obviously for me, 30 years, gosh, I have 30 weeks, well, I'll be happy. But we've built something here, and how does what we've built relate to the church or say about the church? Not a lot of churches have even the scantest idea that this is going on or exists whatsoever. I am. How about this? How about a question to all of you? Let's say we took the discourse, all of its how many people do we have? Let's say 2000. OK, let's take the core groups. Let's say we have 500 core people. We build a church, we put them on there, and we try to figure out a liturgy that everybody can appreciate. I don't think you'd get anywhere. That's not how this place works. This liturgy changes every 15 minutes. I mean, there's some core tenets, like, you know, don't call each other certain words, or at least be willing to learn from the other. But to have her, I mean, the closest thing we have to a liturgy is the Friday QA, and that's just Paul talking. What I'm trying to say is I don't think that we have to be I'm saying what I'm trying to say is I don't think this can be called a church in the traditional sense of the words, and I don't think it would work that way. You would have lots of small groups where people would sort of walk in and out, maybe listen, maybe. It's more like a large multi-day conference where you can kind of walk into a talk with somebody who's giving a presentation. I wouldn't limit it to the discord because the discord is one aspect of this. When I think about this, I think about Rando's United, I think about Sam's channel, I think about the discord, you know, Luke on his crazy voxer stuff. The people who listen to my channel participate in the comments. And that's where my perspective is always a little different because I know more of how this permeates other aspects that maybe not all of you know because There are a lot of people who call and text and email you, Paul, that is not also kind of part of larger public land. Right. But there is something, and it does have, I mean, because you know, when Job, when you said our church is basically anxious about their existence, and so maybe paintball for Jesus, maybe shirtless volleyball, maybe, you know, YouTube, you know, whatever to do to keep the youth. And I've watched churches, you know, go on that for years and it almost always ends badly because if you, you know, and what usually does better, and you know, you talk to Rod, if you talk to Rod Hugen, he's much more high touch and let the youth do some things and, you know, give, put them on the magic school bus and let them get dirty and make mistakes. And, you know, maybe something good will arise out of it. I think that there is a, if you were to ask me, so we have all this openness, but it doesn't just become a, you know, pouring tapioca onto the counter. Okay. So there is some structure. And what I've seen at least is on one hand, there's openness, but yet there's also a self-knowing. So one of the things that I've, you know, and Sam, I think you're really right about kind of how you function here, but I've learned, I mean, one of the things I've learned a tremendous amount from Sam. And in some ways, Sam has helped me become a better Trinitarian because he challenges me. You know, Sam knows himself and he's articulate and he's learned and he, but he's also engaging and he knows how to do the dance. So in some ways, what we're really about here is the certain dance that I think you described on the Discord. And it gets manifest in the Rando's United video and on Sam's channel and in different places. And so it's really this combination of a self-knowledge that says, I'm not threatened by other differences. And I think that actually is laid upon a foundation of, to me, it's Calvinism that finally I can be out on a tether because I know who holds the rope. That might trigger Luke, but I don't care. No, I mean, the way that you describe Calvinism, I'm perfectly fine with. I just don't call that Calvinism. That's just called trusting in God. Luke's just a three or four point Calvinist, just not five. Irresistible grace. Awesome. The most amazing thing about Luke is, maybe they'll make a clip out of this, is that for a guy who's constantly saying, it's just all talk about ideas. All the dude loves to do is talk about ideas. It's deeper than ideas, Paul. Listen, Paul, if you join the Voxer group, like I try to convert you to, I talk about lots of things on there. I accidentally had turned on my sound notifications on my phone. Like, what the hell is making all these things all the time? My wife was like, what's digging? I don't know. It must be some app I'm unaware of. It's constantly going off. It's awful. You can't keep up. I'm a glutton for content. You can't keep up. It's ridiculous. It's like 12 versions of me pumping out all their thoughts simultaneously. Luke is, Voxer is to Luke as YouTube is to Paul. Yeah. Yeah. So this to me though, so everybody in here has said that like, where else would I go? And this is a place where all these misfit toys come together, where there's no other place. It's virtually not alone. We are all here because we're getting something that we're not getting other places. So the reason we're here and doing this is because the church isn't doing this. And to me, this gets at like the first conversation I ever had with you, Paul, is what I've always wanted to do. My whole intellectual enterprise has been, because one of my biggest pet peeves is people will talk about secularity and I'm glad secularity is rising and the church isn't. I'm like, are you paying attention? Like that came out of the church. Like you're not digging deep enough. Like this secularity that you're critiquing came out of the church. And so the reason people aren't going to church, I would say largely is because, and the reason we are all here is this is a space. This is a feminine space that allows us to say what we really think. I have, sorry, Jeff, go ahead. Well, I just, I want to have a question for Paul on that. You said, you know, this, we're, this is a place where we can't get it at church. And so my question for you, Paul, and really for everybody is why can't the church do this? And should the church do this? I have ideas. Oh, Joe. No, no, no. I want to hear Paul's answer first. Paul's the church expert. Well, this is exactly why estuary. The church, the church has to embody something and estuary can leave it in solution longer. So if the church is a solid estuary is a gelatin. But I want to push on that. The church has to embody something, but I think you're talking about credo. The embodiment is in the religio, which is what we're doing here. If my church said, Hey, Sam, we love your church father series. Could you once a month do a Bible Sunday school on the church fathers? But you have to give up YouTube. Done. Easy. Channel gone. I would do it, do it in my church once a month, whatever, every other week. And I would put even more time into it, probably. But instead I get to have lunch with my elders every once in a while where they start to wonder if I'm a false teacher because does having a YouTube channel count as teaching and is what I teach false, right? Like true story. So this is like, I would way rather in many ways that the depth of relationships that are unfortunately geographically strewn across the whole globe, if they were localized geographically with people. I mean, obviously one cool part about our community is we attract really exceptionally interesting people that are rare and hard to come by. And you couldn't count on your own local five, 10,000 person town or suburb or what have you, or neighborhood, having a whole bunch of these sorts of people. But I would prefer if it were my geographical local church and I got to see them in all of the regular events that go on there and I were able to contribute. But like I said, part of the reason why I'm here, why I'm doing what I'm doing is I want to do something and this is the only thing I get to do because there aren't barriers. You raised your hand earlier. That's really interesting to be saying because of course if I tell my elders I want to do a series on church fathers, they'd say, oh sure, I have to take down one would come. And part of the reason I'm on YouTube is, well I sort of backed into it in a way, but people have come and it's really interesting, Sam. It's really interesting. But I think there's, and we're sort of here in the middle between the church and we've got the religion that's not a religion written out there floating around and we've got Jordan Peterson who you know again is in that video. It really struck me the hole that the church used to have in the structure you know is left and so what we're seeing now is things are caving into that hole and so in some ways you've got Peterson that's out there saying I don't understand why the church can't sell responsibility and part of me thinks well the guy certainly hasn't been around church very much because there's all sorts of people trying to sell responsibility at church through the church and not like Peterson and you've got Vervecky who is you know we're going to have an ecology of practices and but that's where let's say you need credo. Credo will emerge and again oh gosh I hope I think he's really close to saying yes because it was a really good randos convo but you know prop it because I had so much thinking while we were doing it. Do anything and propositions will emerge from it and at some point if you want to keep propositions are of course upper register and so if you want to keep a degree of stability credo will happen and so even if there's a conflict between Sam and his elders over credo I tend to think that it's important to figure out how to have that conversation well and pursue it because even if at the end of a few years of discussion Sam and his elders are still on two different sides of a line God will have done something through that conflict. Absolutely but if you elevate the credo above the religio you're anti-Christ. Can we define those three terms? Yes please. The credo is the propositional it's the abstraction from the mystical thing that binds which is underneath it which is unarticulable. I need a concrete example. This the thing that's binding us anything that's religious anything that holds you together the thing that holds together with the multiplicity in any pattern. But you don't live that Luke there's a credo that you and your wife share and every time you put your hand up and you see your wedding band there it is. But this is a commitment but that's a commitment the credo is a commitment in the abstract. You are married. But me not leaving every day is the religio. Oh absolutely but the married is not incidental to that because. And you say vows at the beginning of it that are quite similar to saying you know a creed. But I didn't understand them at all in the same way that I understand them now. Right. And I don't understand them in the same way that I'll understand them later. And they're real enough to govern you and they do. But I got for your children. Sometimes they don't though. Well I know that's the way it is in church too. Right. And so the difference the religio is the thing that actually binds. What the what the credo does is it's you know I think about the string in the in when you're making rock candy you put that string in it it gathers the crystals around it. And so in Sam's church you know there's Sam said it nicely in terms of how he is. He's you know he's that thing in the he's the thing that doesn't fit and we can't figure out what to do with him. Okay so here can I can I take it here let's let's make it very practical and take it to be like a family. You as a family can have a but you can't say this without talking about the family. No no I agree which is which is fine and we're talking about it at I'm not listen this is where I'm not an anti-propositionalist. You need propositions but you need them in the right way in a dynamism that is iconic and anytime you invert them anytime you invert credo and religio practically it takes Christ and makes it anti-Christ. And so like the law is just if you use it lawfully to quote Saint Paul but the law we're still talking about church yes because here's the thing like in a family you can have an idea about the way that things should work you can have your credo but then if you hold to that in an unrelenting way relationally that causes division your credo has become anti-religio and it is no longer serving what it's supposed to serve that I would argue as the rule is what the church has done over the last 500 years. Is the job of the church? The job of the church is religio. Credo will be there but credo should not supplant religio. And I'd say you know so here so poor Sam he's always the example he's always the example. I can use another example of someone let's say in a Christian reformed church who doesn't believe in infant baptism yet they participate in the local church I mean you can you can run this with same-sex marriage you have a gay couple and this is where I'm a hard example because you can't point to a behavior that I will or won't do. That's really an interesting that's a really because then the question is to what degree does the trinity does trinitarian theology express itself in the concrete religio of the church? Gosh so what happens on the discord you know we start we have this nice conversation that anybody can participate before you know we're having a murky theological debate. And that's the big difference with the discord and the church in my view. The church isn't there to teach you all these different ideas and concepts and weird philosophical people you've never heard of on the continent. It's supposed to show you to have it's supposed to facilitate you meeting God and to show you Christ as far as I can tell. Education is not what's then. So the university is supposed to do the teaching? Because that I'm not saying what is supposed to do the teaching. I'm saying that what we have is difficult to equate to a church because so much of it is is about exposure to ideas. That's fine for your small groups but yeah it doesn't scale. Well of course it doesn't that's what makes this place so weird and that's why this place only scales because it's online. I don't think it scales if we all come together that that was my point I tried to make earlier. This works in small groups. One question I also still have about our community is how limited is it by sort of done bar numberness. Right you know like Job you were saying yeah in some sense the community is probably a couple thousand right like popular Paul videos will go up above four or five thousand on a regular basis. Less popular one sort of bottom out in the low one thousands right so that you know the regular audience is there unless the algorithm really sends one of your videos to a bunch of unusual people and then there's sort of you know discord which is slightly smaller and then there's the people who regularly contribute and then there's the people who hyper contribute right and and there's sort of one of one of the reasons why this community works is like if I go on the discord if I'm in the comment section on a video or if we were to have some sort of in-person retreat there's a very good high chance that if I'm committed enough to the community I will know a couple people there and there will people that I also don't know right and that's similar to going to a medium-sized church on Sunday right like there will be some people I know all right I'll have some conversations in the parking lot before or after you know whatever right there's sort of our and this is kind of a weird thing about our community are we a church are we not a church and and how does technology enable slash constrain the scaling and and what are the the constraints there if did any of you have any of you watched the verveky scale conversations that first for vacay scale conversation that's on his channel about three quarters of the way in he starts talking about church university monastery and of course we I mean he's obviously looking at christendom because that's these became it and you look at the evolution and sam you know this history probably better than any of us you know you have this interesting evolution through constantine of you know what happens then with the priesthood in the church and of course the monastic movement will have its role and you know into the middle ages the university will will come to the fore and of course and part of what luther is a luther is a university professor as well as an augustinian monk as well as connected to the church at vittenberg I mean luther is is right there in the middle of all three and what we've seen in a way since the protestant reformation has been this the the addition of secularity the subtraction of the monastery and the subtraction of the monastery and now we're watching the deconstruction of the university and that's been you know that's not just recent with peterson if you go back and you read dallas willard at the beginning of the divine conspiracy in the 80s you know people in ethics people discover that a class in ethics doesn't necessarily make you ethical and so you know what we're seeing is this slow that's the hole in the culture where the church used to be not only so church monastery university and and i think in some ways part of what we're you know sloshing around in here as an estuary and as this little community is that space for people so it is a monastery and estuary and church and university is what you're saying so what you're saying is no i'm actually being serious is well that's kind of how we're because the one thing we don't do is eucharist and and we're not about to start and the the assumption is we you know we recommend though you should go there but then people will write me and say paul what what does it mean that i go to i go to my you know i decided to be orthodox so i'm going to the orthodox i went back to the roman catholics i'm i have a priest and i received the eucharist and you know is there a sermon or is it just the liturgy you know blah blah blah but then i listened to i'm getting all of this university really from youtube and the internet and and the discord is sort of the i mean i mean that's actually how universities are acting today they don't have discord but the conversation that you put out today with that um for that adam the lutheran guy right was interesting and he was talking about how facebook wanted to get into somehow hosting or mediating religious um organizations meetings experiences what have you and like both of you were you know kind of reacting with some justified horror at the idea but i'm like but wait a minute so i am watching you on youtube you guys are communicating via zoom and all of this is internet mediated and like wait a minute the idea that you know internet slash facebook could mediate religious experiences so it's like well to what extent is that what we're doing and to what extent is that not what we're doing yeah okay uh you know paul you're not going to say all right everyone go set fetch some bread and wine and or grape juice upstairs from your kitchen all right it's our friday meeting okay everyone come and bring your own you know byo elements and uh you know here we go um you know words of institution etc that that is not happening would that be feasible could we actually pull that off i mean it's already happening church lots of churches yeah oh yeah yeah yeah but i'm just saying i wouldn't do it and i wouldn't do it on the discord because you know i just when you said that i just had the same moment of when i first talked to sam and i learned he's not a trinitarian it's like oh you can really get me in trouble here because if you know word is out that a christian foreign minister is hosting the lord's supper on a discord server now suddenly i'm in trouble yeah i know where the lines are and those lines are important but what's so interesting okay so sam who's more who's more of a heretic sam the unitarian or someone like me i'm trinitarian luke you are more of a heretic than i am easy question okay well and loving it too luke you relish in your heresy so so this so so this bag it's not to go down that bunny trail but then what is a heretic because i affirm all the ecumenical councils all the creeds it's you're you're you have the religio of a heretic oh man oh no oh no luke seems to live a pretty clean life as far as i can tell yeah but but but you do have but but that's you do have a spirit of heresy about you though luke sorry that this sounds hilarious this is why this is why i get along we're weird different sides of the same coin i'm the heretic who would just love to be anything but right and and luke is the not heretic who kind of likes frolicking and poking people in their axioms and making sure no one's ever too comfortable with whatever they believe and as soon as elissa children child children's gets too sure of herself she needs to be chopped down to size and wait hang on hang on hang on look look look look does anyone in your church know about your heretical ideas see i don't even know my heretical ideas would be and this is what you don't have a radical idea no i'm serious isn't this the point but yeah if nobody in your church knows of course you're not in trouble but sam is the same yeah like after church when i'm sitting there having coffee hour when i'm talking to my priest it's the same thing like i have one mode it's right i think i think the point is that a bit yeah but at your church you're not like i don't know you wouldn't be ostracized you're not ostracized for yeah for your religio um but sam basically is in any kind of church that he would want to be in well i'm not ostracized for my credo the things that i talk about the i mean the religio comes out in and this is where orthodoxy is orthodoxy is a little bit different i feel like they don't in the east they don't like because i would i do affirm all the creeds that i know of i mean i'm still a little sam and i we should have another talk about calcedon i don't know what i think about calcedon calcedon stuff for me but um but i affirm all those things and then orthodoxy is like are you going to liturgies are you orthodoxy is very much in a mode of and i think it's because of what peugeot talked about of like you can't because it's intrinsically personalist and because you can't judge from the outside like be careful you who judge from your judgment you condemn yourself and i don't judge anyone i don't even judge myself saint paul orthodoxy is like they don't they're very careful about making judgments about things that people say like that's between you and god and so it's personal in that sense which doesn't mean it's arbitrary like jettadaya said that in one in a conversation that's important it's very important and this is why i always push that personalism isn't relativism it's not arbitrary it's personal it's it's very very important it's not the subjective objective thing is like are rationalist categories and they're wrong like you shouldn't make that divide but everything right the the difference is like if somebody confronted me like hey joe by sure you're praying the rosary in church like dude you're wearing shorts yes get out of here yeah i mean that's that's different than what you're saying your orthodox church those are two two very different things yes so what would get you in trouble in your church luke um so i i don't know and i think that plays out it probably plays out different from from church to church and depending on the priest but these these are conversations that i've even had with um jeez do i want to go down so like um would you be in trouble if you took a second wife and i don't mean with your first wife yeah would you be would would they keep you from the table or so a 20 year old luke who's cohabitating with a girlfriend who's not yet married some you know doesn't need to be you but like something like that would uh and and it was super well known even the priest it was common knowledge in the whole church right even if the priest is the last to know i get that even the priest learns about it right the the short answer is i don't know the the short answer is i don't know but we had this exact conversation once i don't know a few months ago in the box where we were going back and forth and and we were talking about it in a very personalist way and and i think at the end of the day a lot of us came to the conclusion that that that that decision of whether or not to withhold the eucharist or something like that because the problem is is you can you can get into clericalism right which is the whole critique and thing that led to the reformation like controlling that authority and power and manipulating from from the priestly role um i think i think at the end of the day if you really are a consistent personalist and you're not judging then then you have then then i think you have to leave it i think you can offer the eucharist and you leave it up and you leave it in the hands of the person now this doesn't have very protestant very protestant well this is the difference between personalism and individualism though is like it's it's not my church doesn't let me do a lot of things they still let me take communion because it's up to the individual to decide whether or not for themselves how thoroughly they've accepted yeah but i wouldn't want to stay here and and that's important that's different than having multiple wives which is performative and i'm not trying to make a joke it's it's it's they're not trying to see what you think it's different from what you do yeah and the influence that could be having on the rest of the community etc yeah right and i don't and i'm not saying like i'm not speaking broadly for orthodoxy i'm not saying that's how they would play it out um and and this is from my little i mean this was mainly me and nate and sherry and like how orthodox are we you know that we're having this back and forth conversation for a long time um uh that's where we stood at the end of the day because i just i i feel like you're the dangers for going about it any other way i think are wrong and i i really would stress that it's not like an individualism it's not just like you and your feelings and your arbitrary like well you know i'm just out like just do and blow and and get with hookers and like and i feel fine about it pure priests so like give me the eucharist lift that you know i don't yeah that's not quite the same thing but i think like that scene and like one of the godfathers where um he's like you know like all of michael corleone's enemies are getting killed and at the same time he's in the church for either a baptism baptism that's right a first communion or something right and it's like do you didn't renounce satan and all of his work things like i do right and you know meanwhile you know the body counts racking up in the other scenes right like that sort of thing like there can be i guess where am i going like luke i think that you will acknowledge that the proper place for discipline the proper place for enforcing lines is in a personalist context right like in an in an individualist or a not thoroughly enough personalist context it's wrong to do that because you don't know the person well enough it'll backfire etc but within a family and things like families you know there's enough you know knowledge and personal relationship where discipline even perhaps you know harsh discipline to the point of exclusion of certain things can be the appropriate thing and i think that you do think at the end of the day that a well-run church should have the ability and the discernment to do things that would exclude people from the table yeah i mean i would i would like i'm not going to say yeah 100 of the time like i mean i'm not going to make a rule out of it i don't think you can do that as a personal because only the radical reformation thought that actually we're just going to let every individual make a decision about this the pastor whoever church board elders what have you doesn't get to decide it's on the individual that's a very very protestant very individualist i would even say right so i would agree on how to handle that if you make it if you make it like an absolutizing rule of course it would be but then because like because the rule ultimately i would say and i don't mean this in like a cavalier way is love and you can't and that is ultimately transcendent and ineffable and irreducible and specific every time in a personal contextual way all right i'm gonna i'm gonna pivot because we're at an hour and a half here and i want to get to the fourth question we're halfway i can go to five i don't know about you guys um well okay um where would we like to see you know this has been helpful to me because i do think we are sort of swimming in the hole that the church has left um and and the church has been you know you have this image of pre-reformation europe at least that that at least had a cohesive hole we have the church at the center of the community you know you have walls around the village i mean why was it that i took um san michelle as kind of an image for estuary where you have the church at the top of the mountain and you have the community and you have walls and you have a sea and you have all of that and that's in many ways what has been what has been taken apart um and so now we're sort of all frogging around in this hole in the middle of the culture and you know we have churches where where where do we want to see this go so what do we want out of this like i was looking for it i think that's joe you've stumbled into a lot of things that you weren't looking for in the last four years i'm not being like i'm not trying to make light of it even though i always try to make light of it i'm not trying to make light of it it's i think a lot of us just find us here and it sort of just happens day by day maybe i'm only speaking for myself so here's here's the thing you know how pa joe says there's a particular clip where he says there are people who watch my videos and they have they tell me they have no idea what i'm talking about and he and they keep watching it and he doesn't understand why it is i get that i've seen i see some of his stuff like oh oh i don't know why that's true but i think it's true i'd better watch more of pa joe because you know and then i have no idea what i'm doing it's no idea what i'm doing i just do but you do in a sense joe because the pa joe illustration is perfect people that come in that don't understand it but they stay yeah they don't know why we're here but they intuit there's something here they have there's some part of their multiplicity that is attuned to this is good this is true this is beautiful i can't explain it they're in touch with something that's deeper than their explanation sure sure but but it goes back to that same question paul asks like why did you come here like well that's that's the same as the first question it's like you know how has this changed you like it's not like i can oversee that and i don't i don't think a lot of people can oversee that and you see that in the entire jordan peterson paul vanderkley movement like again and again again you could say this is a pattern in reality of massive transformation beyond your own ability to oversee it all like you can oversee bits and pieces of where you change the where certain ideas really modified your thinking but to be able to oversee the entire way in which you effectively transformed and with in which you start to inhabit a whole new pattern of existence yeah good luck with that bucko it's not going to happen it's just too much of reality and too little of you as peterson would say well why do you continue to stay then well where else would i go again that i look i've all has the words of eternal i've considered many times to leave the discord i've considered many times to leave my church doesn't work it's it's it's it's only worse so and it's and not because i i hate those things that i tried to leave them but because i hope that could do without them because they can be very time intensive and and uh you know you have your doubts like sometimes i wonder maybe it's all a big joke maybe it's all just you know maybe maybe i've been fooled maybe maybe all those books are full of horse shit and i just got fooled in the thinking there's anything of real value in there those thoughts come and go but it's dude how can i even compare my life to what's three years ago it's ridiculous i have a kid it's almost six months old starts to walk around so not walk that'd be interesting at six months but starts to scoot into things he finds interesting you know for fake you would have five words to describe that that i don't get but he does that and to describe how that changes things or if i even know what i'm doing god it's it's just it's just hubristic and that's why i don't want to write a letter to my church because i have no idea what i'm doing so how could i judge whether they do which is exactly why you need to write the letter yeah yeah to figure it out and that's why we're having this conversation right we're trying to you know like jordan peterson will say like oh the hebra's wandered around in the desert and moses was like just watching what they were already doing and then you know like it sort of bubbled up and you know that whether or not that's a true kind of what happened that is a little bit of what we're doing we're like what are we doing we're like kind of trying to look at ourselves and then proposition you know bring some of our religio into properly articulated credo i might say but like here's a question like i bet you guys probably feel this way sometimes and this is why i'm kind of still around do you ever like go to i don't know whether it's church or some other person talking about christianity or religion and they like feel behind the times i don't know how else to to say it like you know like you're kind of out of the loop or like you're not like this this feels a little bit like there's some kind of it feels something like there's a cutting edge that is more here than it is other places paul's his hand in his face because he agrees with me no no and like like when i go somewhere else it's just not there right and okay and so this is part of why i keep coming back here's why i disagree and i'm gonna keep it short so somebody else can talk the reason i disagree with that sound is because my christianity is so heavily feed is the philosophical that whenever i meet somebody who actually properly lives it like oh you have so much more to teach me than i could teach you because all i have are weird like ideas like luke would say and they have actual lessons and that's why i don't agree next i agree and i disagree though sam because when i when i want to talk about the way that i often think about ideas and thinking and propositions is their future their potential like kind of like how rupert sheldrake said mind it's potential it's it's to be enacted it's to be embodied which is important it's a it's a it's a critical essential part of embodiment and so that's the embodiment is what you're talking about joe which is absolutely legitimate too but when i'm talking about ideas and all the common vernacular and history and everything we're talking about nobody nobody in my real life can do this i go i have a book club with everybody who's more highly educated than me they all have phds sometimes multiple ones they're all very smart and more well read than i am they can't talk about things as well as we get i don't think um it's just it's different when it's in this specific idea realm this is where i will agree with you but but also joe i think your point's totally legitimate like that is if if all that if that's all it is just talking about ideas without the wisdom of like talking to some uneducated person who has lived a very faithful holy life in your local church like that's that's more real that's that's been done you know many people who are have lived faithful holy lives have struggled to articulate a lot about it yeah and that's not to say take anything against them yeah but this this thinky talky thing we do it's that's a that's a subsection of humanity yes but it's well you've you've told that story a lot paul of how when you were a young pastor you know you you were going to teach these ladies about marriage and you didn't know shit they ate me for lunch paraphrasing yeah but i really but you know sam's point is just i can't i mean this community has spoiled me for my denomination on so many different levels i'm completely uninterested with all of the stuff my denomination throws at me about almost anything except actually except some credo things and and other things that intersect in what we're talking about and i i see most of the stuff just floating out there between my colleagues and it's just like it's it's sort of like again your church job is well we're going to die in 30 years oh yeah but you know and and people will ask me i said yeah my church my church will probably die but i'm tremendously optimistic about the future of christianity silent one but so so are we trying to probe jeff to talk if so i'll get out of the way come on jeff it's getting dark once jeff to translate selfish with your ideas yeah yeah well well i think paul your your question was where do you where do you want it to go um peterson's like you have to have a goal goal goal it's like man we got no goal and i i agree with myself i love just frogging around in an estuary i think that's the perfect word bye jeff i don't know if my mic is working test we're letting you warm up no i think um i think in answer to your question paul i i have a couple of ideas that came to mind um you know sam you mentioned the i think you said we're like a box of misfit toys and um or people who just you know don't feel like they fit in and uh i don't know if this is uh narcissism or what it is but i i typically feel like in it i feel like i'm the person that doesn't fit in even in the places where other people don't fit in so if there's like a group of people that come together because they don't fit in and ah finally we're in this spot like i gravitate to those places and then i feel like oh man i don't really feel like i fit in hey jeff when we were we when we were fishing not fishing in arkansas you were the leader of the group there well you know when you showed up it changed the dynamic totally for the better i'm being perfectly honest well i was i was going to reference that too because i felt that you know i i felt that the first night and then by the time we got into the second you know after we had slept and we woke up the next day i almost kind of like something about that felt like it was missing it was just like oh i don't really feel and it wasn't anything that anybody was doing it's just like this internal feeling you know that i have is once i get into a place like i don't feel like i fit in and for me um that kind of connects with i think paul what you were saying there is this whole idea is talky talky kind of thing it's almost like that's the place where i don't feel like i fit in with this very well like i i like listening to it but i don't feel like i can engage with it all that well but the the piece that i do feel like um keeps me at least close to this or you know kind of listening in on conversations is um tied into where i want to see this go or at least what i want to continue to see more of and maybe growth and that is you know we we look at some of the newer people who come to the community and the newer people who like step up and they start to reveal themselves and you see their personalities you know you look at your chads you look at your chrises you look at your marks you look at um you know even gavin has started to show up and it's just i that reminds me of what it was like when we first came into this community right we we all started to meet each other and we started to riff off of each other and there it is and you know i'm i'm a i'm an older person in this community probably in the in the older end there are certainly some that are older than me um but you know i think back to my 20s there were those stupid shows on mtv the real world and they would have they would have you know there would be a season and you'd find all these people and you'd connect with them or you know as a as a as a as an audience member you'd see that but you'd also see that they would like form these connections and then when it first came out you're just like oh okay that's a season or whatever but you start watching it for years and years and years it's like it it shifts the focus shifts and oh here's this new cast of characters and you know i guess saturday night live kind of has done this over the years too but it's just it feels like you know i i think of kind of us as oh we're one of the early seasons of the real world and now we've got these other seasons and these other casts that we can follow and oh what do you think about them and yeah i just i love it so here's the thing jeff if you don't mind i'd like to describe you to yourself sure here's a little story i have jeff and i met in believe was in texas but it was like a four-hour drive it was probably still in texas i was at some university giving a talk about some obscure subject and through vanaclare i met jeff and we we had chat ads and jeff was gonna take me out for barbecue so he picks me up in a rented car he's already honest says yeah you know i i took a wrong turn or somewhere or something and i get in the car you know jeff could have been an ex-murderer but you know i i get in the car and we drive to some place we chat and we drive to some barbecue place i think was called the salt lake now this leading up to a point we we get in there we get a seat and i think jeff you had to go to the toilet or something and you you put the car keys down on the table saying just in case so you don't think i would leave you here hadn't even entered my mind that somebody could do something like that but what that to me now what that to me showed is that you might feel out of place or what you in what you implicitly do is make sure the other people person feels in place and that's maybe why you feel out of place because you're so busy trying to make other people feel like they're in place and that works with what i hear sam say he says oh you kind of position yourself as a leader at the famous fishing trip that i'm so unhappy i couldn't be at so i i think that's something you might want to want to consider about yourself now i appreciate that i completely forgotten about that story i was like what did i do with the car keys as you were telling that story but yeah i just thought about that thank you i thought about that moment now that you've now that you've called it back i i remember that now because yeah you said jeff could have been an axe murderer i just got in the car with him you know my wife's thinking the inverse it's just like so you're going to meet who they're from another country dad do you do you know this how do you know this person again and i'm just like that's fine it's fine look here i'll let watch this two hour video watch these 17 videos that he's done with this other guy that is a complete stranger on the you'll feel better get it you'll get it then you'll get it just like no my wife is fine like you know what i trust you i'm also going to be praying a lot i'll take your word for it um but no i get there and i'm just like okay job's from a completely other country he's in this giant state he's getting into this car with this stranger i'm now walking away and i am his ride right it's not like you couldn't find a ride or whatever but i don't know there's something in my mind that's just like no i need to make sure that you know he any of the any of the random thoughts that i might be having about can i trust this guy i need to make sure that i'm the only one that's having those thoughts and not him there it is that's it all right we need to do more in-person stuff like we can whine about covid but we should also probably admit that covid increases the demand for what we're offering because it constricts a lot of non-online possibilities but with maybe covid ever ending sometime maybe ever and the unfortunate constraints that it's imposed that in some ways help us in some ways hurt us we do need to do some more stuff because i like the chicago meetup group i haven't mentioned it i probably should have mentioned it before is pretty great right like yeah it's like a book club that's like discord right and it's pretty nice and i think the sacramento ones like that too um but there are there are still i don't know maybe only a couple dozen people who get to be part of a discord or a in-person meetup that is somehow connected to whatever in the world this thingy is but whether it's conferences meetups or fishing trips or what have you we need to do more of that and that will probably require a little bit of intentionality and discipline and work that so far hasn't befitted a that hasn't really happened in a community of a lot of uh kind of slacker oriented people yeah did i hear that there's going to be a men's retreat for us all to flock to at living stones let's go on paul so i had the idea and then jared heard so jared's my son who's of all my kids he's the one who who keeps you know stays in this little community listens to some of my videos on the discord as comes to the meetup so he's like yeah it's a great idea and of course immediately i started getting messages from people oh yeah i want to come it's a great idea so immediately i started thinking about how could i pull this together and but then i've got to deal with i mean then i've got to deal now with the real life community down here on the ground and getting these people here and costs and i mean that's part of the function of of meat space is that it gets complex pretty quickly oh yeah we'd leave our towels everywhere and then you'd have to go find those later and yeah that it's obscure well you know i i just had all kinds of ideas about okay well we can find volunteers from the church to put these people up but then you know yeah i i'd say yeah you know first you know first one i have to deal with is my wife okay so we've got three randos who are going to stay in our house with us and everything that went through jeff's wife's mind well now it's not just my crazy giant husband out there in the world doing crazy things now he's bringing him home and you know and at the church it's like okay we got to get together a list of things that need to be done here and timing and so it's you know even the i you know i i feel tremendous amount of guilt about the local meetup because i haven't really really reactivated it since covid and part of the reason was that so we had a first meeting and it was a even though i renamed it it was still a jordan peterson meetup and it's like oh i want to try and get this estuary thing going here and what i really need to do is sit down and schedule it on my calendar probably for two meetings a month and then i've you know my wife i've got to deal with my wife and the people at the church and i mean it's it's it's very complex and part of what made this thing work for me was i had a i had a lot of freedom in terms of what i can do with my time during the day within this little box and so here i am in this little box and i can make this stuff happen online and i think there's a there's a lot of that that goes into the the the shape of this thing but you're exactly right it has to get into the real world but then suddenly now that's that's real i mean when a child comes into the world it's got to you know it comes at tremendous risk to the wife and then tremendous inconvenience to the husband as well and off you are so yeah this virtuality has afforded a lot but to make it more real it's gonna cost more than just easy attention exactly i mean attention is cheap in some ways and like our current operating budget is very small in some sense considering how much hours of attention you know is involved but once you start doing it online that equation will start to change very quickly i can't just suddenly fly to the states anymore i mean not until little sam is like four or something like that so i i would like you know we're going to thank you for the record for naming your baby after me that was very sweet yeah sure of course i mean yeah i would like to post covid because we're currently in lockdown hopefully not too long but post covid i'd like to uh you're in lockdown again yeah yeah we are yeah a couple weeks oh it's it's terrible we got like 20 000 new infections a day but i wasn't going to talk about covid so i'd like to there are more dutch people now also thanks to your channel carl uh paul that i know about like the the people the young woman from campa and sarah could be i can't remember i know seminary student yeah yeah i know it's a seminary student yeah yeah i know at least some other people that you know uh the who was the other dude um eric was it eric you talked to recently oh um yeah i've got him in my mind i could see him um yeah i think he studied some some interesting field i can't remember anyway those are people who have now seen on your channel but i haven't met yet and i there are more dutch people connected this than i know so uh and i really want to get to europe i've never been to europe and that's something i can sell to my wife pretty easily so we'll go to the paris honey and to all these other misters what did you say nothing honey yeah well and and i do want to do you know another i did that little get together in my my sister's house in connecticut and that was that was just really a tremendous time i'm always sensitive though to cost because there are a number of there are a lot of people youtube is sort of cheap for people and so when we start getting together then suddenly you do have some exclusiveness can you afford the time can you pay for the plane ticket how about lodging how about costs of being there so even showing up to my sister's place um you know that costs people something and so i think about how i can do this as cheaply as possible so that to not have the financial thing be the the barrier for entry and that's a big value in the church i mentioned that um in a video recently because i want people to be able to you know we got some people in our world who have very little money and we've got others that have a lot of money and so then we're back to x2 and four um what does that mean x2 and four is when they all met together and you know oh they're in the temple and they they prayed together and the teaching of the apostles i mean that now we're back into church i can't get away from it so well and it would also you know you know what happens then as soon as it becomes a funded thing there are going to be expectations like you're basically sort of having a meetup well then i have to meet paul and paul has to you know sign my my uh my cell phone holder and uh and then as soon as there's more money around there's also the risk of exploitation and stuff like that just kind of reminded of that by certain pejor videos that might have that that pang burn guy you know like oh we're gonna have this this talk thing and then suddenly it's it's all yeah scan and the you know you want your vip your vip ticket so you can shake uh shake the shake the lobster daddy's hand and have your vip picture with him which so on your hand through paul's beard oh yes there was this great comment under the video with somebody made today poet says oh that dead beard is is light enough to nest some eggs it's a hedge I'm thinking of keeping it through the new year so I'm kind of curious how big it'll get my mother is like because I have a cousin whose beard you know he lets his beard go really big he's like you're looking more and more like rus it wasn't a compliment not that she has anything against my cousin rus but it yeah anyway gift sam sam were you saying we need to shift the conversation to the next item on the agenda I'm checking right here it's Vin Armani talk is that right is that right I gotta turn off my alarm here because it's telling me I gotta check um I gotta check Al Alvin Alvin Kamara's uh status if I gotta take him out of my fantasy football lineup so talk amongst yourselves for a moment yes oh what I just wanted to ask paul I just was gonna ask paul what are his thoughts on Vin Armani why is Vin Armani such a polarizing figure oh man do you know who Vin Armani is yeah I said snake oil peddler Luke it's because half the population is gullible and half the population isn't that's why he's right yeah let's dial Dave W into this into this call I've read too much about crypto and bitcoin to know when I see bullshit so yeah I don't think he's mainly even talking about crypto and bitcoin is he yes yes I think that's all he's talking about the trinitarian nature of bitcoin I am I just I'm a selective hearer I guess I watch a Vin Armani video and I'm just like I don't even hear about bitcoin maybe maybe that's how I can save the church with bitcoin yeah who knows just anyway can we talk about something else yeah we can all right mark ingraham is now in the lineup instead of alvin kamara who's out again so you're drinking Luke you keep checking on the scams what's in it this is uh apple pie shrub sour shrub sour see this is one of the reasons why I love living in a big city particularly like a food a food city wait so it's like a shrub do you know what a shrub is it's like like job shrooms no not quite I mean a little bit so like it's a apple cider from orchards blended with our mixed culture oak fermented burliner base and a dash of apple cider vinegar lovely before conditioning on cinnamon and baking spices it's delicious good choice there you go could they be a sponsor for our podcast yeah they could all right have we oh oh so that was it I guess I'm out I did that he finally kicked sam out he's finally had enough surprisingly he's a he's a unitarian teetotaler so the question I think the last question was where this stuff is going and I think it's the hardest question because I don't think any of us knows I mean so if if if tomorrow it's not there I would miss it but I could still go on so it yeah I think that's it I mean I'm talking about the discord I mean what if Paul's channel went away if every now and then I think what am I doing I gotta stop this and I'll make a comment then I'll be like no you can't stop it it's like well I I think the real question is I can't stop it I can't stop myself and that bothers me even more but don't you think to some degree that's that's kind of the that's one of the markers of a healthy community or a healthy you know multiplicity that has some kind of unity is that it's not contingent upon one thing whether it's like a celebrity pastor or a monopoly or this or that because like if the discord disappeared tomorrow and you stop making videos I mean probably I mean keep interacting with people I'm sure on a daily basis well I you know and one of the things that I I love is watching Sam do his thing on his channel and the local meetups I've always you know when I first said estuary it was an interesting ripple that went through everything and you know some people immediately were thinking estuary inc or paul or pvk inc and I very much did not want that I want a distributed you know it's bitcoin I want a distributed durable network that will will not be bottlenecked by my limitations and grow you know even even to the degree far beyond me to the point that maybe nobody ever remembers my name I'm okay with that and so that gets into the that gets into the essence question again where we started of what exactly are we doing and I you know part of what I pulled out of this was and Joey said this very early on in our local meetup too it's a certain style of conversation which is more open than let's say a credo limited church and again I've got no problem with a credo limited church but that is more open more exploratory like what Peterson was describing when he was describing his conversation with his unreleased with Sam Harris right like at Cambridge right he was he was articulating the thing that kind of he's been you know demonstrating and pushing out there better than than anyone else who'd been able to articulate it so far yeah and you know when I when I watched your conversation you know a couple of you with um see see with the conversations about rise and fall of Mars Hill with Tripp and Sarah with Tripp and Sarah I loved that conversation and and in many ways I feel like a I feel like a proud father that these are the elders of the community and all of you four are the elders of this community and there are many more and that if something happens to me or I have to stop or I mean my my father and my sister dropped out of a heart attack with absolutely no you know problems of difficulty and so I'm well aware that could happen to me and so sure I mean the YouTube would keep right there'd be plenty of reruns but I look at this and I see the growth and now all of you were all of you were competent well-educated wonderful people before I ever knew you of course but what I what I have seen happen in me over the last four years I mean both all the times that I've done the I mean only two of the three times I've gotten to shake Jordan Peterson's hand the same thought came to me okay I've got 10 seconds to tell him what exactly I want to say and the one thing out of my mouth is thank you because what because I started making videos about you I've had some of the most productive learning some of the most enjoyable learning I've ever done in my life the uh and and in some ways yeah I've learned a lot from him but it's not about him it's much more about all of you and and many more beyond you two or three or four thousand more I don't know how many who write a comment and you know go to a discord and make a video and I don't have enough time to read all the comments or too too much hanging out in the discord or I don't have enough to actually reap use the grim reapers metaphor I don't have enough time to reap and harvest everything that I've sown but I have a sense that there's been a ton of sowing and the sowing is continuing and it is yielding a harvest of even some things that I can't fully appreciate or articulate like to add a bit to that there's a particular part on about discord that that always struck me as interesting and it hasn't been a one-off it kept going is that there are a fair amount of number of members who've posted pictures of their babies being born like or even like hey we found out like forgive me for not getting a name right you're either mark or zack or something like it but they found out they're having triplets and they tell us they tell this community and I mean there's also an underlying maybe it's not articulated but there's an underlying someday our kids will play together that's that's in there I mean I remember somebody made a joke where where their daughter was born pretty close to my son they're like oh you know let's get the the marriage things in order for later and and it's a joke but it's also you don't get that thought out of nowhere that's also these people are connected remotely but also not really because they come out of these ideas about what the good life is and and and how we want our children to grow up it's absolutely beautiful and then you know once in a while I check in with all the parents like hey how are we all doing and and how are the kids and you know eric hamilton and getting you know becoming a dad and he was sharing and we haven't seen eric a lot and I understand why but you know he shared about becoming a dad and that that I don't know where I'm going with this it was about something you said paul but yeah it shows how real the feel the community feels to people when it's the sort of thing that you want to share good news with yeah yeah yeah exactly it's yes yeah yeah and that's not just uh you know it goes to what luke was saying too it's just not thinky talky ideas it's and and and vendonk put that into the the structure of his estuary protocol you know what what what has happened in your life and any community that doesn't have all these layers is you know and I think I think again this is what what what do we want as human beings we want it all we want consummation we want realization and this is why we long to be to be not just virtually not alone but physically not alone and we want to break bread and we want to share meals and we want to fish and we want to create memories that aren't just you know in two dimensions flat on a screen but with the with the textuality and contextuality of water and fish and salt licked barbecue and keys on a table there was not one cast at the fishing trip for the record it was the non-fishing fishing trip the least productive fishing trip in history yeah the nice camp out though yeah I shouldn't have missed it that's my favorite kind of fishing trip there and and you know the the the half the half paul missionary tour we did with job and vendonk and and rodney in the truck um you know there's some memories there that I'll that I'll always that I always cherish don't say too much job don't say too much I see you're thinking no no no I'm thinking about the all the kids and about and the fishing together and it's and then I'm you know those are the peugeot patterns that I recognize because you know peugeot will say something about patterns of these these these repeated movements towards this great glorious thing in opposition of all of everything else and and I see that in there like oh okay so he's not some crazy prophet after all he actually had I'm just joking those the times that I recognize that and and that and then I you know it's the same that Peterson says that is what buttresses you against against just these these nihilistic everything is is is meaningless narratives of yeah yeah yeah well they say becoming a dead change is your life I guess it does I don't know what I would I'm just kind of rambling I need somebody to take over well I just go ahead I just wanted to say um like this whole thing there's there is like this spirit that is running through it you know you talked about the string and the rock candy and that kind of stuff it's something like that that's running through it and we've been talking around it and talking directly about it but I just like you talked about the community and how people will like share their pictures and they'll you know share parts of their lives and there's connectivity starting or happening there um you know there's also a deeper level like each one of us has talked individually or and we've I've met everyone on this call in person except for Paul uh so far but of the of the people that you know I've gotten more close closely connected with like I've shared like I've shared very deep and personal things with them and they've shared very deep and personal things with me um and like even some some people when we first came into the community like we were sharing deep and personal things like very quickly you know there was just like a lot of trust right there that had already been built up and it was because to a certain extent we had already learned a little bit about each other through our being able to see our public conversations with you Paul and so it's just like okay I know a little bit more about this person I feel more comfortable leaving the keys on the table or you know sharing this part of my life that maybe I wouldn't talk to a random person about but I'm really struggling with it right now and I feel like I've got a place where I can talk to people so anyway I just wanted to say that there's that aspect of it um where there's like that trust there and I don't feel like there's anybody that I've gotten to know really well in this community that I couldn't say hey here's something that I want to talk about and it's something very real and maybe it wouldn't be appropriate to talk about with you know your average person or even like you know people that I know but that I just haven't felt like this level of closeness to. Yes I go go Joe. No it's just a potential point sorry it's it's just about church again sorry so my church trying to figure out basically my church trying to figure out how can we be the better alternative to watching Netflix on the couch here on the wellness on the morning and I think what this discord does right is it offers a very good alternative to watching Netflix me it could still be on this goodie or underwears on the morning and Netflix too it's both and yeah but not really turn off the Netflix because the discord's more interesting because it's more personal yeah and I'm not I'm not sure it's it's any salient point I'm trying to make it's just something that kind of popped in my head as Jeff was talking about this well we are in a war and it is a war of attention yeah and the personal is more powerful than the impersonal and Netflix is impersonal and and I think what we again what we long for is a is a consummation we see opportunity and potential between each other and there is there is some propositional between us that you know Jeff and Joe didn't know each other well but they had shared in this link and it was enough to say all right it's a good bet I'll take some risk but we'll we'll go for it and again there's always that element of it's chaos and order it's a little bit chaotic to get to know Job this rando from the internet but we've had the order of of at least some contact between us because and this is this is also part of the this is also part of the the situation of scale in that if if you know someone else is watching Jordan Peterson well he's got four million subs but if you know someone else is watching Paul VanderKlay oh you know and so that's where there's sort of the inversion of the hierarchy where small is safer and better because if you found VanderKlay you know because I would imagine there are there are a hundred people or a thousand people or maybe it could even be you know it could even be tens of thousands of people who have seen a thumbnail of my video I look at the metrics clicked on it for 30 seconds and said why would I spend my time listening to that and some of them leave the home screen that's right and then they're off to the next thing you watch Paul VanderKlay too I thought I was the only weirdo in the world that did that right so so in other words those things and they're they're propositional too those things create this fabric that that we have in a sense been weaving over the last four years and you know we'll see I just we'll see what God does with it because he's already been doing things with it and part of the reason why this community works is that in order like yeah we have a high degree of trust like Jeff was saying like why do we feel the need to share baby pictures why do we go on camping trips and share like some of the deepest most intimate parts of our lives and stories around a campfire with you know like why is it that the the fishing trip started because Jacob and Charlie the two people who are probably about the most combative on the discord were like oh yeah let's go fishing in Arkansas right and they were the catalyst right like what's with that that's a little bit funny that that there is that the seemingly the bottom of the estuary is the thing that was the most likely to want to manifest in reality but I think part of the reason why our community works is that the reason why we don't have people that are able to exploit the trust network or something like that the way that you get on the inside is that a you need to have dedicated a lot of hours to watching a whole bunch of stuff and we can tell if you didn't right you can't fake it we can tell right and if you've dedicated that many hours you're probably this probably isn't your easiest con right so we've filtered out all the people are trying to con us because there are way cheaper easier targets than us but there's the formula in case you want to right in case we're not the easiest hill to climb and uh and that we and that the people who kind of rise up in the community are the people who've been vulnerable on the internet for everyone to see and like one thing that I thought about is like I first talked to you Paul about two and a half years ago and I was scared you know excrementless to do it the first time and was really worried and you know had all sorts of second second thoughts about backing out or not letting you post it and etc etc and you know finally did like I wasn't worried at all about this conversation right like uh you know I was getting kind of excited once there was we were within half an hour of it but but that was like the the level of feeling instead of agonizing about it for weeks right so but but that overcoming that sort of thing is a hard thing to fake and that's something about the sort of person that you are that enables us to trust each other so quickly so that that's part of the you know the the thing that can kind of scale because it's an internet test but it's also it takes a lot of time and it's hard to fake even if you know certain bitcoin you know hustlers are somewhat able to get inside the network it seems another shot fired across the bow of luke bitcoin is charlie okay by the way I haven't heard from him in yeah he's been he's said he's been busy he's like a soccer coach for one of his kid soccer teams and that's been taking a whole bunch of his time uh but otherwise he says doing fine and misses uh thank you he missed me I'm not sure okay he didn't he didn't say I love your point sam and I think that's right I think that's right you know the you know verveki talks about love as you know mutual reciprocal broadening disclosure and and that's what we're doing and it's a you know it's sort of a blood and sort of a blockchain way we're doing it out in public you know it's it's a it's like okay well you want to I mean because I read the comments and I when I have a video like the first one on my commentary on the four horsemen I mean that will blow up and I'll get all kinds I can always tell when you get strange people that have been sucked into the estuary from the ocean because they look around and they're like what's going on in here okay so but no I think that's I think what you said is is is right and it's and it's good and it certainly is um for me part of what I enjoy is connecting networks together so you know long before there was any of this there was CRC voices and you know a couple of you have wandered over into that fun little um that fun little stream and it's nothing like it was 15 20 years ago it was a wilder place then but um I to see to see the relationships form and to see love grow and to see to see the love yield flourishing I mean that that is I mean all the metaphors are about that that's that's what romance ought to be that's what church ought to be it's it's the facilitation of growth and flourishing from love and so if you know it's not dunking on each other like there's so much of on the internet but it's yeah it's it can we'll we'll we'll have a battle of ideas as long as as long as it's fun and as long as it's loving and the minute it stops being fun and loving for all concerned we'll take a step back and say no love is first and if if at the end of this even if you win or lose the argument if you don't feel loved then the argument was a failure and that's all right joe well I mean I was going to say that's what the forum is for yeah well the forum is for the forum is kind of a time out room for arguers well sometimes I mean sometimes something gets heated and that should be possible I mean yes yes and like I said about Charlie and Jacob coordinating the fishing trip yeah and and even then some there's a row it's really really going hard to harden the form like yeah but it's not like you know it's not gonna overflow into the other ponds too much so don't worry too much about it and they sort of need that so okay you know I'll kiss some makeup later don't worry about it so it doesn't always need to be all happy clappy no no and that's another thing that bothers me about church no it does it does actually but that that whole oh well well yeah no no I'm gonna stop it's no clearly consuming me too much there's probably a place for that in church you know like the the liturgy or certain formats are not um that's not the place to like be having a battle no no but it's also not the place to always be told that everything's fine and dandy and nothing is expected of you yeah sure no it has to be yeah everything's valid and yeah just no no no no screw that that's that's no funerals at church kind of help with that well and you know it was in the Audrey Assad comment I mean that was fascinating when she's like well there are churches like that like the Unitarians the Episcopalians I thought oh poor Episcopalians I just got lumped in with the unit sorry not not your kind of Unitarian but no it's and and that's again that's part of it there have to be boundaries you know even estuaries have boundaries if there's if there's no boundary then it's it's not an estuary there needs to be a structure to facilitate the both the conflict and and and the the nurture so you need some boundary man otherwise it's all chaos and that's that's not good you don't want that so and like I said I think our our hierarchy sorting algorithm is sort of one of the things that serves as our boundary that keeps us from devolving into tapioca port across the table is um willing to you know like like fraternities right like why in the world to get into a fraternity did they make you basically humiliate yourself in front of the older people in the fraternity right like that's kind of gross and weird and dark but part of it is like it it demonstrates that you're willing to pay a cost for uh admission right that as even even though I think there are way better forms of uh you know accomplishing that task in terms of forming communities than like fraternity you know stuff but it is sort of like we do that when we come on Paul's channel and have a conversation we are showing that we're willing to risk vulnerability and that that that's what kind of is something a little bit like our boundary or at least our filtering algorithm yeah we let Esther skip that for a while but now she's Bethel so is she gonna have she needs to go back on you need to talk with Bethel uh now that she's come out of her closet in her full on emoji or on you know face avatar glory definitely she's got to tell her story yes yes no ideas no colonizing no promoting just the story esther i'm sorry bethel and if she has a patreon she could mention that on he can mention her patreon if she needs to that's no problem all right have we are we ready to land the plane here well uh paul if i were to meet you in first in person the first thing that i would say is thank you so uh and hopefully one day i'll get that chance so thank you paul i thank you no i it gets it gets it gets sloppy quick but the it's bizarre you know the way i feel about you guys you know even you luke even you well you know and it was it was funny when when john verveke said you know in one of the you know fairly early on he said i i feel a lot of affection for paul and i thought i feel the same way this is rather strange and it is this you know it's it's a reciprocal you know disclosure that that continues on those fancy vervekey words the some of them are really good words though i mean you got it i know when i first and it's like i remember when i first started and was strung who you know i was having conversations with him and we haven't seen you know he hasn't been on the channel a lot of people would kill for the kind of opportunities i've i've offered to strung and he just come on come on and then y'all know him a little bit but you know when i first started talking to vervekey i got a lot of worse than you sam um when i first started talking to you i got a lot of buddhism and don't talk to him and da da da da and it's like no we're gonna he's he was clearly speaking in good faith i know mark sometimes goes off on that a little bit but he's clearly speaking in good faith and you know now suddenly all kinds of christians like john vervekey and he's you know seems to like the christians too and i i that's when i see that stuff happening when you see when you see again it sounds so when you see love grow in a in a productive ordered way it's it's just what it's just what you live for so so how are you saying you felt about us paul i care about all of you because just our love language is words of affirmation that's just well that's all we got on youtube i can't hug you and um well this is quality time quality time is one of the love languages and we've had right yeah one last thing about boundaries though you so you opening up the boundaries not listening to people who wanted to harper in on the boundaries and talking to john vervekey and sam and things was the thing that allowed love to grow and boundaries but but that's boundaries have to be flexible but not but but they have to be semi-permeable they have to be flexible they have to otherwise if they're if they're gone again you don't have an estuary it's your tapioca on the table and there are i mean jove has banned people from the discord i mean happened yesterday i just i kicked them someone else banned them yes joey banned someone that's one thing i know joey joey you're doing that you're out of here yeah jobe is i argued their case let it be said anyway uh i feel really bad about betting because i don't know it's like no they can be redeemed i mean there was that's why that's why that's why estuary isn't just discord so you know i've i've continued to have and i think and increasingly i don't think you would mind me saying this an increasingly productive um conversation and relationship with nathan who was you know who's still banned and rightly so he he he was just we're not gonna we're gonna let you make a little bit of mess in the discord but we're not gonna let you destroy it no and and and i'm sure nathan will be back or at least i mean it's my hope that he will be i mean the guy's a machine he he reads books like this it's i can't believe how many books he reads but the way that he writes on his blog his honest struggling with his ideas is and he he refuses to i don't even know how to phrase this guy's just genuine and and i think we've just seen him in times where he struggled and i don't know i just uh yeah i mean that's someone i'd like to meet someday for the record nathan ormond yeah yeah yeah not that asshole nathan no nathan orman i love it how the dutchman feels most comfortable to swear in english than any of the any of the rest of us you know i'm actually it doesn't always trigger the same brain circuit when you swear no no it doesn't it's it's yeah no i'm actually trying to unlearn the swearing uh because i've i'm a dad now funny story funny story i was in uh what was i was in california near disneyland manheim no we're in germany anna anna anna i was there for a conference so this hotel and i'm sitting with a co-worker and i'm asking and this was around spring break so for all these kids going to disneyland and i was sitting there talking to a client and it's co-worker like hey did we get client x and y and he's like no we didn't and i wasn't thinking i go mother anyway i said that word and this this adult with a small child just gives me the dirtiest glare and i'm looking at like why does the guy give me the harry iber oh wait i said a bad word it doesn't need to register that way because it's it's sort of culture yeah it's popular culture tv internet uh not that i'm not a student live your r-rated life here in america job no but honestly i mean in your loose morals terrible morals we should all drown in the sea as is our destiny but it's i should i should oh no no these terrible swear words it's bad bad bad yeah yeah and sam is such a happy little boy i can't believe us two missing tropes have produced such a bundle of joy it's it's unbelievable wonder it happened it's wonderful yeah yeah so if if we all kind of knew what was going to happen we would try to make way different choices than we actually yeah yeah so that's what makes questions like oh where would you like this to go so hard to answer because we have we have no idea we just kind of do stuff like look i i'm religious and i'm i'm a dad what the hell is going on here it's just yeah maybe that's a good way to end it job's religious and a dad yeah what's going on here you've kind of been i mean you've kind of been a poster child you know the poster for this thing all the way through i've told this before i've done the the peterson self-authoring program twice and my heaven is basically a list of little check marks that suddenly i came through realization a couple months ago wait a second they're all here i'm in my heaven all i need to do is make sure i stay there yeah and make help others get to their own and it's just it's a real humbling strange realization and and it's wonderful and and yeah i i can only be grateful don't leave us bodhisattva yeah you could stay some sarah okay that's just obscure buddhist references all right we're landing the plane paul we're landing the plane so anyone else closing one love oh yeah closing words closing words thank you paul thank you luke thank you sam thank you oh yeah yeah paul will uh freddy will love this this he won't watch it he won't get this far in there 50 percent of people who click on my videos are gone within 30 seconds sometimes 60 or 70 percent i don't know if that's the average but i look at that it's like wow those mother uh all right take care we'll have to do this again and um check in a while later bye everybody have a good night job bye bye bye bye