https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=WUZDaq8Iyq4

 I started off in radio drama, which is a very wonderful and strange place. And then in television drama and then trying to make a television drama about the Bible, at which place, at which point I had a major faith crisis and lost my faith. And then I was there for a few more years. Oh, now we got to hear about this losing your faith. What happened? I started reading the Bible properly for the first time. I had, you know, I had done some quiet times and my quiet times had really focused very hard on the nice bits. You know, the devotional literature really did encourage me to memorize very hard that the Lord knew that the plans he had for me and they were proffes for me not to harm me. But I had never cracked open chronicles. And so, yeah, I had this very nerdy, intellectually curious part of myself navigating through the BBC and the world of ideas. And then I had this very emotional, beautiful, very relational faith. But there was no connection between those two parts of myself at all. And I was assigned to be a researcher on a program about the Bible and they gave me one and two chronicles and one and two kings to become like a world expert in. Sorry, when you work at the BBC, you can ring up and say hi. Yeah, not a world expert as in a scholar, but like enough of an expert to really guide a couple of episodes of a TV drama about it. That's absolutely terrifying. But go on. Completely terrifying. I know. And everyone else I was working with had like loads of theology degrees. It was very experienced. It was one of those like very another sort of very strange thing. I was there. And I would ring these world experts and be like, Hi, I'm from the BBC. Please tell me everything you know, which is what a researcher media does. Basically, they just like scoop out the brain of clever people. And basically, the key messages were it never happened. Or if it did, God is genocidal. It was just right. Yeah, really very brutal introduction to Hebrew Bible scholarship. And I just didn't have anything. I had no foundations. I had no hermeneutic. I had no I had no theology. Really, I had nothing. I was just like, Oh, I've built my whole life on this terrible, terrible book. What is this? And why is this happening? And it's not as nice as I thought it was. It just just like crumbled beneath my feet. I remember it was such such a bleak, lonely, I've moved to Manchester to work, work on it out there. I didn't know anyone have any friends. It rained all the time. It was just was a really, really hard and dark time. What did this do to your I mean, so so deconstruction as it's now called the rebrands it's now called. I mean, it's I mean, this this becomes sort of a a dogfight on Twitter. But it is it is for many people, an absolutely devastating thing, because you don't just lose this story that you've been living within you lose your friend, at least in your parent, in your case, your parents were secular. So although your mother sort of, yeah, so what what are just what were the consequences of this for you? I, I didn't talk about it with a lot of people. My friends weren't there. Mike, looking back, it was it was the early to early to mid 2000s, which we call the noughties. But I gather you guys call the orts, which I don't understand. I was really lonely. I didn't talk to many people about it. I had I had I had friends, but they was most of them were still in London, I'd moved to London for that internship and to work at BBC to begin with. And a lot of them were in church. And I think when you're riddled with doubts, you don't want to just dump your doubts on unto other people. You feel sort of sort of this horrible mix of like contemptuous of them. But also protective of them. And somehow marked. And I hadn't yet made any new friends and I was working with all these I was my main friendship group were my colleagues who were lovely, but a lot of them had already been through this while they were doing theology degrees at Oxford or Cambridge. Right. Or just didn't, you know, I was the very bouncy, naive, evangelical, and I didn't want to look stupid. I didn't want people to realise I hadn't worked this out before my mid 20s. And yeah, my I don't I must have talked about it with my mum, because I don't really keep anything from my mum. But I think she probably just sort of worried about me from afar. So So how did this change? You're working at the BBC? How did this change other parts of your life in terms of your career? I mean, did you just sort of then sort of just get absorbed into the background of of secularity? No, it didn't last very long. Basically, I was a very bad atheist. I really, really tried hard. I was I'm just not cut out for it. I don't have the I don't like this book coming out and I the the the the line that was coming back to his life, really, I felt like I should admire the kind of austen ability of being able to gaze into the void without flinching by flinched. I was like, and I honestly don't, it feels incredibly inhuman not to flinch. But this is this is so true, because I listened to some of these stories, and I listened to some of these deconstructed stories. And they're so sad, because I listened to these people, or I talked to these people. And it's like, you had a rich life that you enjoyed. And you traded it for this. And the only thing you seem to the only thing you seem to have kept out of the transaction is your pride. Was your pride really worth all of this other loss? And I don't want to minimize it. No, and I do think what you said earlier was more compassionate, Paul, like, I don't I don't think anyone chooses it. I went I went and talked to a bunch of Welsh pastors, they asked me to go and give them a lecture on deconstruction. And the whole thing was trying to move them from basically angry about it. Yeah. And defensive and pissed off. Yeah, because people in deconstruction and I was can be very like acting out of pain, and acting out of grief and lashing out. Yeah, and feeling like they've been fooled and feeling cheated. And also often Christians are terrible at engaging with them and answering questions and taking it seriously. And they want them to just put all the doubts back in the box. Yep. Yep. And so yeah, I don't think anyone would like I certainly felt like I could not remain a whole person and not take what I had discovered seriously. Right. Like, my identity will crack down the middle if I don't find a way to take my brain and apply it right to this thing. Right. Yeah. It I've lost my train of thought. But yes, that's me in the in defense of deconstructionists. I don't think anyone actively chooses it. And I don't I don't I honestly, I feel very lucky slash blessed that I was a bad atheist, right? I couldn't I couldn't shake him off. I was just like, go away. I am done. It really felt like, you know, your ex boyfriend wouldn't let you go. Yeah, I was like, no, I'm done. I'm done with you. I don't need you. I'm too sophisticated for this. I'm too grown up, or I want to be, you know, like I this is this is for naive people. You know, this is for emotional people. This is for uneducated people. And I don't want to be one of those. And I'm gonna I'm gonna walk away from this because it makes no sense. But I couldn't I like I would cycle around Manchester. I'd be like, I don't believe in you. No, I mean, I don't believe in God. Stop talking to me. You're not real. Yeah. Yeah. It's like everything else fell apart. All of the structures, my ability to go to church read Bible, it all left by I didn't know how not to pray. Like this is an ongoing conversation that my soul is having. Shut it down. This is amazing poem called staying power by Jean Murray Walker. Have you ever read it? No. This audio poem is a production of poetry foundation.org. staying power by Jean Murray Walker. In appreciation of Maxine Gorky at the International Convention of Atheists. 1929. Like Gorky, I sometimes follow my doubts outside to the yard and question the sky, longing to have the fight settled, thinking, I can't go on like this. And finally, I say, All right, it is improbable. All right. There is no God. And then as if I'm focusing a magnifying glass on dry leaves, God blazes up. It's the attention maybe to what isn't there that makes the emptiness flare like a forest fire until I have to spend the afternoon dragging the hose to put the smoldering thing out. Even on an ordinary day when a friend calls, tells me they found melanoma, complains that the hospital is cold. I say, God, God, I say, as my heart turns inside out. Pick up any language by the scruff of its neck, wipe its face, set it down on the lawn, and I bet it will toddle right into the God fire again, which, though they say it doesn't exist, can send you straight to the burn unit. Oh, we only have so many words to think with. Say God's not fire. Say anything. Say God's a phone, maybe. You know you didn't order a phone, maybe. You know you didn't order a phone, but there it is. It rings. You don't know who it could be. You don't want to talk, so you pull out the plug. It rings. You smash it with a hammer till it bleeds springs and coils and clobbery metal bits. It rings again. You pick it up, and a voice you love whispers, Hello.