https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=9ipYN5EWn4w

 and the blue checks were unceremoniously stripped from our cultural betters. Yeah, well maybe we should start there. Yeah, let's do that. The medium is the message, man. Let's do it. That's right. So last night actually we had our estuary. Hi everybody, this is Paul. And with me are Kale and Sam. Kale and Sam are not strangers to this channel, but apparently they've never really been, they've crossed paths in a live stream before, but they've never really spoken together before. So I'm super excited about this because I respect them both immensely. And I think they're both tremendously interesting thinkers. And you're late. Yeah, thank you, Jacob. Jacob's right on me. But he must have some sort of serious, a series of alerts that just stalk you, stalk you something fierce, Paul. That's right. So maybe we should start with Elon Musk and Twitter. So on the 20th, his rocket blew up and all of the high status people from the previous administration and Twitter who didn't cough up their $8 a month like I have, I was actually coughing up money for a Twitter blue before because it gave me long videos and I could get clips I wanted to on there. But now the limits are off in terms of video. So we're streaming to Twitter and this is a first for my channel. So let's start with Elon Musk and Twitter and maybe even Elon Musk and the BBC of media. I did a video on the swarm and the beast. I was thinking about that conversation, which I thought Musk sort of missed the boat because he's not, I don't think he was at all articulating the difference between Twitter and some editorial driven content like what like New York Times or BBC or Washington Post or something like that. But do you think in his missing that boat, the conversation opened some things up? In other words, I thought you did a good job of pointing things out that he was missing, but in his kind of guile, he sort of oddly guile-less or something. Yes. He just sort of like blows right through stuff and is like, oh, look at that. Like that's so weird. And a lot of people like me who are on the fringes and just watch all the time and we're like, yeah, wow. It's like Elon Musk is noticing things. Like look out, like this is interesting, but still not really where his mind I think ultimately rests or goes to feed, something like that. Well, he's got Tesla, SpaceX, Twitter. I mean, where on earth does his mind have a chance to settle? But he clearly bought Twitter because he cares about, he seems to have an idea about stewarding public conversation and free speech. And so when asked in that interview, would you be willing to sell Twitter again? At first he said, no, no. And then he said, maybe the right person. Who would be that right person? So. Yeah. It's a moral thing, right? Yeah, yeah. I think he sees his purchase of Twitter as a moral duty, as does I think his, when he talks about why Tesla, then you can debate whether electric vehicles are actually that environmentally friendly or not. Right, right. But I, and I think the same for SpaceX. I mean, these things are, I mean, he just burned 10,000 gallon or 10,000 pounds of super refined petrochemicals to have it blow up, two minutes later. Yeah. So yeah, Elon is a fascinating thing. I feel like one thing that I think is one of the most interesting parts about Elon's trajectory is that I knew maybe a couple of years ago, a lot of people who treated Elon as something like a Messiah figure. Yeah. And I was, I didn't perhaps like Elon that much because I felt like he was over-promising and under-delivering and somewhat intentionally allowing himself to fill a unhealthy semi idolatrous void in a lot of people's lives. Especially tech oriented young guys about my age. Yeah. And whether it was cryptocurrency or like, oh, he's our savior. He's reducing carbon emissions. He's ushering in the electric carbon free, future utopia and saving the planet and bringing us to another one too in case he doesn't save this one and et cetera, et cetera. And there's even something like archetypically mythological about, he's the one who's going to take us from this world to another one. Yeah, you know, Sam, I was reminded of, I don't know if you'd seen Eric Weinstein's early episode or two of the portal and he's sort of explicitly talking about, I don't really even mean portal as in a metaphor. Like, I mean, we need to get off this planet. I remember listening to that and be like, well, that's a take. You know, I'm perfectly, I'm down with the idea that this is a metaphor. Not so sure as a reality or something like that, you know, but yeah, I think Musk sort of accrued around him that kind of mythos and worship. I mean, I think you're correct, Sam. I think that he became a point of worship for people. Yeah, you know, hero is one thing. People looking up to him, that's one thing, but there was, I don't know, he seemed to be starting to fill a somewhat idolatrous role in a lot of people's lives that I knew. And that made me somewhat dislike him, honestly, even though, because I felt like he wasn't doing enough to negate that and almost even courted that. But then I think this flip that he's gone through from someone who was mostly universally admired, mostly on the left as a environmentally conscious super entrepreneur. Yeah, I mean, he cracked the electric car problem. Like that's no joke. And I have my own critiques about it as a sort of a long-term project, but that's no small thing. I mean, that's an amazing thing. Right, and so he did do legitimately amazing things. But then the sort of red pilling of Elon where he got increasingly wary of sort of mainstream left social cultural issues. And there were signs of that movement for quite a while. And then him talking with the Babylon Bee and now just being full blown sort of, any doctor who engages in, who sterilizes a minor should be put in prison, right? I think we tweeted that yesterday or the day before, something like that. And I think that this is, I mean, I could talk about how this might have weird impacts on Tesla financially, because most of his customers were, part of the reason he bought a Tesla was not just a car, you were buying into Muskdom. You were doing your part. Tesla was the new Prius. Yeah, you were participating in the new transformation of the energy grid, which was transforming society into a renewable thing. And you were helping settle Mars by buying a car. Right, and it doesn't hurt that they look really cool. Right, they look really cool. And like all of your coolest friends who have the good tech job are the first ones to get one, et cetera, et cetera, et cetera. And I feel like he's kind of poisoned his customer base on that front a little bit. And that'll be interesting to see how that plays out for him financially, because right now, almost all of his wealth is Tesla stock. And if, but maybe the brand can survive that, but he's been having to cut the price of his cars a lot recently, I think to be more or less just competing on price instead of being this participating in something. But I wonder how many people have followed him through his political trajectory and how much influence he's had on the people that have idolized him, or how many people feel disillusioned and feel like they lost their idol through Musk's red pill. And I don't really know about that. He, you know, it was one of his comments about Twitter and the regime change was that he felt that Twitter was sort of held hostage to a certain group of people from let's say a Berkeley mindset. Whereas Musk in many ways sort of represents a, so Berkeley is East Bay. Yeah, right, right, right. And Musk is South Bay Silicon Valley tech. And, you know, part of- That cozy relationship is truly a remarkable thing that has happened in the last 25 years. I mean, the fact that, you know, like, and I think, you know, the guy that Kings North brings up all the time, Paul, is Kevin Kelly. And, you know, if you look at Kevin Kelly's origin story, now he's sort of the big, one of the big tech boosters, you know, the machine, but he likes the tech name he calls it, right? But you look at his origin story, his origin story I believe is that old hippie Seeds magazine or catalog, I should say, right? So- The whole earth's catalog? The whole earth, that's it, that's it, that's it. Thank you, thank you, Sam. You know, and like that had got, that those things sort of get fused and connected into this sort of, I don't know, Martin Rothblatt transhumanist energy lane is really a remarkable thing. You know, it's just kind of incredible. Oh, there he is, yeah, there he is. The elder statesman of, you know, the boomer. I mean, it's sort of a weird condensed symbol of a boomerism, isn't it, Paul? Yeah, yeah. Launched Wired magazine in 93, executive editor for seven years. Now senior maverick for Wired, I love this. I love maverick, I mean, gosh, we can do a whole- You can never be part of the establishment. That's right, that's right. Yeah, you have to be a maverick, even if basically you're chairman of the board of a, you know, a company. You're a maverick. That's that whole, you know, we got into that with Peugeot, that's that whole American denial about, you know, I am the establishment, but I'm against the establishment. Yeah, well, and I see that in my world, not in my school, but in like the school world, if you look at all of the sort of the big, you know, voices coming out of the school world, that they will say that we must, we teachers must be, we must be change agents to create change agents, right? And it's like, well, actually what you're doing is you're minting aperitif for the formation of the new regime. Like that's actually what you're doing, but you're calling it change agent because we know that people like the idea of change and hope and all those kinds of things. And so, well, you always say, Paul, it's like magic words, buzzwords, right? It's like, it's totally, so chief maverick for, you know, the thing that will like run our lives here very shortly. Well, and this, you know, this activism as such, and now even the, what's important is this profelicity of activism where you have to be seen to be an activist if they took it down, but I've put this in my video a number of times. There used to be a statue along I-80 between Sacramento, just as you're getting towards the Bay Bridge, you know, big people. And it was this statue of like a bunch of people all together in an urban with these placards. And of course the placards were empty. Right, it doesn't matter. It doesn't matter. As long as you are embodying the ethos and the mythos of activism, that is where we find this. And to make a big statue of that, and so, okay, we're putting this as the center of our thing. This is our center organizing principles that we're the people who hold a placard. It can vary from day to day, depending on the needs of the situation against. Exactly, that's right, sorry. What are we, it doesn't matter, details. We can fill in the details later. I'm just here to protest. Isn't that another version though of the American rebel? Well, that's the famous Brando line. That's the famous Brando line, Paul. Like, you know, what are you rebelling against? Doesn't he say something like, what do you got? I think it's from the Misfits, right? I think that is, I'm gonna look it up because that's too good. And even Elon is sort of playing into the idea that he's rebelling against Blue Church, you know, woke as a machine thingy. But he is also the richest person in the world, or I don't know, depending on the stock price, is one of the top five richest people of the world today. Close enough. Close enough. Close enough for us. Right, right. Close enough for us. And so, and obviously he's one of the most attention grabbing people on the planet and has all of the soft power that goes along with his ability for, even though the mainstream media that hates him still uses his name to get clicks out of him. And so is he rebelling against a powerful thing? But people are always like, well, I don't wanna just be on Twitter now because now it's just the whims of some billionaire, you know, so it's like the people that are leaving Twitter. Rules for him and not for us. Sorry. The people leaving Twitter because he took it over, are they're fighting against the powerful thing, but yet he thinks he's fighting against the powerful thing. There is a weird American thing that makes us just bad at owning our sense of power because we have always imagined ourself rebelling against power. And mainly that's because of our relationship with England in our formative consciousness. We're always fighting King George the third, right? I mean, it's always, you know, it's all, yeah, forever. You know? Now, last night we had our local estuary meeting and the topic that won out was kingship. And then one of the people actually there, I mean, we talked about this American rebellious thing, authority, whether or not even kingship is viable. One of the videos that didn't get made this week for me and I still might make it is Gavin Ashenden did a video about the turmoil going beneath the surface in the UK about the liturgy for the coronation. Yeah. And GBTV, which had Calvin Robinson had some old atheist, British atheist who loves the monarchy and loves the Church of England, even though he doesn't believe in any of that stuff. And it was fascinating to me. The one person in the group, in our group last night said, well, you know, is Elon Musk King? And it's like, hmm. Monarchy is always throughout human history intertwined with divinity. And there are various ways of working that relationship out. Maybe the King just is a God, maybe he's the son of a God and he's the, or he's the anointed of a God or something like that. And even the current English, you know, coronation ceremony connects the legitimacy of its monarchy with divine authority from God. And that it's almost hard to imagine monarchy without some divine backing. Or ersatz. Or purely seen as tyranny. Right, or ersatz divinity, right? You know, like, you know, one of the things I like about the English monarchy, again, in theory, like I'm an American, but you know, is that it's honest actually. You know, that in this subsuming of, or the absorbing of all authority onto, you know, the King, you know, it's sort of an acknowledgement that, you know, yeah, like more important than that. Well, you know, Paul, you've been sort of riffing on this in the background. You know, the monarchy of the Pope, for instance, right? There's a sort of, you know, and it's not quite the same. Maybe it is, you know, I remember reading this as an undergrad, but the whole notion of a Cesaropapism, right, that you see more in the Eastern context than you do in the Western context. Well, you know, maybe the English monarchy sort of became the sort of the reinstantiation of the Cesaropapist, you know, vision. But now going up here to both to Charles and then to Elon, you know, two very different figures. One sort of always seems, at least in my mind, a kind of hot mess in Charles. And then Elon as this sort of vaguely autistic wunderkind, you know, who is just tripping, you know, he's tripping all these, you know, he's tripping all of the pieties. Whereas Charles, you know, even though he's kind of, you know, not all that keen on the Jesus stuff, seems to have an appreciation for the traditions of the thing he's walking into. I don't know, I'm all over the place, but. Even a perennialist can respect traditions, I guess. Yeah, yeah, yeah, that's good, that's good. Part of the question was, you know, if, so there are, there continue to be monarchs all over the world. Japan still has their monarch, you know, descendant of the sun god. England has its monarch, the Dutch still have their monarch, the Spanish still have their monarchs. Monarchs are all over the place. I asked the group whether Xi, Chairman Xi was a monarch, you know, is, you know, what's sort of the difference, in antiquity, what's sort of the difference between a monarch and a strong man, of course, you know. Well, communism has its own difficulty with this question. Because communism would then always seemingly need a strong man, but you know, it was a chairman, a comrade, something like that. And their source of authority was like, they're helping to usher in the, you know, realization of the Marxist utopia. Yeah, yeah, the utopia, the kingless, ruling classless, hierarchy-less utopia. Which of course, Augustus, you know, in all of the travails of the end of the Roman Republic, Augustus comes in and simultaneously both saves the Republic while he cements the imperial throne. And calls himself the son of God. Yeah. His father was Julius Caesar, who has been assumed into heaven as a god. I'm not a god. Let's make that a god. And it's like, I guess that makes me. Yeah, yeah. I don't make the rules. But I kind of do, you know, but anyway. So it's been interesting though with this, you know, this came out with, so I spent some time, and I want to spend some more time with Harry Potter and J.K. Rowling, and then of course, ContraPoints comes out with this, you know, hasn't done a video in 10 months, and then suddenly podcast regret. And you have this dissatisfaction with liberalism from both the left and the right. And in some ways, the right is much more overtly talking monarchy. The left, you know, not exactly, you know, is that more sort of a communist utopia that will emerge from? How, I mean, how popular on the right is this monarchy business? I feel like, and this brings up the whole question of Christian nationalism, and does that phrase actually mean anything in particular? As far as I can tell, it means anything from, I wish I could just sort of talk like I'm a Christian and assume that my neighbors are a Christian and that would be okay again. To Christians should be more overt in voting their conscious in a constitutional democracy. To we should have some sort of state church and maybe even things like blasphemy laws again. Yeah, it's a really, yeah, totally agree. It's a total mess of a. It's a total mess of a concept. And like, really, you think your obscure branch of Presbyterianism is going to assert itself over the most powerful country in the history of humanity and you guys are what percentage of the population and control what levers of power to enact this exactly? So it's like, yeah. Moscow, Idaho as the new center of the world. Is that what you're saying, Sam? Well, you know, in like Catholic circles, I hear, you know, you hear this sort of stuff bandied about and it's, I think it's equally fantastical in its, disconnection to, you know, the actual United States of America that we live in. So like, you'll hear some of them. I think the more honest versions of this will talk actively about national divorce, right? And like moving out of your blue state and moving into your red state and those kinds of things. But even that, of course, you know, my red state friends, and my family, you know, I come from a red state, they don't wanna hear it, but, you know, they're not as red of a red state as they think. And you know, and that's because the blue church, blue state has the wifi. You know, it's like, it's that, you know, which is why I think it's interesting to think of Elon as a kind of would be King come lately, you know, because he, you know, he owns this thing called SkyNet. And it's like this, you know, you know, big, big, big, you know, SkyDaddy, right? I mean, that's sort of the sneering kind of thing that you hear about, you know, Christianity, you know, like, oh, you know, it's God is just, well, this is a paradise lost, you know, Lucifer, you know, and then Eve uses the same language that, oh, you know, God and his spies, you know, the angels, right? Well, you know, how do we, what do you think of that in terms of, you know, Elon has, you know, and the connection between wifi and the blue church. And, you know, I wanna tell my red state friends, like, you know, I am sympathetic to wanting to order your polity and your communities toward a sense of the common good, you know, rooted in faith in Yahweh and Christ Jesus and all those things, right? But are you really serious about what it would take in order to curate that guard? I just don't think that they're serious about it. Yeah, yeah, I agree. I watch, when everybody talks about monarchy, I often remind people, you know, Canada, Australia, you do have monarchy on your money still, as does the UK. Is that the kind of monarchy you're talking about or are you talking about something more substantive? And then often- Like proactive, you mean, like in the- Well, and this is- Beyond the ceremonial. Well, but even the, what's interesting about the question about the, I mean, I find it amazing that in some ways where we might have a liturgical controversy arise in the West. Right, right. Right. And because suddenly, well, everybody sort of understood Elizabeth, what Elizabeth was doing. And Elizabeth, of course, tried to walk this line to be queen, but not be political, even though the prime ministers are reporting to her, et cetera, et cetera. And now Charles comes in and- Seems to have opinions on topics that- Yeah, have opinions. Whether it's environmentalism or- Traditional architecture or- Poverty, yeah, yeah. Stuff like that. And then you've also got the question of, let's say, in the United States where we have this president who was elected every four years. And many would argue that some of the most problematic aspects of the presidents are their monarchical vibes. And we've had in this country over the last number, a good number of presidencies, I mean, you might argue that FDR was the last American king. Yes. I mean, the length of his reign, the amount of power he wielded, many have argued that, in fact, what has happened to congressional power is that it sort of receded because senators and congressmen, they want to come out and say, they want to keep their jobs. And so you have presidents increasingly ruling through executive orders and things of this nature. And also, the- Sort of the Trump Clinton contest, Hillary was gonna be the technocrat. I mean, she was the one who had all the skills. She had all the experience. She was the best-prepared president for the United States. And Trump wants to come in as the second coming of Ronald Reagan. Yeah, we seem, thinking about this from a presidential standpoint, we seem to think we want a nuts and bolts person, but we really want a showman. We really want, in my own world, you really want the Pope John Paul II. You're not so keen about the Benedict XVI. It's like, you know, and it turns out the Benedict XVI was completely inept in terms of the actual running of the show anyway. But we really love the show. And I would suggest, and maybe that's, going back to Charles, I mean, I think that Charles perhaps does, in fact, appreciate the aesthetics of the show. But I do think that, you know, look, we don't have national liturgies in the same way here in America, right? You know, because we all go about our business and do our things or know things on Sundays, right? You know, but, and even, you know, they're, anyway, the point is that, you know, we still need some kind of national sacrament. We've had it. And we have some, like, protecting, like, I think a lot of this, I just feel like monarchy and Protestantism are almost inherently incompatible. I know that obviously England, or the United Kingdom, is a attempted, a counter example of my point, but to just be extremely simplistic, for Catholicism and orthodoxy, the source of authority is at the top, and that gives its glory and legitimacy to those underneath it. And in Protestantism, the source of authority is the individuals at the bottom who give source and legitimacy to what's above them. And I know that's a simplification, but at some level, I think that's still, there's something fundamentally right about that distinction. And America is that idea of Protestantism put into its best attempt at embodiment in a country. And it's- Yeah, I think that's fair. Yeah, I mean, you know, I've had conversations with Anglican friends, and, you know, a lot of Anglicans that I've talked to are pretty, can be uneasy about even considering themselves as Protestants. Now, of course, as a Catholic, like, I mean, that's just funny to me, because just in terms of the history of the thing, and even the oath that Charles will swear is sort of the one true Protestant religion. I mean, it's like, you know, but when I think of, like, as an American growing up, as an American Catholic growing up, when I thought of Protestantism, I thought of a Baptist church, or like a Jimmy Swaggered kind of evangelical, charismatic, big tent quasi revival thing, right? You know, or- All be Protestants. Yeah, right, right, that's exactly right. You know, or high church, low church. I mean, I really had a conception of low church as sort of being real Protestantism. Right now, I know that that's not fair or whatever, but so maybe that's part of this, Sam, that the defining ethos of American Protestantism was the low church variant. The radical Reformation. Right, right, okay, yeah, that makes sense. As opposed to the magisterial, and Anglicanism is, yeah, I still, I mean, I feel like the fundamental split in Protestantism, and so maybe this will complexify the thing I was earlier saying, is the Protestant, who are like, Rome is so broken that we're gonna make our own thing and we're not looking back over our shoulder, versus the Protestants who are like, Rome is broken, we're gonna create our own thing, hopefully temporarily, to be the light on the hill that attracts Rome's attention to show that we were right, so they implement our reforms and then we can come back. Yeah, I think really instructive, if anybody in the audience is interested in really kind of sort of sorting through all these various strands, is I mean, like really, really do a kind of a close scrutiny of the English Reformation, because the English Reformation basically had every variety. We tend, and from the vantage point of 2023, we just sort of look back, oh, like, things were Catholic and then Henry comes along and then things are Protestant, and like, da da da da, there we are, it's like, it's like 100 plus years of just absolute mess, absolute mess, and you've got the low church people who sniffed anything to the right of them as being papish, right, including Christmas, including these things as sort of these gross trappings of Roman idolatry and papish idolatry. And then, of course, the country eventually settles into this kind of like Catholic-like thing, right, with the beautiful churches and the vestments and the liturgies and the hymnaldy and the common prayer, I mean, all that stuff is, again, from the outside perspective of me as a Roman Catholic, like, looks like Catholic-ish to me. Well, I think two things, I've been reading Vatican I and Vatican II by John A. Malley, which, you know, I started reading Vatican I and this, you know, this council in the 19th century where there, I mean, you have ultramontanism, we're gonna, basically, as European monarchies are both, are going to the extremes, up and down, you have just the rise and fall and destruction of all these monarchs, ultramontanism comes in, basically, and says, we need a strong monarchy for Rome. And, of course, at the same time, they're losing the Papal States. I mean, all of this, it's a tremendous period of time. And then, of course, Vatican II comes along in the 1960s, after the Second World War, where you had Nazism and communism still alive, and now, suddenly, we're okay. You know, the Catholic Church, we're okay with democracy. We're, you know, we're not anywhere near as monarchical. We're not demanding that of these governments and America. You know, it's interesting how America both becomes sort of the hope for the Jews and the hope for the Catholics. Right, right, no, that's right. Yeah, you know, you look at a figure like John Courtney Murray, you know, a lot of Catholics my age and younger don't really know how tenuous the relationship was for Catholics living in the United States of America. Like, you know, it was a very, you know, I mean, I couldn't have even gone to, you know, I couldn't have stepped foot in your church, Paul. Like, it would have been, I would have risked, you know, my good standing as a Catholic. I couldn't go to a wedding at your church. I couldn't, you know. Or vice versa, in the Christian Church. Right, fair enough, yeah. 1970. Yeah, yeah. And, you know, so, but, you know, John Courtney Murray, the famous Jesuit sort of political scientist and theoretician, basically sort of makes it okay for Catholics to be American. Because, Paul, remember, and I don't remember the exact date, somebody can fact check me on this, but I'm pretty sure it's either the very last few years of the 19th century or the first years of the 20th century in which we have a pope condemning Americanism. Right, I mean, this is like a, you know, and look, I can make a fairly reasonable defense of what he was saying. But, I mean, do you think like a rank and file Roman Catholic and, you know, living in Illinois or St. Louis or whatever, is going to say, you know, that the Catholic Church condemned Americanism? Like, what? I'm a good Catholic, I'm a good American. Like, what are you talking about? But those are like, but that was like a big consequential thing, like that stuff mattered. And now it doesn't. I think it's also interesting. Some of the American anti-Catholicism was obviously just ethnic prejudice. Y'all told me. But there was something also there, I don't mean to give an excuse, but it made at least some amount of sense in the Protestant thing where, you know, it's individuals, right, that have their autonomous consciences that make decisions, and then we come together and vote and ripple the authority up from that. This idea that there was a religion that still had a person above that, a person above the peoples in the pews who could almost maybe give something like orders, kind of does mess with democracy a little bit. Oh, 100%, yeah. And that if that becomes too big of a percentage of the population, then, you know, all of a sudden this idea that we have autonomous individuals making decisions, but like 20, 30, 40% in some places of the population might be gang Catholic and might be so loyal to a bishop or a pope or anything like that, it does start to break the idea of how that works. And it's interesting that Catholicism seems to have come to peace in some sort of sense with the monotheism. Peace or pieces? Peace. Not pieces. Well, maybe both. Maybe that was a Freudian slip, but I meant peace. Yeah, yeah. Well, I think, you know, there's one way to sort of look at American history here, you know, the consequential election of Kennedy in 59, right? It doesn't even get elected in 59 and take office in 60. You know, that famous speech that he makes to the Houston Baptist Church in which he basically says, I'm American first and I'm Catholic second, right? You know, that if I'm being honest, was, again, who knows what it means now, but was probably in that context, probably heretical or certainly would have been considered by every European Catholic bishop to be absolutely heretical, right? He's encouraging his conscience above his church. Correct, correct, right. So which is essentially a Protestant move, right? We would say, and I don't, not being mean here, I'm just being, trying to be factual here. And so, but one wonders, right? I mean, so the Second Vatican Council is announced, I think in 62 and the first, you know, session starts in 63. And Paul, if my memory serves, the Bay of Pigs is happening as the first session of the Vatican Council is underway. Okay, and so, you know, I was born in 73. So full disclosure, I have zero memories of that, but I gotta think that must have been absolutely bonkers, right? And this is something I tell my current students now, you know, who have no memory of the Cold War, right? They were all born after the Cold War. You know, the whole idea of nuclear war is like some weird fascination and fixation of boomers and Gen Xers. They're like, what are you talking about, right? And, but in 1963 at the Bay of Pigs, like that was a real thing. Like we really thought that this was it, right? You know, like it, it, right? And so I'm fascinated with the Second Vatican Council and American history. Number one, how do you write American history without the council and a consequential statement from the Vatican that allowed Catholics to come to heal? Heal as in like heal, boy, heal, right? I mean, if that had not, if John Courtney Murray and his gang had not won the day in terms of pluralism, religious liberty, and basically saying, hey, you could be a Catholic and an American. Like, I don't know how the history of United States gets written without that, because, you know, Catholics would make up a huge, as you said, you know, Sam, a huge percentage of mid-century population, certainly in urban centers, right? And so what if they, what if that, that they had not come to heal and that that antagonism had continued to exist? You know, that's a big deal. But then secondly, sorry, and I'll stop here, but to think of the Second Vatican Council, you know, in relationship to the realities of the nation, the nuclear bomb, right? And think about the connection between the nuclear bomb and this sort of Promethean moment in which we capture the fire of the gods, right? You know, there's a great, you know, the book, apparently the book to read on Oppenheimer is, you know, the Modern Prometheus, which is also a riff on Frankenstein, by the way, which is the subtitle to the book Frankenstein, a Modern Prometheus. And of course we know that Frankenstein is not a reference to the creature. Frankenstein is a reference to the doctor, right? So, you know, but in this moment in which we have unleashed the power of the nuclear, so to have that council take place then, it's just endlessly fascinating to me. You know, it seems that it's very understandable to have people imagine that the church, Protestant and Catholic, but perhaps it's easiest to see with respect to the Catholics because they are so large and so ancient, and in some ways so organized, and that at least it's- Certainly in America, way more than it is in Europe, actually, you know, the parish model is- Ironically. Yeah, yeah, yeah. But you seem to have this continuous retreat from the heights of power that it had, let's say in the Middle Ages, and perhaps that begins with Napoleon, where at Napoleon's coronation as emperor, he famously takes crowns himself. And, you know, you look at the 19th century, the loss of the Papal States, where, you know, in a sense, they're confined to this little enclave. But then one of the things that I mentioned in the videos is that that really struck me in Vatican I, what size the church was in Vatican I. And then in Vatican II, this enormous, you know, people from all over the world, globalization, which- It's literally the largest meeting ever. Yes. Like literally, you know, and I'm not saying that as some sort of like Catholic homer here, like just literally the largest meeting ever done ever. I was, when I was reading that and, you know, thinking about it, I was thinking about Jordan Peterson's Reformation Day meeting that is gonna happen this year with 2,000 people, and I thought, and it's still smaller than Vatican II. But so in some weird ways, the Church of Rome is massive, more massive. You have more voices at Vatican II than any other time. And what's on their docket in terms of agendas, you know, it doesn't, when we look at it today, it's not strange. They're gonna talk about poverty. They're gonna talk about racism. They're gonna talk about all these issues that we're so accustomed to having churches deal with today. In the 19th century, they're just kind of like, you know, we have to deal with monarchy. You know, Vatican II, a big issue obviously was liturgy. You know, sort of the renovation of the liturgy. And you've also got, of course, got at the same time in the 1960s and 70s, the end of the colonial era in Africa and in Asia, you're going to have Pentecostalism just, you know, explode throughout the world and also exploding in Latin America, where, you know, this, you have this, the relationship between Catholicism and civil government, on one hand, is massively receding. And on the other hand, I mean, I think part of what makes talking about these things so difficult is that everything is just too massive to not only get our minds around, but even to get our language around. Right. Yeah. Well, you know, you're talking, like in the Latin American context, you sort of talk about the crown and, you know, the altar and throne, you know, monarchical Catholicism, right? You know, but Paul, I think there's a way in which you can look at Vatican II as being spearheaded by a number of people who, perhaps naively, but certainly aspirationally thought that they could unify the West. And, you know, so, you know, so from the trad Catholic perspective, this has been a hope, I'm just, you know, giving mouth to a kind of perspective here. It was a hopelessly Protestantizing force that stripped like an acid bath, everything that made Roman Catholic, Roman Catholicism, Roman Catholicism, right? All of the distinctives, right? And so, you know, but I think that those boosters of the spirit of the Vatican council felt that this would be, if we can just sort of soften the edges of all this kind of vaguely Oriental Roman Catholicism, you know, that we can kind of make it more user-friendly to the North Europeans, like maybe we can kind of bring the band back together again. And, you know, I don't know, I mean, didn't happen, of course, but, you know, but so the liturgies that I grew up with, you know, are much more in keeping and akin to what, you know, I would have seen at your respective churches than what my mom grew up in, for instance. Yeah. And yet, go ahead, Sam. So, two years ago, my great aunt passed away at the age of 102 or 103. And she was a nun and had been, on my mom's side of the family is all Irish Catholic. My dad's side of the family is New England Wasp. Got it, got it. And so, when I'm saying that there used to be religious prejudice against the Catholics, part of me remembers that from both the perpetrator and the victims point of view. Yeah, right, right, right. And, but so I, my great aunt passed away and my mom got her scrapbook, which was one of the few belongings that she had. And she had made this in the 1930s when she was a, what's Maria in The Sound of Music? It's like you're trying out to be a- No vishut, no vishut. No vishut, right? You're thinking about becoming a nun and you're kind of living at the convent, but you haven't taken your- Where was the convent, Sam, just out of curiosity? Springfield, Illinois. Oh yeah, I know that area. So my great aunt lived in that convent for 84 years. Wow, wow, yeah, yeah, Paul. Because she lived to be 102 or 103 and she entered at the age of 16 or 17 as a novician. And so this is her scrapbook, but when she's a novician thinking and into her early years of taking her vows. And there are pictures of her marriage ceremony. Yeah, it's amazing, yeah, yeah. Where my great grandfather is walking her down the aisle to be married to Jesus. That's right. And my grandma is her bridesmaid. And like all of this sort of stuff, I'm just like, and this is the late 1930s. And I'm just like, this is a different universe. These people are quite literally my biological relatives, some of whom I met and knew. And I don't recognize this at all. And there's a letter from my great grandpa about how proud he is to have one of his daughters be becoming a nun and what an honor and a blessing that is on the family and how he looks forward to her prayers blessing my family for generations. And all of this sort of very, very deep, heavy stuff. Thick, thick, thick stuff. Thick, thick, cultural. This is like Central Illinois pre-war Irish Catholicism, which was just deep. And I'm just like, I am their great grandchild and I don't recognize this at all. And this just isn't the Catholicism. So my mom ended up leaving Catholicism when she met my dad. Or she was on her way out and then my dad helped her on her way out. Roughly what year, Sam, just out of curiosity? That would have been about 1980-ish when my mom left Catholicism. Post-council, it was super easy to leave after the council. And there was some friction with her family. Of course, yeah. Vastages, but she did it. But she did it and she didn't get disowned. And I still had great relationships with my grandma and my aunts and uncles and cousins on that side of the family. It was a little bit of tension, but not extreme. And so a huge amount of my cousins are still Roman Catholic. And their faith just doesn't seem like it's the same thing as my great aunt who died, who got married to Jesus in 1939 or whenever that was. So one of the great fights going on just below the plight surface of things in Roman Catholicism is revisiting what the council meant. And so Pope Benedict XVI, both as Cardinal Ratzinger and as Benedict XVI, and just before him, John Paul II, both of their papacies were dedicated to interpreting the council in such a way that it was seen as a, they called it the hermeneutics of continuity, that all that old world that you're talking about, Sam, is actually commensurate with what is now. Okay, now that's a heavy lift, as you just pointed out for obvious reasons. Now, the current pope, and so this was a real fight though. This wasn't just like, oh, they're in charge and they're just sort of managing this hermeneutics of continuity. So there were these two big, big camps, roughly speaking, the kind of, and they were both kind of modernist camps, actually. They weren't the tracts. So there was a sort of a conservative, modernist liberal camp, and there was a sort of progressive, modernist liberal camp. And so Pope Francis is clearly, it seems to me, part of this liberal modernist, sorry, this progressive modernist liberal camp. And so they called it the hermeneutics of disruption. And the primary articulators of this school, it's literally called the Bologna School. And the Bologna School understands that what happened with the second Vatican council was a new eruption of the Holy Spirit that irrevocably changed the Roman Catholic Church so that everything before is essentially not true. It's almost like a new covenant, not quite the level of new covenant, but it's- The way they talk about it, Sam, it does in fact. So I'm in this sort of weird situation where I sort of have been a conservative. Certainly I would have been considered a conservative because I believed in the kind of hermeneutics of continuity, but now you sort of see how can a pope just sort of come around and like resurrect the hermeneutics of disruption and not have it be hugely consequential? And I'll put some meat on those bones just for a second. Growing up, so I went to a college called Thomas More College. And of course, as you know, Thomas More, the famous chancellor of the realm under Henry VIII, has to make this decision, is he going to be Catholic first or is he going to be Henry's chancellor first? And he tries to kind of like, look, I'm gonna let you do your thing, but I'm gonna sort of recede from private life, but basically it became untenable. And eventually he becomes, we consider martyred for that. I do find the veneration of Thomas More a little, it's like that previous dynamic where, oh, the big evil, bad Protestantism martyred are, in a sense, standing up for his conscience, Thomas More. It's like a complete inversion of the- It's much more complicated. The Protestant story. Yeah, yeah, it's much more complicated and fair enough. But at the end of the day, why does a Catholic, why do we venerate Thomas More as a martyr for the faith? Because he stood up and he said, no, a king can't make a decision that goes against the will of God. I mean, that's in essence what it is. And the will of God is that marriage, Paul, is forever. Not a lot of caveats to that, right? So now, if all of a sudden, with this hermeneutics of disruption, if you can rethink even, and this is why marriage is so important in the Catholic symbolic imaginary, right? It's not, and look, I could go on and on for this, I'll stop, but it's so important. I mean, you talked about your aunt who enters the convent. All of the iconography is that this woman has forsaken the world and is marrying Christ ahead of the curve, essentially, right? We all, of course, with the hieros gamos, we all, as part of the church, we marry the bridegroom, right, in the end, right? But she's gonna sort of get a head start on things. That's kind of the idea here. And there's some elevation of the whole family's level of holiness through that. Correct, right, right, right. So, and again, The whole family is really proud of, That's right. He's done this for us. Yeah, it's anti-individualistic. You can kind of see all those things, which brings in that other conversation we've been having, Paul. But if you hold that, wow, like the marriage thing, like, you know, there are sort of difficult cases and there are, you know, we have to be pastoral as opposed to sort of standing on principle. Well, all of a sudden you have to ask your question, well, so then what you're telling me, this is sort of the Kathy Newman moment. So like, what you're telling me is that Thomas More probably isn't, he really didn't have to die for this, is kind of what you're telling me. And I don't know how to square that circle. I don't know how you can be in this sort of school of disruption that Vatican II birthed a whole new church. Now, practically speaking, maybe they did, you know, but I don't know how you thread all of this together and maintain the claims, the bombastic, you know, claims of Rome. I just don't know how you do it. Yeah. My own personal crisis there in a bit. And it's sort of like, it in a way can undermine your own authority to cause that much disruption. Because what you're saying is people who allegedly had my position and my authority in the past disagreed with what I'm doing now. That's right. And I'm disagreeing with them. And so it's sort of like, well, then, A, what authority, how do you have the right to do that? And what's to prevent the next guy from just completely undermining yourself? Right, so now then you're stuck into like, well, for eight years, we're gonna have Democrats doing something and then the next eight years or four, you know, you're gonna have Republicans doing something. It's just like, you know, I've got a pen, you know, and I've got a phone and I'm just gonna be a king. Because that's what Obama said, right? I'm just gonna be a king. You know, screw your democratic process. And so then it's just one group's executive orders, then get offset by the next group's executive orders, and then those get reset and like, that's where we are and we're stuck here. And the precedent of what is allowable under an executive order continues to creep, creep, creep. Yeah, that's right, that's right. In what ways did the Second World War, because the Second World War was a watershed for the Christian Reformed Church, I assume for Catholicism in America. It certainly, I don't know that you would have had the Second Vatican Council the way it was without the Second World War. Of course, the Second World War leaves communism in charge of a lot of the world for the next, you know, 40 plus years, almost 50 years. World War II killed state-empowered Catholicism. And I'm not saying it killed Catholicism. Obviously, there's a couple hundred million people testifying against that, but it ended, and it was partially the fascists, right, in Italy and Germany and Austria and various other places that weakened the church and then the defeat of fascism by democracy basically was a one, and communism also, was like a one, two, three punch with liberal Americanism being the victor that ended and killed all vestiges, essentially, of state-empowered Catholicism. And the entire West was either communist or liberal. Right. Which are kind of two weird forms of Protestantism. There's something strangely Protestant about communism in a weird, distorted kind of way, but I think that's really, it was in some sense the ultimate triumph of the Protestant victory. Yeah. And so, and Orthodoxy then gets covered with this blanket. Of communism. Of communism, which of course, at the fall of the Iron Curtain sort of gets unveiled and now people are beginning to say, oh, you know, you've got emigration to the West. It's also interesting that, you know, one of the things I want the rest of this history to cover is the Suez Crisis. Because the Suez Crisis is a moment that I don't think Americans pay any attention to, but in some ways it was the ceiling of American power over the West. Because of course, Egypt is thinking, well, this is our chance now that, I mean, of course, after the war, India now, okay, the crown of the British Empire, the jewel of the empire, India goes its own way. You know, Gandhi sort of triumphs via, you know, the Gandhi sort of take on Jesus. And then Egypt is gonna flex its muscle. It's going to take over the canal. And the French and the British basically engineer a way to, of course, Israel is roiling in terms of the Israeli state, the beginnings of the Israeli state. The British and French are gonna come down and seize the canal and unseat Nasser. And basically we're going to, the French, of course, wanted to sort of reassert themselves and go China. And so these, you know, France and England are gonna sort of reassert there, try to regain some of their colonial mojo. And the United States just waves in and says, no, I don't. This is, you guys don't understand how powerful we actually are. And this is gonna take you, England and France, a little bit of getting used to. And even this Ukraine war is still a manifestation of that. You know, the US, you know, whatever you think of the Ukraine war, it is still very much a projection of American power into Europe. And I feel like it is only demonstrating that even when we might've thought American power was weakening in some sense, perhaps, there's no replacement. It's not like Germany is stepping up and leading the war in Ukraine. It's not even like France or England or anyone else is. And seemingly, you know, it's really just America through allies of proxy and allies of willingness. And there is something, I mean, I don't wanna say America is just a monarchy and it is just an empire, because there are some differences. I do think one of the reasons why America is as powerful as it is, is because we don't have monarchs. And having too strong of central leadership often enables someone to make a stupid decision, which often hurts the country, like Mao's great leap forward or something like that. And America hasn't had any great leaps forward in that sense, because we haven't had anyone powerful enough to do something stupid enough. And that is a result of democracy and sort of just making it too hard to do anything, and that means to allow some good things to get done, probably leaves a lot of good things undone, but does mostly prevent big bad evil things. And that is part of America's strength. And it is also the case that America is as powerful internationally as it is, because we mostly build our alliance based off of willing participation of our allies. And we don't ask too much of them. And if anything, that it's starting to show that maybe we don't ask enough of our allies. And that part of the reason why the American world is becoming too weak is that, I think there'll be a question in the next decade or two if America can really keep up with the full strength that it has this international global order, or whether it'll begin to be truly multipolar. And there's a weird ironic way in which that would still probably benefit America, nationally speaking. Yeah, I think the crackup is likely going to happen just because it's gonna be unsustainable economically. But I think that the American, you all know, I know Rod Dreher, and we used to do the show together. And it's been really interesting to watch, to listen to him talk about America from the vantage point of not being in America. But I think that's, whether I think that Rod's 100% correct on the issue is not really my point here, other than, I do distinctly remember reading about America when I was in Europe for several months. And it really is a different perspective on things. And Paul, maybe you got a taste of that when you were in the DR. And, but it's, so anyway, to read Rod in sort of the way that, we Americans think we don't have theology and we think we don't have religion, but ask the Hungarians as they are attempting to shore up, themselves as a people, but are running a foul of the LGBTQ plus blah, blah, blah, directives from Belgium. I mean, they're not gonna leave the Hungarians alone. And I think that the Hungarians are probably out of economic necessity, going to have to bend that knee. And, I mean, what is that? That's public theology, isn't it? Well, it goes- It's mission work. America looks different from different places. Obviously from the Caribbean, a country like the Dominican Republic, it looks different from Europe. It looks different from Japan or South Korea or Australia. It will look different. It's just such a massive colossus. And, to bring in a little Christian reform thing in terms of the, there was a sociology professor at Calvin, who a couple of years ago performed a wedding for a Calvin employee and her fiance. And then when his contract was up for renewal, he wasn't tenured. His contract was not renewed. And he is now currently suing the college for wrongful termination, even though I don't know about not renewing. But the thing that caught the attention of the Christian reform community in this television interview was the statement about the wedding he performed. It was a non-religious wedding. I did it on my own time. It had nothing to do with Calvin. It had nothing to do with Christianity. Yeah, maybe you're right, brother. Maybe you're right. And I think this gets into the question of, okay, well, what America has, a lot of the power of America has tended to come from its, certainly from its artistic community. Hollywood has dominated. And Hollywood was a big issue in the Islamist pushback against America. You're corrupting our youth with your movies and your media. And now, if Elon Musk is not a king, which he is not, Elon Musk, Steve Jobs, Bill Gates, these are princes of a, if you live internationally, you very quickly begin to recognize that there is a, there is a layer of people all around the world and they're in the developing world. They're in the developed world. These are the people in the Dominican Republic that can fly back and forth to the United States without any trouble at all. I teach them. That's right. This is the globalist ruling class and a, one of the issues that came up last night in the estuary meeting too, when we were talking about it, was church membership and propositional assent because the Christian informed church has this, we're fighting this question about same-sex marriage in the CRC. We're using confessional means, but there's, but part of the tide that's turning in religion, we see this in this little corner, is we're going from prepositional to procedural. And the value of- You're proceduralizing the propositional in order to maintain the line on same-sex marriage within your denomination. Right. And when you look at, let's say the princes of industry that have been reshaping the world, the titans of the world today, which who are, you know, even, I mean, China is trying to keep them out. They're now sort of blocked out of Russia because of the war. But when you look at even a nation like Ukraine, the question is, will this nation participate in the procedural religion of the world that involves these little things that we hold in our hands? It involves all of the things that we do. One of the things that again struck me, Kale, when I participated in that Roman Catholic mass, which was a funeral, again, you know, all of the practices that Catholics have and then this wedding that Sam had, you know, in many ways, the entire question of what on earth do we mean by religion, the predominant paradigm that was really cemented in the Protestant Reformation in the West is receding. And so in that sense, the Orthodox kind of come up and, you know, how flexible are they with respect to propositional truth? I'm unclear from that, but they very much. Depends who you ask, which suggests that they are at least somewhat flexible. So, you know, when you think about, over the last couple of summers, I've read a lot of books about the Second World War. You know, part of, especially in the Pacific, part of how the American empire was established was the industrial technocracy. We could simply out-produce, out-spend, out-muscle, anything else in the world and, you know. You know, Paul, yeah, you know, Paul, it's interesting. I was thinking about exactly that point in relationship to some of the conversations you've had about the early formation of Christianity. You know, I think that's a very interesting point. And it could be something as simple or akin to, you know, that Christianity worked, right? And, you know, whatever one in the 21st century believes about miracles, I believe in them. But, you know, that the miracles were perceived and understood as to be realities that demonstrated divine competency, something like that. Right? And I wonder in the sort of the secular register of the Second World War and what Peter Zahan calls the sort of the Bretton Woods, you know, day taunt or whatever, you know, world, you know, the world created at Bretton Woods, is that, you know, Americanism worked. Like, you know, globalized industrialism protected by American Navy steel, it worked. Yep. And again, there were losers. I'm not naive, you know, I'm not naive, but it worked, essentially. Even in Ukraine, it's still working. I mean, Russia is losing or at least not winning a war right on their doorstep. And that, you know, and I think an interesting thing that sometimes Americans maybe don't fully realize is there's a certain sense in which the president or American power sometimes has more power outside of America than inside of America. Interesting. Because- Hexquan-animo. Right, well, and I mean, like, Paul, Calvin, let's imagine that the CRC holds the line on same-sex marriage and they're even able to enforce this at some level at Calvin College and that it holds together, right? The liberals can't use the means of the US government to bring Calvin College into line on LGBTQ questions because of the First Amendment and many other reasons that are kind of mostly go back to the First Amendment. But yet America can put pressure on Hungary because Hungary needs the American safety net to keep it from being attacked by Russia and it needs the economic access to the EU and global markets to have its standard of living. And so that there's a weird sort of way in which America can exert more influence over Hungary than it can over Calvin College. Right, because we have these pesky things called state legislatures. It really is a pesky thing called the Constitution, which with a division of powers, which every president has tried to get rid of systematically. Look, we just lived through COVID. I mean, like one of the frustrations that, more so the Biden administration actually than the Trump administration, for all of Trump's bluster, he really wasn't about using the power of the state to get what he wanted. It was really kind of a remarkably feckless actually. But Biden's like, the frustration is like, these damn states won't do what we want them to do. And I'm sitting there like, yeah, because we, states are real, they're not inconsequential. It's like what happens, it's Sacramento for instance, Paul, in your environment, it's like, that's not inconsequential. It's not just theater, it is theater too. But it has power and jurisdiction over the state of California. Yeah, yeah, yeah. And Sacramento is different from Texas. Sure, Austin or Baton Rouge or. Or Utah or Idaho. Right, right, right. And unfortunately, even the choices of the Illinois government affect me, which if you don't like California, it can get worse, you know. This is, yeah. Right, it's a really unsunny, unsexy version of California. Right, and even more so. Wow. With less economic diamonds. Right, that's what I'm talking about. The mayoral election in Chicago drastically affects crime rates and in and out migration from the city. Which will have a downstream effect upon Springfield because as more and more people pull out of Chicago, which they will, right, until somebody decides to wake up or not, that's gonna have serious, serious. I mean, when your major economic engine of the state is falling apart, that's not good for every Illinoisan. Right, right, and it has a paradoxal effect on the suburbs where I live because people leave the city to go to the suburbs, but some people are leaving the state in general, so it's a little bit weird which of those two things helps or hurts more. But anyway, yeah, and so it is weird that America perhaps has a weirder way of being able to project its cultural hegemony on conservatives in the America sphere, but not as much in America. And then Canada then becomes like this weird thing where it's like, we're just gonna show that we can do what the Democrats want to do but can't do in America, but we're gonna do it in Canada. And that's gonna be our entire political program is figure out whatever America wants to do, whatever the Democrats want to do but can't do, oh, we can pass gun control, we can pass laws about trans, gender, whatever, even though America can't, ha, ha, ha, look at us, come over here, maybe, you won't, but we wish you would. But again, and even, sorry, go ahead, Paul. No, no, go ahead. No, I'm just making it up. But you've got to a certain degree the provinces because Alberta is like, well, let's, oil, we've got oil. We'll be the Texas of Canada. And now the conversations I've been having with Canadians, of course, Jordan Peterson, there's no louder Canadian right now who's unhappy with the regime and in Canada, there seems to be absolutely no end in sight. There's no- But the reality that Canada is allowed to exist in is only ensured by the economic engine of the United States of America. And I'm not saying that as some sort of like chest thumping like former Bud Light drinking, red blooded American. In other words, it's like Canada's not even a real place in that way, right? And again, I like Canada, please, I'm not trying to be anti-Canadian, but it's like, they just live in this hyper unreality. Why in the world hasn't the US conquered Canada? Like in every parallel universe, you also be like, oh, there's a rich, you know, help this country. Oil rich country. All emails can be directed to Twitter, Kayl Zelden at Twitter and the Transfigured Channel. Thank you, Canadian. 50% of my listener base. We love Canada, we love Canada. They get to be completely ridiculous on foreign policy or whatever because they're so secure because of the goodwill of the United States. And Canada- Well, no, look, I'm not being anti-Canada here, Paul. I mean, I'm listening. I watched what happened with that trucker convoy and anybody who believes in any kind of liberal democracy should be, their blood should run cold with what happened, with the seizing of bank assets and, I mean, it's truly, truly a chilling thing, not to mention the COVID regime. You know, I mean, so that's really where I'm going with, you know, I'm not attacking my Canadian friends. Canada has had a degree of media capture that the United States has not. The, I mean, an amazing amount of Canadian media is funded and supported by the government to the degree that, you know, certain messages don't get out. One of my Canadian friends was telling me that there's legislation in Canada that even, you know, the government's trying to say that a certain percentage of media consumed has to be Canadian-sourced and not American. I mean, and it's like, wow. If anybody, again, one of the videos I do want to make is on the rest is history on East Germany because there are so many interesting pieces in that. But what about, you know, so Fox News just got stung with this court settlement and people are saying that now this opens the way for Rupert Murdoch and others to be sued directly because of, I mean, what's, is it, I mean, a big piece of the narrative, and this was underneath the Musk Twitter thing. There's this panic on the part of major media sources that social media is allowing heterodox communication to go out, fake news, all of this, in other words, the way to capture democracy, this is an old story, of course, the way to capture democracy is to control the mind of the people through their informational channels. I don't think that, you know, if you look at the New York Times yesterday or today, it's all about Fox News, Nana, Nana, Boo Boo. But I think that, I mean, first of all, there have been lawsuits, who is the young man in Kenosha, Wisconsin, Kyle Rittenhouse, who during the Black Lives Matter protest shot someone, and then there was all the hoopla about that, and I think he sued CNN and whatever for, not quite as large sum of money, but a pretty large sum of money, and there's been stuff like that on both sides. But I think really the real winner is alternative media, because you can't quite sue YouTube, you can't quite sue, well, maybe you could sue an individual podcaster or something like that, but they won't have as deep of pockets as Fox News, so you won't be able to sue them as much. So I think really, I don't know why the New York Times or CNN would be cheering this, because it just means that they're exposing themselves to the politically reverse orientation of the same sorts of things, which their profit margins are already slipping. And so I just feel like this is another death knell in the fall of legacy media, because they can get sued for these defamation things, and the polarization of their business model means that it's more and more tempting to either report a story incorrectly or whatever, and if it means you defamed some 18-year-old in Kenosha, Wisconsin, or you spread lies about an election machine company, both of those stories are more and more tempting to make, and then you have more and more legal risk for that. And so I just think it's gonna make it harder for the legacy media and hasten their demise. What does the demise of the legacy media mean? Because I don't see legacy media going away. They still have tremendous power. I mean, Joe Rogan wouldn't be Joe Rogan if he hadn't got his start in mass media. You mean like with those reality shows you used to do? Fear Factor. Fear Factor, yeah. And the fighting. Yeah. And you still see this tremendous power. I mean, JK Rowling, I haven't looked at the podcast rating. Corporate entities need somewhere to spend their ad dollars. And so the easiest way to do it is just to like phone up CBS, NBC, ABC, Fox News, whatever, all the alphabets, right? That's the easy way to do it. Right, so I don't think any of that's going to change. Now, I think demographically it could change, right? I mean, I literally cannot tell you the last time I've turned on my television and watched a news program. No, no, I can tell you that. The last time, besides like football, right? If I could stream that now. But so we can get into that if you want, Paul. So you raise your eyebrow. But I think the last time that I literally stopped everything, turned on the television to watch Fox and CNN and MSCBC what they were playing was on January 6th. What is that, two and a half years ago? But isn't the case that mass media is, there's just going to be more mass medias? That's interesting. A little bit. And it will probably, there will be some consolidating effect. I was in Florida on my dad's side, visiting members of my dad's side of the family. And I have an aunt who's even older than my dad. And she was like, oh, Fauci is going to be on 60 minutes tonight. So we need to end our dinner early because I got, we all obviously need to get back to our televisions so that we can watch Fauci on 60 minutes. Because this is an important thing. This is, we're supposed to watch this. This is a paypal audience. And so I think that legacy media will die. I wish nothing but long life for my aunt. But legacy media will die as its audience dies. Yeah, that's what I was insinuating. I think that people, I think it's a boomer thing. Do you think the death of mass church and mass media dies together? I do, actually. And do you think that the rise of alternative in both spaces is also analogous? The only reason why I don't know the answer to that question, and I think about this all the time, is the network effect. I'm just not sure how to figure that into the calculus. That the network effects can be good and they can be bad. It's like network effect on January 6 is that everybody can tune in and watch the same thing. But we also know that the network effect can be captured. And that's, I think, at least my interpretation, what we lived through in the last two and a half to three and a half years. So the downsides of the network effect. So now for somebody like me, all of my skeptical priors have just become blown up. Maybe that's why I don't tune in, Paul. I just, number one, it's hopelessly shallow. Three seconds in an ad break, three minutes in an ad break, I just can't do it. It just hurts me. And I've heard maybe of something on your channel, Paul, but maybe this was the Elon Musk thing, maybe this was the Elon Musk thing. But when you know something about a topic and you see it covered in the legacy, you're just like, wait, what? That's what you're coming with? That's just so dumb. It's just shallow. And are you that dumb on the subjects I don't know this much about? So now, that's right, that's right, that's right. What even is this thing? This newspaper or this news channel. It's just, I don't know. So trust, gone, gone, gone. Jordan Peterson was my first dose of that. When way back in the wave one of Jordan Peterson's rise, when the New York Times tentatively first said a couple semi-nice things, back when Barry Weiss was still there, right? About Jordan Peterson. And then- David Brooks gave him the big quote. David Brooks gave him most influential intellectual in the Western world or something like that. And then all of a sudden you can just see the switch flip and they're like, no, kill it, kill it. Bad, yes, yes. It reminds me of that meme. Shut it down! Yeah, it's the Austin Powers meme, where Frou for Business is send in the robots, you know, the death robots. It's like, this guy can't, oh, he's off the reservation. But again, network effect, right? You know, that's what you're describing, Sam. They weren't really quite sure what to do with Jordan Peterson. They're like, oh, he's interesting. Maybe he could be our friendly crank. Maybe we can sort of, we can not neuter him or gelled him, but kind of keep him on the reservation. He could be our kept opposition. I think they were auditioning him perhaps for that role. And he is not that, as we all know. David French took the role? Well, yeah, right, right. Maybe French thought he could have a new friend. He's like, no, my friends don't like him, so I can't have him. He says mean things. He says mean things. So I don't know, Paul, I mean, you know, you asked the question, I'll ask you. Will legacy media and legacy church die, you know, with the boomers? I think Protestantism is less vulnerable. And interesting. Because in some, I mean, it's just really tough to keep mass at scale and markets continue to perform. And if there's- I mean, the mainline church is the same audience at 60 minutes. Yes, that's correct. At this point. So the mainline churches will really, really struggle. And I would say that the mainline versions of boomer Catholics, it's the same thing. I mean, it's theologically the same. It's politically the same. I repeat myself, right? So, you know, it's- It's Joe Biden. It's our current Catholic president. Devout Catholic Joe Biden, as we have been reminded over and over and over again. Right, so, but it's weirdos like me, right? You know, who I'm trying to raise my kids Catholic, and I'm trying to be Catholic, and I'm trying to be faithful, and I'm trying to have some sort of historical sensibility to me. Like, I'm gonna have, they're gonna have a harder time stamping the me's out, the dozens of us that there are. Dozens. But I think that the normie church is gone with normie media. Well, you know, and Ethan is bored, but the Orthodox are not, you know, the Orthodox, this has everything to do with Orthodoxy. Because in many ways, Orthodoxy has become another option on the small P Protestant menu in religion in the West. Even though Orthodoxy has aspirations for neo-Constantinianism, I don't see anyone having that come, see that coming. And what's going on now between Putin and Ukraine, with respect to the Orthodox church, for someone who on rebel wisdom blithely said, well, maybe if the Protestants and the Catholics would just have this history of bloodshed and statism, maybe Orthodox doesn't. And it's like, really? Proc, prosynism is- You're reading a little history. Procynism isn't at war with each other. It might not be united, but you know, it depends on what you mean by unity. There's a lot of different kinds of unity and ecclesial unity is one thing, not fighting an act of war with each other is also a different form of unity. One thing that maybe, Ethan, maybe this will help make the conversation more interesting. But one thing that I really wonder about is, I feel like, especially when I'm looking around at kind of evangelicalism now, or, you know, low church Protestantism now, is there is this weird problem where people are listening to podcasts or YouTube, or have their own sort of curated theological influence stream that they have often chosen for themselves because that's what they're interested in, that's what strikes them as correct or et cetera. That's who they admire, whatever. And then you have the people in the same church that are being influenced by drastically different formation worlds that are mostly online or virtual or coming in through your earbuds or something like that. And that I think it's putting a lot of weird tension on churches. And I'm seeing this in kind of my own local evangelical church that I might still kind of go to or not. I'm still figuring that one out. But I think this is, because 60 minutes or whatever, the blue church could unite mainline Protestantism. And they had kind of a stable information stream that helped them stick relatively united with each other and had a very shared worldview. Yet Democrats and Republicans had some differences, but nowadays we look at Democrats and Republicans in the 1960s and they look so similar to each other. And so I do wonder how this is gonna pan out. Because if I listen to Paul and someone else is listening to ortho bros and someone else is listening to super restless and reformed Baptist Calvinism, then like- Doug Wilson. Doug Wilson, how do we get along in church and how do we vote together on elder boards and all those sorts of things? Well, this is why the Pope shut down the Latin Mass. That is my sort of, I believe, some basis for this belief, but I believe- Should he shut down or is he trying to shut it down? Well, there you go. But even the idea that you would attempt to shut down the Latin Mass stems because exactly what Sam said is that some Catholics wandered off the reservation and started listening to things in their ear pods on their workouts or while they're doing the dishes. And they were reminding Catholics of this tradition that they had that local pastor Bob isn't giving them. And they're looking at like, on paper, my church should have all of these great things that this guy on YouTube is telling me that we should do. Well, why are we doing these things? And like, well, where did all this stuff go and why was it removed? And so, well, the thing you do is shut it down. But when you can't actually do it as Pope, aren't you simply communicating your ineffectiveness and your impotence? I know, Pines with Aquinas is still a YouTube channel. Discussing porn with Dennis Prager. I saw that, yeah, I saw that. And it's just weird when people can choose their own catechesis and that it's similar to how education is getting disrupted. Why would I listen to my boring chemistry teacher when there's an also a chemistry teacher? I mean, in Catholicism, the way that we solved this problem for centuries was like, all right, you sort of wanna be like a Franciscan type of Catholic. You wanna be a kind of Jesuit type Catholic. You wanna be a Dominican type Catholic. You wanna be a Benedictine type Catholic, right? There's sort of this variety, but you went to the mass and the mass was just basically the same, right? And so it was a kind of unifying technology that sort of instead of the sort of the radically and typically horizontal world that we live in, the mass was this sort of strange vertical lifting up and out of the sort of the morass. And so at least in that, and somebody like Aquinas would call it, or in the catechism would call it the source and summit of the Christian life would be this, your Eucharist, the liturgy itself. But what happens when you take the vertical element out of the liturgy and you flatten it into this horizontal space. And I think that's what we're living through. And what's the difference between Sam's great aunt that the entire family and community understands this wedding to Jesus versus some woman somewhere who got this idea in her head listening to some trad Catholics. And so she's surrounded by her friends and they have a wedding to Jesus in their backyard. Isn't that kind of where we're at? Yeah. I can't imagine any of my cousins getting married to Jesus, but my great aunt did. But you can't imagine somebody out there with a- Paul, Paul, Paul, a year and a half ago, somebody had a wedding celebration in their backyard and they married themselves. So we're already there. Again, take out the particulars, take out the particular sort of details of the theology. We're there in practice. Well, but the woman who gets married to Jesus in her backyard, maybe with some priest who's two cities over who she found on the internet and a group of other people that she pulled together in a Discord server, and they're gonna have this wedding and they're gonna share the pictures on the Discord server. That's a very different thing than what happened in the 1930s, where in a sense, there's sense making that has happened on a million different on a mass scale, which today looks just completely odd. And now, oh, my cousin got married to Jesus in her backyard with a priest two cities down and all of her Discord friends. And I guess I'm gonna send her a gift through Amazon. And that's kind of where we're at, right? Well, I mean, we can have a cousin who changes gender and gets married to another person who's changed gender, and we're gonna have a barbecue in the backyard, and we're gonna have to all show up and be like, yay, you, all right, here we go. Don't, you'd better affirm. Right, right, I mean, but that, it's good for the family. You've got one in the family, I don't know, I don't know. Well, I know that you've got a time crunch, Kale. So I wanna thank you for, no, absolutely. I wanna thank you for taking part in this. And you too, Sam, I don't know, Sam, if you got any extra time, if you wanna dare let any of these characters in the room. Yeah, y'all do it, I gotta beat, but you guys have a great day. God bless you all, have a great weekend. I'll see you on the flip side. Cheers, guys. All right. Bye, bye. All right, I will do what is probably not wise and let in the, we'll see who dares come in the room for a little while and what they have to say. You never quite know what you're gonna get when you drop the link in. So I was listening to Contrapoints by listening to you. And there was something that clicked for me for the first time listening to that. Like Contrapoints and sort of the people, the trans people on the Harry Potter podcast that the host interviewed. I was noticing, it's like one of those things, maybe I should have noticed this earlier, but they were sort of, the trans people were making the point like, look, sometimes I feel fragile in my new identity, but it's really important to me when people out there in the world anywhere, especially if they're close to me, doubt my identity, it causes me to have negative bad feelings and that could put me at risk of mental health or suicide at the worst. And so then the logical extension is for me to have trans rights, everyone in the world needs to agree with my point of view. And it was that flip from, please let me do what I want to myself to actually the only way I can actually get what I want is if every single person affirms me. And to me, it was sort of like, imagine if a Christian were like, look, Christianity is the most fundamental part of my identity. But sometimes when I encounter people that don't believe in Christianity, it gives me belief dysphoria. And I wonder if my beliefs aren't correct. And if I'm not a Christian, then my mental health will deteriorate and who knows I might even commit suicide. So therefore, please rest of the world, if you could believe in Christianity or at least act like and go along with it, then I won't have any belief dysphoria. We really need you to affirm Jesus, it's life or death. Yes, and you are erasing my identity and creating a Christian genocide if you do not at least go along with this and help me maintain my beliefs. And obviously that would be absurd. And if you ask contra points, if do you agree with that? Should everyone in the world affirm Christianity or Islam or how do we handle that multiplicity problem? That would be, it would be really, so that was like this narcissistic switch where my mental health needs need to be projected onto the whole world. And Paul Antleitner has been tweeting about something similar recently where he's been seeing a theme in movies. I forget what his examples were, where the arena becomes a means by which the primary characters solve their own therapy needs along those lines. And that it's sort of like, we need to project our therapy needs onto the arena and change the arena for the sake of my mental stability or something like that. And that's gonna lead into some strange places. Well, number one, there's the question of the state. I think contra points would be happy enough if the state just mirrored what contra points believes is the proper posture. But maybe some of the next generation trans people aren't content with that. They need all the people everywhere to be affirming. Right, because otherwise the world is not a safe space for them to be in. Right, as soon as anyone gives them down. And God in a sense is part of that because God is the arena God is very much out there. And so if that then gets mirrored to them, but what's interesting also is again, comparison to the story that you told, having a deep wide religion made. In other words, instead of having to lift the heavy burden of having the entire world agree with you, if you just basically submitted yourself to the community and lived within the community's world, you would find the experiential satisfaction and safety that will always elude people who demand that the world march according to them. You know Peter, I don't know Peter. Hey, how's it going guys? Good Peter, this is the first time I've met you. Yeah, yeah, thanks for hosting this. This is kind of cool. Yeah, yeah, what's on your mind? What did you want to jump in on? Well, it's interesting. Some of what you guys are talking about as far as like community and things like that and how we understand community and even being a part of a church and what that looks like, what that means moving forward. I don't know if I have like a whole lot to lend to the conversation other than I think that that is, yeah, it's definitely something that we seem to be losing. Like you were just saying, what does it mean to be kind of like myself in and amongst this community? Where do I find myself? And if I'm just isolated from a community, then I don't know that I can find myself. I think I need that community. I need feedback. I need something to be a part of in order to really understand who I am. I can't just be solo on an island by myself. We are in ourselves insufficiently deep ponds to actually contain ourselves. Do you have a religious background or are you going to a church somewhere? I would probably do a really bad job of representing the PCA denomination that I'm a part of. I work at a church, but yeah, that's kind of my tribe right now. I'm sort of exploring what that means as far as being a part of a Presbyterian church. I went to Knox Theological Seminary, which is connected to the Presbyterian church. So yeah, that's part of my journey for sure. I would hate to like say, hey, I'm 100% PCA and then say something that maybe doesn't represent the PCA very well. Okay. Maxwell, Caleb, you guys want to jump in at all on anything? I'll let Max go first. Hey guys, nice to be with you today. Paul, I saw you started, you mentioned Ivan Illich's book or David Cayley's book. I was wondering what you think about it because I'm really enjoying it. Ivan Illich takes such a radical posture and it's, you know, I've got sympathy. We homeschooled our kids. I've got sympathy with respect to a lot of his positions on let's say mass education that in some ways we're trying to address the pathologies that the system itself has sort of brought forth the difficulty with something this radical. It's sort of akin to Paul King's North's machine conversation that, okay, fair enough. Christianity took a dramatically bad turn to the degree that it institutionalized. We have sort of an anti-institutional buffet religious thing going. Is that an improvement over what we've seen done by churches? So it's a tantalizing thesis, but, and if you've got someone who is a very remarkable person like to the degree that I know who Ivan Illich was and what he did, you know, seemed to be quite an exceptional, remarkable person. When I think about the vast majority of Christians and human beings, not everyone can specialize on, you know, the, on this extremely high level of articulation and sophistication with respect to the Christian faith. I've often brought up my cousin who was a welder, who goes to church faithfully as an elder and his conservative reformed church, is faithfully married to one wife, is lifelong, has a couple of kids, has a couple of grandkids, you know, has a hobby, likes to go fishing, likes to play basketball. You know, what does Ivan Illich really have to say to him? I mean, it almost, it almost seems like, okay, fair enough, but is that just religion for the auto diebacks and the monks? So that's part of the challenge of that, in that you're going to need to have something that is scalable. And it was, you know, part of the challenge I made to John Verbecky when we were talking about his project, you know, for people who are middle-class, professional people who by virtue of their socioeconomic state, their education, can afford to go and do a conference with Rafe Kelly or go to the Quest for a Spiritual Home conference with a Canchino that's coming up, all well and good. But my welder cousin, you know, he lives local, he works local, he worships local, and the vast majority of human beings are much more at that level than the sophisticated level. So. Thank you. Caleb, you have anything you want to say or just coming into, Caleb, you have the distinction of I think you're the only one who came in and helped us, came into the Sunday School class once because Rick put in the link and nobody wants to come, which is absolutely fine, but. It's one of those things where, actually I was curious, it's gonna get me totally off of what I was about to ask, but I'm curious as to what utility was, what exactly did you want us to do in the Sunday School? Well, I'm not sure if I can really interrupt and ask questions, but. No, that's a fair point. I, you know, like I'm doing with this live stream, I play with a lot of things and I don't quite know where things are going and so we were, I thought, you know, what if we did have other people participate in the Sunday School class, but I'm not really quite sure how that would go. So at this point, we're just. It's fun to be there. Yeah, at this point, we're just using StreamYard because for those who are looking for the 11 a.m. service to be streamed, we're having real issues with our camera and the sanctuary. So about the only thing we're able to stream right now is our Sunday School class. So that's kind of where that's at. I like what you're doing here, Paul. If I may, it was a couple of weeks ago, you guys were talking about the printing press and it got me thinking, I wasn't able to engage. I don't remember what I was doing, but I could hear you guys and it's almost like, you know, you're talking about using StreamYard, right? It's like using the roads that Rome built. It's like we're using the means that were provided for us by these other entities, but the point is still, we need to get the gospel out there. We need to spread the gospel. So I just, I don't know, I just wanted to say, I love that you're, I don't know how much of this is experimentation on your part, but it's like Rome built the roads for us, so we might as well use them, you know? Because the gospel's gotta go far and wide, so let's just go. It's a lot of this is, I mean, especially on my channel, it's almost pure experimentation. Because again, this isn't my day job. Yeah, yeah. This is a hobby of sorts and it's become a ministry in that, you know, when people ask how can they support this, I usually tell them the best way to support this is by, you know, donate to my local church because I'm sitting in the building right now and I'm doing this and not making my rough draft and some of the other things. But it is experimentation and it's experimentation with a degree of trepidation because the medium is not incidental and it shapes. And a lot of this actually for me is really pastoral development. And I feel I learn way more than I offer. And this channel has the whole time been just a place that I can learn and grow and develop and then maybe on the basis of that have something to offer. I mean, it is awesome though. It kind of goes back to the conversation about the church, the body analogy, right? We're all these different parts and we're knit together and we need to have that. We need to be able to have permission to kind of experiment and use these things and feed off of one another. And, you know, the trepidation about using online or digital means, I mean, I see it, I hear it in other people and yet that's where the community comes in to keep each other accountable and to kind of shape us and move us and say, this is a good use of that medium. This may not be a good use of that medium. And we can kind of hopefully find the best way to use it. Yep, yep, yep. And it's, you know, for me, I think it's fairly low risk. I mean, part of what's remarkable is the cost of all of this has come down tremendously. So I try not to, yeah, here's the tool. Let's try it out. Let's see what happens and maybe we'll, you know, maybe we'll decide it was a bad idea. There's plenty of stuff that I've tried that I've decided was a bad idea. Yeah. When the cost came down because everybody was locked in and had to do everything online. So I wonder if it's not providential on some level of, you know, again, the roads have been built. We might as well use them. Let's, you know, we're all learning how to present the gospel through digital media, which yeah, it can be a little scary, but I think, I don't know. I don't feel as resistant to it as maybe I hear some people in some places, I'm more willing to experiment. That's more where I am. And part of, so, you know, we've got Caleb and David here and they're quite clearly at work. You guys might be at work too, but you're, you know, you're in a Zoomer class and you're working on PCs, but you know, this was experimentation from the Bridges of Meaning Discord where I'm at work and I thought, well, let's have an open studio. And we had, you know, a guy who was fixing speakers and Chad is often putting up tile. And so, I mean, part of this has also been for men. And, you know, some of us have jobs driving truck, laying tile, a lot of coders, painters, tradesmen, you know, listen to, how much music can you listen to? And then you've got AM radio or now this really abundance of niches via YouTube and podcasts. Now suddenly we can continue to grow and develop in all sorts of ways with these tools. And whereas let's say maybe 400 years ago, we'd all be in a field mowing hay with a sigh together and we could talk back and forth. Now we're all in these little boxes, but via these connections, you know, what do they talk about back and forth during the reformation period when they're, you know, when they're farming or if they're building something, you know, I've worked in blue collar jobs and you work with guys and you talk, you talk about whatever you're gonna talk about. And this in some ways is part of that. Well, what are you doing David? You washing something? Yeah, I'm cleaning my brush and cleaning my roller pole because I'm about to get started in a office. All right, all right. Painting church, painting a church. Painting a church, painting a church. Now we've got someone coming in to do some, to do some cooking here. All right. Now, Paul, can I ask you a question and then I'll probably have to go because I just- Yeah, go ahead. Okay, so I was thinking, I stopped in when you were talking about like Protestant Catholic stuff. And I was reading Stephen DeYoung's God as a Man of War. And I think it's interesting this idea of like, nations saw when they went to war, like their gods were going to war with each other. And I think when the Protestants and Catholics were engaged in all their wars, that's where like the fierce tenacity came from is they recognize that. And so what's interesting is it seems to be, if you take that view on things, that God favored Protestants. And I know Protestants use that as vindication against the Catholic church and Orthodox. And I don't even think that's all necessarily bad, but like to play devil's advocate, there's also a phrase where it's like, I think it's from like meditations, where it's like, whoever the gods wish to destroy, they first make mad with power. And so it's like, I wonder, I don't know, like part of me is like, well, it seems like the Protestants were doing something right that the Catholics can't get right. And then in other cases, you know, plenty of people have vented their frustrations at the Protestant church and stuff like that. And it's hard not to feel like sometimes it's falling down that path. So I don't know, what do you think about that? Well, that's, you know, what I was getting at with my God number one and God number two, back in the day of Jordan Peterson and Sam Harris. There's the divine passive in scripture. If something comes to be, it must be the will of God. And of course, there in the pagan polytheistic days, you know, the will of the gods. And there's very much something to that. Now, the Bible and Christianity undercut that and that begins in the book of Job, certainly has resonance in terms of the cross. And so all of these narratives sort of subtly work through this interplay between God number one, who was sort of the arena God and God number two, who is a character in the arena. And so there's very much something to that. I, there have been movements, I sometimes call them retconning movements in history that sort of reframe everything after them. And Protestantism was that. And where suddenly the Roman Catholic Church had to somehow, had to adjust itself to the Protestant Reformation in ways that it couldn't not react to. And in some ways, Luke Burgess, I got his name wrong in my video recently. And someone nicely posted that on Twitter where Luke could see it, he reposted it. And it's like, but his book Wanting with Ren Girard, when you get into a degree of the medic rivalry, you sort of become opposites. And in a way, the Roman Catholic Church had to respond to the Reformation. But in the way it responded to it, it in a sense took on elements of the Reformation in itself. And what's tremendously difficult, and I think this is when you look at how Jesus dealt with his adversaries, Jesus had a way of dealing with his adversaries where he didn't sort of engage in the medic rivalry with them. And I think you really see that in the cross. And I think this is a lot of what Ivan Illich has going for him, where with Illich, he sort of steps out of the mimetic rivalry that's sort of leveling up. I see this all the time in culture war stuff, where, oh, they're so angry at the other side that they engage in battle with them in a way that they become just like the other side. And then all of us onlookers see both sides as, well, they're really just the same. And I think trying to follow Jesus in how he dealt with Rome versus God's Holy Land and God's Holy people is a way to try to step out of that mimetic rivalry and find a way to bring about something different, which Christ did in terms of, I'm working on my sermon, my sermon's about that this week, I don't use mimetic rivalry because nobody in my congregation would understand what I'm talking about. But this is what Christ does. And so this week I'm preaching on Acts 10, Cornelius the Centurion and Caesarea, who is a God-fearer, Jacob would say a Noahite, and God sends in Peter. And God is transforming Peter and Cornelius is being transformed. And they're both put on a road where they are both going to be transformed. And it's not just sort of a mimetic rivalry where both in some ways are destroyed. So I don't know if that answers the question or not, but I know we had to run. I'm gonna land the plane in two minutes, just fair warning, because I do have to do some of my day job. Any last words or, what are you making, Casey? I'm gonna make chicken Alfredo. All right, very nice. Thank you for turning on your camera and showing us your work, I love that. Oh, wonderful, doesn't it just look delicious right now? Yeah, Axwell, tell me a little bit about you. I don't think I've seen you here before either. Yeah, I, where to start? I mean, I guess I started at Jordan Peterson, with a bunch of people. And I got into Rene Girard a lot, just because I found his, what he had to say about biblical religion just fascinating. And I found it to be a scientific anthropological proof of the Bible. And not saying I needed that or anything, but maybe I guess I did in some sense. But yeah, just coming closer and closer to God and Christ through the work of yourself and the community. And yeah, it's fascinating and things in my life. I'm doing, I'm reading, doing one of these yearly plans with a friend. We're going through the Bible in a year and it's just seeing the scripture as it, from the outside in, being someone that just, before I just thought it was so antiquated and had nothing to relate to me or the world. And now it's seen the complete opposite that it actually is the most relatable and the most fascinating. It's given me so much meaning and encouragement and guidance. So yeah, and I'm in a Rene Girard reading group with some people and we read, we've read Vaclav Havel, a lot of Leo Strauss, and who else? We read Why Liberalism Failed last week. And so, yeah, I just, it's endless stuff too. So I really enjoy all of that. Yeah. It is endless stuff. Well, thank you for jumping on and thank all of you for jumping on. Casey, I hope your chicken Alfredo goes well. Peter, thank you for jumping on and introducing yourself a little bit. Same with you Maxwell. And thank you Caleb for showing us a little bit. What exactly are you doing Caleb? Putting screws inside this piece of paper for painting purposes. Oh wow. Impressive job I know. Yeah, well, thank you for turning on your camera and letting us see. So. I never got around to actually asking my question, but. Oh, you can ask it now. I'll stay on for you. Okay. Oh, I don't really know if we actually resolved, but I'm wondering, so here's a problem that I've come up with. And it had to do with what Caleb was talking about a little bit. Cause I really missed a lot of conversation. I'll have to go back and listen to it again. But you mentioned that, oh yeah, everybody's got their own catechesis or makes up their own catechesis nowadays, whatever you put it that. Where it's like, but it's a little bit difficult to not to because the world is so full of ideas and no book of, like no actual like catechism book or class is actually gonna hover them all. So it ends up being that you kind of have to, but it's like, but then that kind of puts the problem of authority, like kind of almost necessarily puts the problem of authority almost on your head where it's like, okay, even if you decide to accept an authority, oh, this person knows more about God than I do, then it's still you deciding that that person knows more about God than you do. And so it's a little, I don't know if there's any really real good way to resolve that ultimately, but I was wondering if you, I think that's probably not a good question for- I think it's a great question. And in many ways, I think it is one of the most important questions. We're wrestling with it now. And I think the resolution comes in time as we wrestle with it. I don't know that any of us can just sit down, think out the answer and blurt it out of our mouths. I think as we're doing this together, we begin to act out the resolution of it. And then once we watch ourselves beginning to resolve it, maybe then we'll be able to put words on it and it will be able to be communicated in that way. I think this process is more true of how we actually continue to grow and learn that I think we like to think that there's a really smart person out there who has the answers and they tell us what to do and then we do it. And I think it's kind of the other way around is that first we sort of do it, it's sort of the Rene Girard thing too, because he's like, watch what people do, watch the form of these stories. And then after you watch it enough, you can begin to articulate and say something intelligent about it, which is a helpful part of the process. But Caleb, I think you said it exactly well that right now we are not living in a little town somewhere in Europe where we all go out into the fields and work together in the fields and the wives are washing clothes together and raising kids together. And we come and we assemble in this one church that has a steeple in the middle of the village and so say we all, because we're all working together on the project, we're all feeding from this massive sea of plurality in from our own little individual contexts, trying to make sense of this. And that's part of the reason that I do what I do on this channel with live streams like this, because it's really helpful to hear. And most of my videos are sort of me thinking out loud because I don't know. But I do believe that God is good and God is still God and his Holy Spirit is still at work in the world and his promises are true. So we journey forward together. One of my favorite Heidegger quotes is, abide in hope what is worthy of thought. So remaining in the question. Yeah. And Paul, I know you're trying to land the plane here and Caleb, I don't know if you're on the Discord, but I think it's a good question. My thought going through the catechism was, it's interesting to have the question and answer memorized and initially my thought was, oh, I don't wanna memorize this, this seems too rigid and stringent. It means I can't think for myself. But as I memorize the answer and as I repeat it, it actually opens up the meaning of the question and answer more, I found, rather than that kind of rigidity, it actually frees me up. And then it also shows me that the church is the place to have those questions and answers and that we come with this expectation of finding an answer. We come to the church, the community of believers expecting to find that answer. And so yeah, although there's no like cut and dry, here it is, it's still a process. I think it's kind of a beautiful one. Yeah, no, I agree. Couldn't agree more. Couldn't agree more. All right, so thank you all for joining us today and thank you for coming in and thank you for the chats in the chat room and thank you for your time and attention. Thank you, Paul. All right. Take care. God bless. God bless, bye bye.