https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=qPT_Mfg6XXk

 Hi, this is Paul. As always, this is going to be something of an all over the place video. Many of you have heard about the Elon Musk BBC interview that some people are sort of talking about in terms of the Jordan Peters and Kathy Newman interview. I don't think that this video has the same kind of dramatic entertainment value as the Jordan Peters and Kathy Newman interview, but it is an interesting one nevertheless. Why is it interesting? Well, a lot of people think it's interesting because they have in their mind this implicit narrative of Elon Musk is going to sort of stand up to the man. Yesterday I spoke with Jonathan Peugeot, Benjamin Boyce, and Wockeldistance, and one of the things we talked about is that part of what we have going on in our culture now is we have these narratives of rebellion that are hardly rebellious. Elon Musk, of course, is an extremely formidable individual who one way or another owns, controls, has founded numerous multi-billion dollar organizations. He has an immense amount of fame, wealth, and power in the world, and he's talking to a reporter that most of us have never heard about, but that reporter in a sense represents the BBC, which is one of the oldest, most venerable information distributors that we have in the modern world, and so in a sense we have these proxies. I was quite surprised to find that Dr. John Campbell, who I watched especially at the beginning of the pandemic, who I very much enjoy watching him, in sort of the YouTube custom, I developed a sense of trust about him. He seemed to try as best he could with the expertise that he had, walk through the information available early on in the pandemic, and give some kind of reasoned guidance, and I remember when I started watching him, he had, I think he was probably in the five-figure, low five-figure internet YouTube subscribers, and I see today 2.75 million, and he's had his own journey through questions of knowing and what to believe and how to believe it. I haven't followed him closely for the last couple of years. It does seem, however, that he has serious questions about the narratives. One of the things that John always struck me as was someone who did his best to sift through the information that he had accessible to him, to weigh it against the amount of experience and knowledge that he has accumulated over his life, and to try and share it as honestly as he could with his YouTube audience. If you go over his videos, you'll see that, in fact, in this video, he talks about the fact that, um, about a whole range of, and about his own vaccine injury. Let's see if I can find the place that he talks about it. We're expecting that. Let's talk about something else. Has the BBC changed its COVID misinformation? I'm talking about the BBC's misinformation about COVID. Questions there from Elon Musk. Now let's look at some of the commentary that has been going on about this. This is from one of the leading, most respectable papers in the United Kingdom, actually, arguably the most authoritative paper in the United Kingdom. He says authoritative paper, my sermon this Sunday, which, if you listen to the rough drafts, will be out on Saturday, Lord willing, is about the end of the Gospel of Matthew where Jesus is on a mountain and he says to his disciples, all authority in heaven and earth has been given to me. Authority was very much a topic in my conversation with Benjamin and Wockel and John, that this question of authority in the world, who to believe. I don't remember if it was on the recorded version of our conversation. Wockel, Benjamin and I talked a little bit after. Jonathan had to go to attend to some family things. But you often wind up in this position, and Elon Musk does with the BBC reporter, well, who do you believe? How to believe? Literature is this platform of semi-self-selected voices, also selected via an algorithm, that presents to us an information that we're supposed to take in and we take in this information and we sort of create for ourselves a picture of the world. All sorts of beliefs, impressions, biases, all of those things together. One of the really, I think, impressive and honest elements of John Vervecki's work. And by the way, if you haven't seen the No, No, No thing compiled by Grim Grizz's Little Corner of the Corner, you should see it. I'd never noticed that John Vervecki will sometimes say, No, no, no, no, no, no, no. Off we go. I distracted myself. We try to put these things together. And what we have when we're looking at, maybe it's the beginning of the interview here. Wow. COVID misinformation. Amazing. You've changed the COVID misinformation rules. Has BBC changed its COVID misinformation? The BBC does not set the rules on Twitter, so I'm asking you. No, I'm talking about the BBC's misinformation about COVID. I'm literally asking you about, you changed the labels, the COVID misinformation labels. They used to be a policy and then disappeared. Why do that? COVID is no longer an issue. Does the BBC hold itself at all responsible for misinformation regarding masking and side effects of vaccinations and not reporting on that at all? And what about the fact that the BBC was put under pressure by the British government to change the editorial policy? Are you aware of that? Now what's interesting here is, so who do we have sitting here and what seats are they in and what are their roles? Of course, Elon Musk has purchased Twitter, this platform, and he's sort of speaking for it. But what on earth is Twitter? It's this massive platform with many, many voices that are saying all sorts of things at all different times with all different reasons. Can we possibly say Twitter says X? Now the BBC is a much more constructed organization. If we think of Twitter and the BBC as bodies, the two different bodies are quite different. The BBC has within it, they both have hierarchies, but the BBC in a sense can speak with one voice. Now a little bit of sympathy for the reporter here because this really isn't sort of apples to apples because Elon Musk is speaking for Twitter and he can do it in a sense with authority because he owns the company and has a tremendous amount of power with respect to how the company operates. Yet the thing itself is just this, I mean, is it Legion? It's this multi-vocal thing where people are talking to each other. And of course, the question is, well, these COVID statements are, well, what does this mean? This gets into a lot of long-term conversation about legislation, for example, that the telephone company wasn't responsible for the things that people said when they used the telephone company. But then you had mass media where the television, the old airwave television stations were responsible for the public interest. And of course, the BBC dealt with that differently. You can go back to the rest in its history and they talked about the development of radio and the BBC and the United States and Britain took different policies. Britain very much had much more of a policy of organization and voice. So we would say BBC has an editorial voice. And even though there are many writers for the BBC, the BBC has in itself a much more coherent agency than something like Twitter. But Twitter was, like YouTube, like many other things, was sort of forced to wade in with an editorial voice. It could very well be that after this video, by virtue of some of the topics that I'm playing and some of the videos that I'm playing, that YouTube will deem it necessarily put a little COVID strip beneath this video. And so then you see the it's almost a hybrid animal that we have with YouTube or Twitter or Facebook or any of these social media platforms that they're not like the BBC. And so so whereas it's you're really not apples to apples and two in terms of who you're talking about. Elon's questions land more forcefully because BBC is the type of body that has a more unified coherent spirit behind it that speaks. BBC has policy with editorial board, board of all of these things that sort of govern the speech of BBC. And then so you have this is almost like Pacific Rim where you have one kind of one kind of giant robot or monster like the BBC that is talking to a different kind of robot or monster that is Twitter. And BBC wants to say, hey, you need to take responsibility for the way that your organism is forming the audience out there. Well, what does that mean? That audience out there is this body politic or a consumer. It's this much larger body. And so in a sense, what we have are these two little smaller bodies, spiritual bodies within a larger body arguing about, well, are you doing your due diligence? Are you doing your due diligence? And of course, someone like someone like Dr. John is is in the middle of this. I still want to find the the vaccine injury statement that he made because I found this interesting. Full interviews there. Check it out. Surprisingly, surprisingly, it seems to be still available. Excuse me. Dr. John recognizes an agency at work behind the BBC that might have a degree of reputational maintenance and preservation that it was to do. So surprisingly, this interview is still up. The BBC is still making this interview available. Mr. Musk, again, does the BBC hold itself at all responsible for misinformation regarding and of course, this is Dr. John style with the with the paper and the camera asking and side effects of vaccinations. I'm not reporting on that at all. That's what Mr. Musk said. Now, I must say, watching the larger part of this interview, I'm very, very impressed about how well Mr. Musk is informed about a whole range of whole range of issues. Really quite impressive. And I think we can assume he's fairly well informed. I don't really know who that reporter was from the BBC, but I expect his boss has had a word with him for being perhaps not as prepared as he as he could be. More on that interview later on. And what about the fact, again, direct quotes that the BBC was put under seems to have information that the BBC was put under pressure by the British government. If so, that is rather ominous and would totally undermine, in my view, British democracy. So let's let's hope that's not true. What would the BBC put under pressure? And again, Dr. John is this is part of the reason I've really admired him is very measured. And, you know, he's got these big signs behind him now. He used to have these other big signs about sort of the standard health thing. You know, get get vaccinated, wash your hands, wear a mask. I mean, Dr. John has sort of evolved through this whole thing. And so if you go back and look at the old videos and the new videos, you can sort of see the evolution of of Dr. John and all of this. A question to do, according to Mr. Musk, to change the editorial policy. Are you aware of that? Now, obviously, the BBC being presumably lily white and squeaky clean on this would come back and say, no, this is complete rubbish. But as far as the Telegraph article was concerned, the BBC declined to comment on Mr. Musk's claims. And again, the BBC imagined to be a body with a degree of consciousness and agency. Why? Why wouldn't they comment on Mr. Musk's claims? Why on earth not? Mr. Musk previously spoken about having major side effects after the second Covid vaccination. I became aware of my assumed adverse reaction to the vaccine after my third dose. Mr. Musk was aware of his after his second second dose. And he says this left him feeling as if he was dying for several days. So I really hope he's made a full recovery. And again, now there's a degree to which, you know, even someone being out in public talking about a very valid personal experience is considered on a platform in certain areas. Well, you're not supposed to share this kind of information. If what I consider to be my vaccine injury, I haven't made a full recovery. I need to take blood pressure medications now. And that just started a few months after my third dose. Temple correlation, of course, of course, temple correlation. And, you know, again, Dr. John has has always to me proven to be very honest, but it shows. Something of the end of the age of innocence that mass media had with us. And, of course, that that age of innocence was was on the heels of the days before mass media, when our information came one to another. Of course, you had the printing press before that. But I think in many ways, people were living much more off of the sort of. The the combination of of two worlds. Someone in the last interview in a comment said, I should watch of what's that apologetics question with the guy who went to jail for assaulting his father with a hammer? You'll put it in the comments section. So I went to that and he was, you know, making some commentary on this Mark Zuckerberg, Lex Fridman conversation. And so I sort of hunted it down and listened to it myself and and liked what something the way that Mark Zuckerberg made this comment very much upper and lower register. Not just based on who you happen to be next to. I think that's what the Internet is already doing, is allowing you to be able to be able to do what the Internet is already doing, is allowing you to spend more of your time, not physically proximate. I mean, I always think when you think about the the metaverse, people ask this question about the real world. It's like, do the virtual world versus the real world? And it's like, no, the real world is a combination of the virtual world and the physical world. But I think over time, as we get more technology, the physical world is becoming less of a percent of the real world. And I think that that opens up a lot of opportunities for people because, you know, you can you can work in different places. You can stay more close to stay closer to people who are in different places. That's good. Removing barriers of geography and then barriers of language. Yeah, that's that's a beautiful vision. That's a beautiful vision, is it? We're not all that sure it is. And the BBC, obviously, with Elon Musk and Twitter, isn't sure that it is. You know, it's everybody likes all of this. Everybody likes all of this lovely, flowery thought about limitlessness until you're actually living in limitlessness. And then suddenly you realize, no, no, no, they like diversity as long as diversity is exactly what they expect to find it. Or all of the surprises are pleasant. And that's not the way it goes. Big ridiculous question. And so what Zuckerberg says here, when he says the virtual world and the physical world, I don't think virtual virtual is the best name for it. It is it is much more it could be it could be the story verse, the spiritual world. We can say it that way. There's lots of different ways to say it. It's it's very difficult for us. The physical world is easier for us to sort of pin down, we think. But that is even receding in sort of a modernist frame. Is it the BBC? And previously banned for things like hate speech. Do you think you prioritize freedom of speech over misinformation and hate speech? Well, you know, who's to say that something is misinformation? Who is the arbiter of that? Is it the BBC? You're literally asking me. Yes. Well, no, you are the arbiter on Twitter because you own Twitter. Yes, I'm saying who is to say that one person's misinformation is another person's information? Now, this could devolve obviously into just sort of nihilism. None of us can know anything in skepticism. But of course, as a process question, is the owner of the platform responsible then to wade into any information that is being transmitted by it? Is it the internet? Is it the internet? Is it the internet? Is the internet responsible for all of the things being transmitted by it? Is there a burden of responsibility? They go into that. They go into that further. Jordan Peterson, back when he was talking about ThinkSpot and developing a platform in which the only rules about speech would be with respect to what is legal in the United States. Something along those lines. CERN is one of formation because we know that all of these bodies that are out there, whether they be Twitter, which is this multi-vocal hodgepodge assemblage of information going back and forth, and every single user who goes to Twitter by virtue of who they follow and who the algorithm sends their way, every different person has a different experience of Twitter than any other different person. And of course, you have the question, he must depend on himself. He says, well, you know, we took out bots and so there's less information. Well, would bots have, bots are usually sort of amplifiers for certain actors because, again, going back to Sam's conversation, bots don't care. Actors care. Bots are tools that are used by actors in order to amplify certain kinds of information. But again, we have these two images of two different beasts. One is the BBC and one is Twitter and they're both nested within this larger body politic. And of course, there's body politic in the United States, body politic in the kingdom and in other countries. And this is what we're trying to conceptualize and we're using narrative, we're using names, we're trying to manage in very rough terms trying to think about all of this. We are deeply against, Zuckerberg says, well, it's virtual. It's not really virtual. It's much more story-worth. We're nested in narratives and against, it's not simply narratives. It's a much different thing. Now, a little while ago, Nate said, you know, oh, Paul, you really, I don't know if he said it to me directly or he said it on a channel or he said it on Twitter. I don't know how, I don't even know how Nate, I haven't met Nate Heil in person. I really believe Nate Heil is a skinned-bound human being like I am and not a construction of some AI genius who's decided to create Nate Heil and Grail Country. But he recommended this book to me and I know a lot of you recommend books to me and one person, I suggested that, you know, colonizing someone and getting me to read the book you want me to read, it's not a terribly straightforward thing. And in many respects, I've told the story before, part of the origin story of my channel is that I wanted Jordan Peterson to read C.S. Lewis's book, Miracles, and I thought, well, I'll just send it to him. I'll figure out, you know, I'll send it to University of Toronto and this were early days, of course, before he left University of Toronto. And I'll just send him a copy. And then I thought for a moment, I said, that's a really dumb idea. How many books is that poor man getting? And then there was an event that he went to, a very early event that he went to San Francisco, the simulation conference, some of you might remember that, some of the people from our meetup went and I thought about taking a copy of Miracles to give to him there and I didn't. And then when I got to the venue, I noticed that a lot of people brought books to give to Jordan Peterson and it's like, yeah, you know, colonizing someone, colonizing their mind, their heart, their life, their channel, their influence, not an easy thing. It's a subtle thing. It has to be done. But anyway, you basically have to cultivate a relationship and Nate Hiel has recommended many books to me that I have not read. Some of them have even shown up in my office and I've spoken about some of them, but he just had to say, tradition and apocalypse by David Bentley Hart and I went out and got it right away, partly simply because of the title and was very glad I did. It begins right off the bat, it seems clear to me that the conception of tradition in the theological sense, however lucid and cogent it might appear to the eyes of faith is incorrigibly obscure and incoherent and you can, we talked a little bit about tradition in my conversation with Benjamin and Wockel and Jonathan and Jonathan quite rightly noted that while in church, especially the Orthodox church, you have a tradition or what is a tradition? Tradition is what I often call the first draft of how we begin to approach the world. Tradition is how we go about things and in fact without tradition we do nothing and when John Vervecky says, no, no, no, I should just play that darn thing. It is so funny. I'm not going to get this out of my head until I play it. That's what I am about to say. No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no not at all! Right? No! I mean nobody's.. no nobody is sort of worried about the epistemic status of knowing no, no, no, no, no, no that's the way we are going to deal with this. That's my favorite one, the no, no, no, no, no, no, no and all of this was so much love, love. I mean, we like like the like when they mean to me with my this is Paul, this is Paul and then all. No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, that's a mistake. No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, or whatever. Yes, Yes. Yes. Yes. No, no, No, No, No, No, No, no, No, No, No, No, no, no, no, I think that's right. No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no. No, no. And it had to get that out of my system. Sorry. So even John Verveckis, no, no, no. I mean probably one of his parents did this or someone formative in his life did this or it's just emerged from him and we and we're all I remember as a growing up person, people would look at me and look at my father and say he walks like him. He sounds like him. I mean they call me little Rev because I've called my father Rev so they call me little Rev because I was a lot like him. The apple doesn't fall far from the tree. We all begin with some sort of tradition but when you come to the church, well some churches especially are all about the tradition and if you pause and ask yourself well what exactly are we talking about here and that's sort of what David Bentley Hart does here. The things begin to emerge. This, Edward argues, not true. It's true not only to the vague popular version of that concept that a good many believers harbor but rarely think about. It is true also of the version of what many perhaps most Christian theologians have tended to consciously to adopt since the publication in 1845 of the first edition of John Henry Newman's essay on the development of Christian doctrine which more or less set the agenda for discussion on this topic and to which no alternative account for a very great significance has yet been proposed. To this day in fact the only Maurice Blondel's history of dogma in 1904 has made anything like a substantial advance in theological reflection on the issues raised in the text and then more a supplement than an alternative to Newman's argument. This is unsurprising I suppose in as much as tradition in this specifically theological acceptance is a very new idea. Relatively considered with no deep roots in the tradition of the church but the general neglect of the topic leaves a fairly enormous unresolved question in Christianity though lying quite conspicuously and troublingly open. When we speak of Christian tradition what are we really talking about? Can we really prove the existence of and then in fact identity a particular living continuous and internally coherent phenomena that corresponds to that phrase and will in any attempt to do so evidence only a product of pure historical fortuity consisting this is the way David Bentley Hart writes and he's a beautiful writer but he's a dense writer and a thick writer and but to summarize it he says basically well you know we so blithely say tradition and if we would stop to think about this thing well things very quickly get more complex and he begins to its first chapter is tradition and traditionalism and he begins to sort of unpack this thing and talk about it and so when you say you look at Twitter which is a fairly new animal a fairly new body and it's like we we don't really have any idea what's what on earth is going on with something like Twitter do we really have something in true in history that corresponds to what we have like Twitter whereas the BBC is an animal or a body or a monster that we're quite more accustomed to. I don't just want to raise this point about tradition he has in this chapter one of the most helpful little segments that sort of grabbed me in terms of a paragraph or two that gets at the sense of what it's like to be formed by a religion and to live within and again words escape us the narrative of that religion the world view of that religion most of the language that we have doesn't really adequately in my opinion sort of get at what we're talking about so right away in the sentence I'm gonna have to pull up the the Kindle dictionary because I don't even know the word that he's using admittedly the entire topic seems rather rich sure she um meaning exotic rare obscure a few linguistic terms are perhaps a bit rich rich sure she um for the average reader so admittedly I'm just going to substitute another word in there so that the sentence makes sense to those of us who um are not as well educated or literate as David Bentley Hart admittedly this entire topic might seem a bit obscure exotic rare from the vantage point of the ordinary believer few of the faithful ever find themselves obliged to delve down into hit into the history of their creed they have better things to do and so are perfectly willing to accept the catechism they have received and even that with a little as with as little attention as possible to any of its most prominent features and when I read this I thought wow yes that's right because as a minister who is making these crazy YouTubes for all of you really esoteric people out there that are have one way or another been sort of dislocated and dislodged from your structure of knowability and the the community that you were raised in you are set on a different course now I've been diving into the jk rolling podcast and this is done by Megan Phelps Roper and so that led that led me into diving into her story a little bit now of course Westboro Baptist was famous for a while and in her words in the podcast it's sort of been overshadowed because in some ways the rest of the internet has caught up to it and so oh crazy little obscure church protesting military funerals because of American policy policies with respect to lgbtq communities or individuals whatever but in the digging I learned some things because I had this sort of low resolution assumed inherited biased assumption about who these Westboro Baptist are and when listening to this woman I discovered no in fact I knew nothing about them they're they're in many ways quite a bit more interesting than I thought they were to be in with Hello good evening um my name is Megan Phelps Roper and I grew up born and raised in the Westboro Baptist Church in Topeka Kansas it's a congregation founded by my grandfather Fred Phelps and consisting almost entirely of my extended family now that part I knew I knew it was a very small church consisting of an extended family and and that should have been a towel because most again the the biased propagandist assumptions that I inherited was that there's just this tiny little okay Kansas that I expected kind tiny little very orthodox too tightly wound Baptist Church that somewhere in another figured out that they could get a lot of publicity and do a lot of things just by going and making signs at military funerals and getting on the news and ticking a lot of people off I was not prepared for the amount of education the seriousness the rationality the clarity the determined nature of their biblis ism that launched them into this place and because this woman here speaking at the heart at the Oxford Union is clearly a woman of considerable poise and intelligence my family is full of lawyers they are incredibly intelligent and well-educated you know loving wonderful people ah well in other words she she grew up in the bosom of these people and with everything let's say accepting making very effective signs because actually if you look at their signs those signs were very effective and you know that because if you drive down the street and you look at panhandlers people who are in one way or another I suppose vying for their lives their signs are dramatically ineffective these people are very intelligent they knew how to make signs and apparently they were very loving and they knew how to have wonderful intergenerational families and they're in fact extremely reasonable and rational because they'd say here it is in the Bible we are going to do this in this way to try and affect the world in a particular manner who also believe that the Bible is the infallible word of God and that Westboro has the only correct interpretation of it the the second part infallible she didn't say inerrant and I'm sure very consciously so and that Westboro has the only interpretation well that's interesting what that led them to do was in 1991 when I was five years old was to start protesting at a local park in Topeka, Kansas we started just holding signs just about you know the gay community but pretty quickly everyone outside the church became a target for our message everyone outside was a sinner who fell short of the glory of God and our job our duty our the only way for us to show our love for our neighbor was to go out and warn them that they were all headed for hell and to explain to them exactly all the ways that they were sinners and and that for us you know the definite like as I said the definition of love is how it was framed for me there's a passage now again this is very effective very reasonable in the book of Leviticus the first time love thy neighbor appears in the Bible and it says thou shalt not hate thy brother in thine heart but thou shalt in any wise rebuke him and not suffer as sin upon him thou shalt not avenge nor bear any grudge against the children of thy people but thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself so for us that just that was a very clear indication that the way that you showed love for other people was to explain to them why they were going to hell and again it makes perfect sense Penn Jillette basically made the exact same argument you can find that video on YouTube as well that they would have an opportunity to repent if God would would give them that gift so that was one huge part of my my life my life and my family's lives were all organized around this picketing ministry going out and standing on public sidewalks with those with picket signs and but then there was also this you know the very you know loving home environment I am the third of 11 children you know we played video games and read books and watched movies in other words they they weren't sort of the stereotype of the completely enveloped these were very impressive people it sounds like and went to public school some people look at the fact that we went to public school and you know went to college and were educated and wonder how it's possible to believe in the things that we believed in the 21st century even in spite of being exposed to every influence outside of outside of those beliefs that that were we were indoctrinated with from the time you know we were children and the only answer that I have is that you know it's like being inoculated against outside ideas okay so they that was that was the world in which their their rough draft was created I also found this this very interesting interview on a channel called Jewish News Weekly with 33 subscribers and the interview is 13 years old and has 186,000 views just to show you that subscriber count and view count don't necessarily correlate and this is the same woman on the street with the signs 13 years ago and again this is again you have all of the biases and propagandist infiltrations that you know this this woman would have never seen a dentist and she would have been home-schooled and all of these things and it's simply not true how long have you been a member of this church um I was five years old and started thinking and now I'm gonna be 24 on Sunday you got involved because of your parents how did you get involved your parents yeah I've been attending west pro-baptist church since I was born okay just like all the rest of my siblings there's 11 my parents have 11 kids and where are you in the birth order oh I'm sorry I can't hear you where are you in the birth order I'm third I'm the oldest girl and when you were five years old were you holding signs yeah I said when I turn six I'm gonna go to every single picket but I couldn't do it all day um and so when you're five it's really simple you know you learn as you go you learn these words just read the words and so again perfectly lovely person standing up holding these signs back to David Bentley Hart few of the faithful ever find themselves obliged to delve into the history of their creed you know she probably had done so more than most led by her grandfather and her family that were that little church they had better things to do and so are perfectly willing to accept the catechism as they as it was received and even that with as little attention as possible to any of its most prominent features neither by the same token are most believers traditionalists since that too would require a sort of concern for detail that is irrelevant to their faith I think that's really helpful because what he did was sort of distinguish tradition from tradition as such from this first draftness that we have and and that first draftness sort of inhabits a part of it and I think it molds and shapes our world and our perspective perspective of the world and as a child one way or another your parents probably you sort of absorb the first draft that you that you receive from your parents most believers more inhabit their religion than reflectively assent to it I thought that I thought his language is really good here they more inhabit their religion than reflectively assent to it and I think that gets at the quest for the spiritual home ideas we talked about with with John and Jonathan earlier this week I should highlight that because I will probably want to find it later at least in the way that one might assent to a simple proposition in other words yes and we talk a lot about propositional belief and assent and people it's just it's just part of it this is just the way things are in some very real and not at all dishonorable sense their belief rests upon the experience of belief only I thought that was really insightful too thus in a way that would be altogether scandalous to the average traditionalist or integralist fascist or religious scold such believers you know we could we could say that west borough baptist was a pretty extreme example of religious scold such believers are largely indifferent to a great many of the dogmatic oh David the way you write a pern a a pertinence an accessory or other item associated with a particular activity or style of living dogmatic up pertinences of their faith most doctrines are not things they believe discreetly but are instead things that they accept only as nebulously included within the totality of the faith as a whole yes I think that's right few for instance truly believe anything so degrading obscene cruel psychotic and in fact unscriptural as the notion of the reality of a hell of eternal torment again this is David Bentley Hart's take on this of course but he does have a point because if you ask people about hell they will many Christians will say yes and but they don't act like west borough baptist now you could challenge west borough baptist not just on let's say their doctrine but very much on their practice and you could say if in fact your motivation is genuinely love do you really think that this sign ministry will actually accomplish what it is you want to accomplish that now what's interesting is that if you continue with megan the world needed my grandfather if you continue with her story you find that well she goes on twitter and she gets on twitter to debate these things and what if you're wrong and and basically team winsome wins the day with her she begins to discover that she begins doing this uncovering that David Bentley Hart is is going to is going to talk about so they don't believe in hell at least not with any immediacy of conscious awareness much less with an imaginative consideration of what so foul ability i wish he had used this example because the example itself is you can use a much less triggering example here to make the point i think better because once in the very sentence that you want to look at the dynamic you actually provoke the response that you're going to talk about a little bit later you kind of undo the the you kind of undo your point that you make in the sentence to do so would be to invite psychosis or to accomplish the total destruction of one's own moral intelligence okay David we'll set that aside most however vaguely accept the idea of an indistinct unreflexive almost symbolic form as little more than something remote and shadowy on the far horizon hazily and hyperbolically defining the outer edges of their spiritual sits in laban that's setting in life and if you've gone to seminary when you read theological books you and commentaries you learn all about sits in laban for the large majority of believers the larger inventory of doctrines is little more than a backs background stage scenery that allows them to play out the drama of religious life in some kind of coherent setting rather than set off starkly or vestiginously against an existential void and this suffices for a life of faith so long as one does not get bored and begin inspecting the stage too closely okay what is he saying with that for the large majority of believers the average inventory of doctrines is more like is is little more than backstage scenery that allows them to play out the drama of religious life and so she grows up in this church and you've got the protests and you've got the dogmas and it's and it's all sort of there and it sort of sits nicely until something's going to provoke a shaking of it and then maybe you're going to have to start to examine some of these things more closely and of course David Bentley Hart wants you to examine your belief in hell as eternal conscious torment or something of the like and this suffices for a life of faith so long as one does not get bored and begin inspecting the stage too closely if one does that all the scenery the trees the distant hills the quaint villages nestled into the fold of the valley the white steeple in its humble church and so forth will be revealed as just so much purely functional crudely daubed pasteboard i think he's pushing his point a little hard but the point is this you will begin to discover that your your your faith is functional perhaps not tested but also not a bad thing or thing to be maligned and if in fact you begin to examine some things you will find that as resolution goes up complexity goes up and you're going to have to do quite a bit more work to maintain what for you was a sort of benignly accepted vision beforehand and and this in fact is when we talk about idodidax in the faith this this is this is partly what goes on now hopefully your church or tradition or people will be able to assist you because of course many have gone there before and you can read let's say c.s lewis's a pilgrim's regress there's a lot of this in a pilgrim's regress at that point one will no longer be able to proceed with perfect innocence and it will become necessary to make an explicit decision along three possible options one to commit oneself to forcing each feature of the background in other words now i've got to go through and really weigh these things and and in our language come to my own conclusions and ascent because of them and many people in fact do that tree hill village steeple and so forth into the foreground hoping to prove that all of this is in fact really what it purports to be to to resign oneself to a faith purged of the comforting illusion of cozy close horizons and familiar landmarks that they're sort of so so the first one is is something of a quest the second one is something of a a perspectival shift third to forsake belief altogether and of course people do that now i would want to jump in with the point that tim keller often makes which is so often when these subtraction stories are told we imagine that forsaking beliefs is sort of leaving let's say an overly furnished room and leaving a house let's say and now you're out into bright skies and blue skies and now you see the world as it is that's sort of the the rationalist new atheist subtraction story and i think actually keller is quite right in making the point that no actually you're just going into a different room because usually what happens and i think this is i haven't really investigated her story enough she basically i would imagine to one degree or another joins a much more mainstream and then will in some ways sort of then once again settle down to what he describes the trees the distant hills the quaint village nestled in the fold of the valley the white steeple and its humble church because he could only live at a certain resolution and in fact the world as we continue to make the point is too complex for us to actually go all the way at any one point or another and instead what we have are individuals that will will only go so far and no more to one point or another if only it were possible for everyone to enjoy the blissful naivete of incurious belief without it denigrating into fundamentalism or morbid formalism or some other impediment to healthy moral and intellectual growth then perhaps the incensed anxiety that produces traditionalism and the tragic disappointment that destroys faith could both be avoided but as newman understood an unsustainable fiction sooner or later by definition loses its power to persuade and so he set out to prevent disestablishment by trying to demonstrate that however indistinct impressionistic and unprepossessing that stage background may often seem there is a depth of reality behind it that it symbolically expresses one may turn a critical eye to those crudely rendered images without surrendering to disillusionment if one is at the same time willing to look through them to the living truth they represent he might he may well have been right but in making his argument he trained his gaze on only one horizon of that landscape and that the receding horizon of the past as a result all he truly succeeded in demonstrating was that again it is impossible to defend the legitimacy of christian tradition simply by recourse to the historical record as though it were clearly the re the record of an ex in ex exorably unfolding the positive belief already wholly contained in the most primordial moments of christian revelation historical scholarship by itself provides no evidence of such a thing or of any discernible rational unity within the course of christian tradition that one could confidently claim has been sustained intact amid the flux of time and cultures and the record has only grown clearer since newman's time and then he's going to talk about the relationship between tradition and history history in the modern sense and tradition and he's going to go into that and now all of this long discourse is to hopefully illustrate that whether it's as as david bentley hart calls it the and calls it very the tree the hill the village the steeple and so forth this this this world as we see it which we absolutely must have in order to continue to process the world because much of the world has to sort of hold still that's sort of the point of the frame problem in order to process bit by bit by bit well now we have to process covid now we have to process west borough baptist church now we have to process transgenderism and jk rolling now we have to process jonathan peugeot and his symbolic world now we have to process the religion that's not a religion in john vervecky now we have to process jordan peterson you have to leave a number of things sort of stayed but all of these things are in fact deeply connected to one another and so often what provokes a transformation and a pursuit of higher definition with respect to the tree or the hill or the steeple or the village in fact because all of this stuff is indeed connected and part of the quandary that we find ourselves in is that these set pieces or at least there has to be a certain degree of settledness for most of the picture for us to be able to process the individual elements of the picture that are connected to the whole and whereas it would be awfully convenient in a sense if the bbc were the tree and the steeple and the and the town and all of those things then you can simply well that's that's the static element that you can sort of keep in place in order to process all of the change going about you in the world whereas obviously for someone like dr john campbell for someone like elon musk well that monster has fallen and what we have turned to now is something we have gone sort of from a bbc monarchy to a twitter parliament where there's all of these voices now of course twitter has an unbelievably large and complex parliament such that if it were not for the limitedness that any single account and the algorithm that in some ways tries to guide you through it it would simply be unworkable now lest you think i have lost my interest in the roman catholic church or the papacy because again for me that the papacy is in some ways a a window into this entire dynamic as opposed to let's say the christian reform church with its synod and protestant churches that have um we you know we don't have a pope let's say and and this in some ways is mirrored by the american system that has house and senate and president or a parliament system and and even a constitutional monarchy where the the king of england stays out of politics probably in the way that his mother did i've i'm continuing to go through vatican one and now i'm following john w o'malley's what happened at vatican two and o'malley is i didn't know who o'malley was but o'malley is a very accomplished scholar president of georgetown yeah a big deal and so he writes about vatican one and he writes about vatican two and one of the things that you immediately notice let's say if you look at vatican one which happens in the middle of the 19th century and in fact david david bentley hart talks about this talks about o'malley and this book in fact in terms of the big 19th century for the roman catholic church and then you look at vatican two the council met in four distinct periods in the fall of every year from 1962 to 1965 each of these periods which lasted roughly 10 weeks so you have four successive years 10 week sessions the first men under the pontificate of pope john the 13th and the last under under three the last three under his successors paul the sixth i think um paul this you know from i have vague memories of the pope before of popes before john paul the second almost important as the actual meetings of some 2200 bishops in the basilica of saint peter in rome during these periods was the work done before the council 2200 bishops this was a massive massive meeting i look at this this meeting that peterson wants to put together in london on reformation day in 2023 and two 2200 bishops but the 2200 bishops are only the start and the things that they have to deal with are just so massive the more immediate context is modernity or more concretely the long 19th century for which the catholic church stretched from the french republic until the end of the pontificate of pius the 12th in 1958 the french revolution and the philosophy that undergirded it traumatized catholic officialdom through much of that long century the council was an attempt to any if you read vatican one you know vatican one sort of is this there europe is just coming unglued and radically changing fast and the church is trying to preserve its sort of monarchical way of going about things and what it does with ultramontanism it sort of doubles down on monarchy and gives the pope primacy and supremacy and from someone who sort of was able to take the take the doctrine and dogma of the church and speak it into someone whose job was to form it and give it back to the church so you have a difference in flow and roman catholics out there who know way more about this than i do which is probably any roman catholic out there please accept my humble forgiveness for the ways that i am getting this stuff wrong the council was an attempt to heal certain aspects of the church's history in that period and that's slipping out of its vestigial weight vatican two was heir however to other aspects of the long 19th century such as the development of biblical liturgical patristic and philosophical scholarship the competition with the protestants and foreign missions and the rise of socialism and communism in the 19th century they're they're wrestling with just the end of monarchy and now they have to deal with how many different kinds of non-monarchy are out there in the world and what are they going to say to it and this is coming at the end of the second world war where the world was saved from fascism and later through the cold war you know with the with the with the help of the roman catholic church and john paul the second from communism and and very much those deaths were dealt by what in a sense were the kinds of the kinds of political systems that arose thanks to the protestant reformation for the inner workings of the church no aspect of the 19th century was more important than the new prominence of the papacy in every area of catholic life of all the previous councils therefore perhaps none even more directly into the debates of vatican two than vatican one 1869 to 1870 because of its definition of papal primacy and infallibility the third and most specific context is the period belonging to the second world war and continuing up to the opening of the council although this context overlaps with the long 19th century when viewed with an ecclesiastical lens when viewed through a political and cultural lens it marks such a significant changes worldwide that it needs to be considered as a distinctive period this is the era of the cold war which reached a perilous intensity in the cuban missile crisis just a few days after the council opened for almost two weeks the world held its breath as the threat of nuclear annihilation seemed about to be realized and there they are in the vatican in Rome talking about other things this period saw the end of colonialism which had a great impact on the missionary enterprises of all churches it was the time when christian democracy emerged in countries recently under fascist dictatorships and it was the time when the western world finally had to face the horror and implications of the holocaust these and other factors led politicians and churchmen to believe that a new age was dawning that needed new solutions and approaches now a lot of that new age and new solutions and approaches are are under continued challenge by more traditional elements of the church all the issues the council addressed must of course be taken seriously nonetheless there are some more significant areas than others the best place to begin is the topic dealt with in the in the 16 final documents of the council they indicate 16 areas of special concern literally liturgy education ecumenism and the rest that is obviously but nonetheless important to keep in mind as i suggest however during and after the council nobody thought that vatican 2 said about the media compared to importance with what is said about church-state relationships or churches relationship to muslim and jews the relationship of tradition to scripture also emerged early on as a hot issue and it continued to be such through the council underneath the contention on this seemed technical theological question lurked questions of wider significance first the prescription of value of earlier doctrinal statements in this instance the decree of the council of trent on the subject and second the way the teaching authority of the church relates to scripture closely associated with scripture tradition questions moreover was the question of how far modern methods of literary and historical interpretation were legitimate as applies to the bible and what you see now is just in terms of the scale and size the church now at this point wasn't just hadn't just sort of colonized latin america and africa and asia but now those bishops from the rest of the world are coming to rome as full bishops waiting to be heard and this continues today they have their own perspectives and how do you manage this with a tradition that is just as large and weighty as that one the quantity of documentation reflected the immensity of almost every other aspect of the council in july 15 1962 the vatican secretariat of state set out among 2800 invitations to persons with a right to participate fully in the deliberate the deliberation of the council i believe i was reading in the ivan illich book that he was invited but did not attend 85 cardinals eight patriarchs 533 archbishops 2131 bishops 26 abbots and 68 superiors superiors general of religious orders of men all but a few hundred impeded by ill health or their government's refusal to let them attend showed up to the opening of the council after the opening days the numbers of persons present in the basilica varied considerably but generally when there are about 2400 council fathers participating at any given time 2400 in a meeting the christian reform church has a senate of of almost 200 and that often seems unwieldy a total of 2860 attended part or all of the four periods in contrast to this is the contrast to other events 750 bishops participated in vatican one so a century later the number goes from 750 which is large indeed all the way up to 2800 the council of trent as well on a well at the least well attended of all councils opened up with just 29 bishops i've sat in council meetings of 24 elders and that was too much even later at this largest session the number of voting members at trent barely exceeded 200 the bishops who attended vatican two came from 116 different countries with more or less the following geographic distribution 36 from europe 34 from the americas 20 from asia and oceania and 10 from africa the communist governments of china north korea and north vietnam prohibited entire episcopates from attending the european governments behind the iron curtain also made a participation difficult or impossible with about seven percent of the world's catholics north america somewhat overrepresented in that it provided more than 12 percent of the bishops the meetings were held in the central nave of st peters basilica despite the huge proportions of that space 2500 square meters it was barely sufficient to hold all the attendees the nave was outfitted to provide almost 3000 spaces 102 for cardinals 70 for patriarchs 26 for the general secretary of the council 2440 for the bishops and archbishops 200 for the parrot tie and 130 for observers and guests from other churches the observers and guests sat in a in a in a tribune reserved specifically for them right under the statue of saint wong gynas nearer to the president's table than even the cardinals the best seats in the house two catered stations or coffee bars no alcoholic beverages were set up in the basilica and laboratories were installed in both sides both inside and outside st peters this massive thing and so now again to come all the way back to where we began we're dealing with trying to figure out how to organize ourselves how to organize the bodies that are forming us and and how to in fact know almost anything in this world through these bodies it's amazing we know anything at all except for the fact that we we have to rely on the first drafts updated bit by bit moment by moment person by person that's the only way it seems we can live and these moments of transformation when for some mysterious reason things sort of move in other directions now as a calvinist you can you can just sort of put that all under the holy spirit the god of creation that that works through time and in time but when you see whatever it is that twitter is and again twitter as a as a social media platform is relatively small here let's ask ai facebook 2.9 billion youtube 2.2 billion instagram 2 billion linkedin 883 million twitter 217 million all of this fuss over trinity well twitter well why well it's because all of the bbc people and all of the politicians and and all of those types they're paying attention and participating in twitter and and so what we're seeing in something like this is the thinking of the world the consciousness congress of the world debating ideas battling them back and forth trying to figure out how to get a handle on what is real and what is true and how to live now of course the church has been doing this far far longer the tweet from my friend paul anleitner i've been in vocational christian ministry for nearly 20 years and here's what i can tell you whatever traditional religious denominations a person may claim to be affiliated with these are the real religious denominations that are actually shaping america's lives disney fox news compass nbc universal daily wire plus i think daily wire plus should be really happy to be in that list because if i would put lists it would be uh i don't think they'd make the list sorry and i know a lot of you out there cnn warner brothers discovery apple goes goes far beyond that that's probably enough for now so yeah there it is leave a comment