https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=-fZQjDd1duA

 Hi, this is Paul. You might hear hi, this is Paul twice in this video. I don't usually do two videos over two days. It often happens when I get into a video and I get to a point that I don't like it, but it still sticks with me and so I mull over it overnight and then I listen to some more of it. Some of the content that I've been looking at on my walk and I get some new thoughts and so that's where you get what you're about to get now because you'll notice I'm wearing a different shirt. I'm recording this on a different day, but I'm going to pick up this video of Balaji Srinivasan and Tim Ferriss at a different point in the conversation. I was continuing to edit pieces of this video that I'm not going to carry through, but this gets into, again, I sort of begin this video again, replaying some of the Verveki podcast where he quite openly acknowledges that this largest frame, the religious frame, he's going to stay agnostic on and just going to continue to work on the stuff within. That very much gets into the dead reckoning question. I think part of what's really interesting here is that we sort of have two sides in this emerging, this young emerging thing that's coming out on the internet. You have the Paul Kings North side and the Mary Harrington side that are deeply resistant to limits. Then you have this other side which is basically making an argument that we're always trying to better and improve, and so why don't we just continue pushing this forward? It's Balaji Srinivasan that says a big part of the, a big thing that's stopping us is this assumption that we can fly too high. So, yeah, I'm just going to have this be an introduction, and then you'll see yesterday's me walk through some of this, and then I'll be back in this shirt. For those of you who are listening to the video, sorry, but there'll be telltale signs of what I say in terms of what day that I'm recording this. Hi, this is Paul. This was the video that I posted. It would be yesterday if I in fact post this coming video on Friday. This was the thumbnail. A big part of this channel has always been my quest to explore in higher resolution the lines between the categories that are pretty significant for the church and to a degree significant for our culture. Between Christian and non-Christian, between believer and unbeliever, why someone would take their time, sacrifice their money, give their lives, their reputation, their loyalty to a church. It's for that reason that books like Tom Holland's Dominion are a big deal to me because they begin to explore the underside of what we believe and how we behave. Because for many people in the world, especially in the United States, the world is a place where we can explore what we believe and how we behave. Because for many people in the world, especially in this secular age, church going seems like, you know, perhaps just a rather incidental aspect of a person's life. Is it sort of like whether they bowl or go to belong to a shooting club or are cat fanciers or something of this nature? And so the questions that I think about that revolve around faith have a lot to do with that. And especially as, you know, for example, in this little corner of the internet, a variety of things developed that I hadn't, you know, had never really anticipated like, you know, a relationship with an orthodox icon carver and a relationship with a non-Christian. A relationship with a non-theist professor from the University of Toronto of Cognitive Science. If you had asked me before 2018 what cognitive science was, I'd say I'll have to Google it and find out. So, a big part of this has to do with miracles. I want to replay this little bit from the podcast that John Vervecki participated in because I thought it nicely, and now that we, I think we have a better container, Lord willing, John and I will meet in Thunder Bay and I think that will strengthen our relationship and the strengthening of the relationship will produce better and healthier conversations. And he's demonstrated a real capacity for genuineness and openness and curiosity and exploration. And so, you know, it was just fascinating to me how, you know, very naturally in this conversation here, the topic came up about, you know, what is the biggest frame? Where is it? Where does it go? Like that's where my mind goes. It's like, oh great, we're going to somewhere better. I'm like, where is that? Well, I mean, there's two things that I'd want to pull apart. And some people, so I've been up until now, I've been talking about what scientists, like psychologists and cognitive scientists, neuroscientists, philosophers call meaning in life, this sense of connectedness that whenever people are given a choice, do you want this sense of connectedness or not have it, they'll reliably say, I want the connectedness. I want to be, you know, deeply connected to myself, to other people and to the world. I want to be connected to things that have a meaning other than just how they're, you know, relevant to my personal preferences. This is why people have children, et cetera. So when I'm talking that, I feel confident talking about when you're talking about this other thing, the meaning of life, like if there's some plan for you, I'm at best agnostic. I don't see plans in the way the natural world unfolds. Evolution is non-teleological. Physics is non-teleological. So I suspect, and I suppose this will piss off some of the religious people who might be listening, I suspect that there isn't a T loss in the universe. Now, maybe this will give more comfort to religious people. Nevertheless, one of the things that I think we, like I said before. So one of the things that interests me there is, of course, the secular definition of religion becomes then that line of demarcation, that religious people have ideas and views and beliefs and practices and bodies of knowledge that they claim, frame in the story to the largest degree that we can sort of imagine. I don't think wisdom is optional for us. And I think we are all individually and collectively obligated to try and become as wise as we can, where wise doesn't mean saying obscure, profound things like in a French accent while smoking a cigarette or whatever. Wise means what we've been talking about. It means this comprehensive capacity to overcome foolishness, to enhance flow, to reliably engender connectedness between us and the world, between us and other people. And then if you say, well, why should we do that? I don't have any answer to you other than, right, that's just what we most deeply love. And where is that all going? I don't think it's going anywhere else than doing the following. Taking a biological primate and reliably through agapic love and through good presentation of a colleges of practice that cultivate wisdom and turning that primate into a person in a community of persons. And then if you ask me, why should we do that? I simply say to you, if I had to choose between a universe that had persons in it and one that doesn't, I think that one that has persons in it is a better universe. And if you ask me why, I can't give you any answer to that. And I wonder about anybody who had an answer for that. Yeah, well, yeah, I mean, I guess it's probably the only way that the universe can exist. At least in our individual experience, because we need to have the projector to create it or to be able to project the image in the first place. I wonder if you're. OK, so someone sent me on Twitter this latest conversation. Actually, he referred to it on podcast. So I looked it up and it's just recently now on YouTube, this conversation between Balaji Shrinivasan. And he this person listened to it and of course, sent it to me on Twitter and said, oh, you'd be all over this. And, you know, why I pick up on some things and others. I listened to, you know, another of a couple of his other conversations before and found them interesting. And listening to this, I had this real sense of. Wow, are are the are the the conversations in my world colliding because this he would be in some way sort of the complete anti Paul Kings North in these conversations. How much of the purpose of Alexa as a device in the home do you think is just developing training data and better tech so that it can be ported over to mobile use in some type of application with, say, are enabled classes? I mean, it's a really good business in its own right. I mean, I've sold tens, if not hundreds of millions of those devices. So but yeah, the training data helps helps a lot. All three companies, you know, Apple, Google and Amazon have, you know, these smart speaker things which are kind of interesting, right? If you snapshot today and then you think back 30 years, the kinds of things that have converged, you know, the clock radio. So he's talking about convergent devices, devices that sort of there's so much game be stuff around this devices that just sort of everything sort of snaps into a new way when this device comes into our being and the iPhone, the smartphone. And it just suddenly via this technology, things just things just transform in a really dramatic way. Now, what's interesting about this is, of course, some would say, no, you better go back to the old flip phone because on the smartphone you have and then people have lots of different things. It takes too much of my attention. It sucks me into porn. It it it drives my it. It completely changes my it changes what I am in a sense. I become sort of this this cybernetic organism. Now, they haven't implanted the cell phone into my hand or put a neural link or a chip in my head. But via my eyes, the data is is is connecting. And of course, Elon Musk would say, well, once we can actually have a better neural link than the speed, which is so slow in terms of your eyes, then you have this, you know, these these these other these other elements. It's become this the closest analog to that in the 1980s household for Amazon Alexa things that and the phone obviously is combined lots and lots of different gadgets. And then we're going to now see, you know, if you look at like the Solana Crypto phone, when you walked out of your house in the 80s or 90s, you'd have your wallet and your keys and then maybe your credit card. And then later you have your phone and a little bit of physical wallet and a physical key and a credit card and so on. And eventually that's all going to converge into a different kind of thing, because it's amazing that your cash and your wallet and your keys to your car and your credit card can all be thought of as a private key on your phone. I suspect we're very close to that. Right. I mean, you have Tesla, which is phone tethered. And then you have, say, Apple Wallet. And then you have, you know, fill in the blank. We're we're very close to that, I would imagine. We're close. But it's one of those things sort of like gathering threads, you know, so you have to gather all of the skeins together so that now a Tesla car can be basically open by your phone. And then you have to sell so many Tesla cars. That's like 10 percent of the market. You've educated the market. And then you do it for, you know, your walls or your private keys. And then you do it for your passwords and so on. So you're gathering all of these different skeins and then you, you know, make that tapestry or that coil. What is that word that you're using? Skein? Even, I don't know if he's asking this for the sake of the audience or he really doesn't know. But this is very much a sense. What's interesting about this moment is that here is a, is it a skeuomorphism? Here's an element, an artifact from the very physical world that Bellagio is using as an example to communicate. And that's already an artifact that has been lost, perhaps, to Tim Ferriss. EIN? EIN. All right. New word. It's like a length. And he Googles it. Length of thread or yarn. A length of thread or yarn. Loosely coiled and knotted. Got it. Maybe I'm mispronouncing it. Skein. No, you got it. Skein. All right. Yes. You gather the skeins. Sorry to interject. Yes. So you asked for foreseeable future. So first is transhumanism slash optimism. And I just. And of course I would think, you know, part of me in my imagine, my trollish imagination would want to put Paul Kingsnorth and this guy face to face. And it'd be like, wow. I mean, that would be two ends, you know. Boom. Tweet, which is a super soldier. Serum is real. OK. Have you seen this one? I have not. OK. So you'll like this one. All right. Super shoulders. Serum is real. OK. This article is from PLOS. It's like 15 years old or whatever. Oh, this is like myostatin inhibitors or something. Yeah, exactly. And so on the left hand side, wild type mouse on the right hand side, myostatin null. And look at the chest on that guy. Right. Like, holy moly. So that's why I put like the Captain America before and after. Yeah. If you are able to work with knockout genes and so on, you end up with animals like bully whippets. So people who have seen a whippet will envision this very, very, very thin dog that looks something like I can't not look this up. All right. It's the it's the second one down here. Oh, my goodness, because a whippet is, you know, this really. Oh, my word. Oh, my word. OK. Yeah, I'm definitely Paul Kingsnorth on this thing. Like a greyhound. But if you look up a bully whippet, you'll see something very, very different indeed. And there are also cattle breeds that are. Have been bred selectively, which is the slow way to do it for this type of myostatin inhibition. So they end up looking like Arnold Schwarzenegger times 10, basically. Exactly. That's right. And the thing is that this movie Limitless that I really like. And the reason I like it is it changes the normal Hollywood formula at the end. See, normally many Hollywood formula, you know, now again, if we if we introduce this into the Mary Harrington, Paul Kingsnorth image. Well, yeah. And. We're thinking this is a good idea. But then again, so here's the image search. You have the little pills and then you have the dude and then you have the cow and. Yeah, I'm terrified. Movies about science fiction stuff nowadays have a sort of Icarus thing to them. He flew. He was too bold and he flew too close to the sun and his wings melted and he came back to the earth. And he should not have ever flown in the first place, you know, and. And it's basically like you arrogant technologist, you added, but there's always some constraint and it will be subtracted from you. You'll never learn. Right. This kind of intrinsic conservatism. And what's awesome about it's a 10 year old movie, so I'm spoiling it for people. But what's awesome about the end of Limitless is the engineers away that constraint. And because in real life, guess what? All of our planes don't crash either. We managed to outdo Icarus. It wasn't like some arrogance of thinking we could fly. We could fly. Right. We could figure it out. Yes, there are some crashes. We figured it out. We got it down to not just the science, but to an engineering. And so similarly, a lot of people, when you show stuff like this, my statin thing or whatever, they'll be like, oh, but it'll give you cancer or, you know, steroids will screw you up, man, or whatever. I'm like, that may be the case if you are not throwing all the science and engineering in the world at it. But like, OK, so here's a kind of controversial statement. You know, Lance Armstrong, the tour de France winner who cheated. Right. Yep. OK. Well, here's the thing. I may be getting some of the facts wrong in this, but my understanding is he had serious testicular cancer. His doctors gave him some kind of treatment and then he did like he came back to win multiple tour de France's right. Like he was out racing other guys, many of whom were also juiced. OK. But the point is, yes, within the game. Sure. He broke the rules. Should be punished. I don't dispute any of that. From an abstract perspective, I want to know what his chemists were doing, because that is some like Nobel Prize worthy stuff to bring back somebody from testicular cancer to that level of physical fitness is insane. Whatever it was that they were doing now, is it possible people again, they'll come up with the Icarus line. What are you talking about? He probably dropped five years off his life. OK, maybe he did. I actually don't know. But if he did, I think a lot of people might still take that trade off in the trade off space to come from testicular cancer to like ridiculously ultra fit and so on. But five years lesson of life, I don't actually think that's a necessary thing. Again, go ahead. Let me hop in here because this is this is one domain where I have I have some familiarity. So for people who want to get an idea of how doping functions at the highest levels or the higher levels at the highest levels, you'd need to get the actually there's a film called Icarus of all things. Oh, really? A documentary which goes into these. I saw it was an interesting film. Soviet states. Use of doping and they kind of they kind of augur down on this. So I'm going to fast forward a little bit. Are quite mind boggling. Oh, yeah. That's great. Yep. The traps on that thing are just crazy. The everything it doesn't even look like they should be able to walk. And in some cases, due to selective breeding and other types of interventions, that is the case with chickens now who are bred for consumption. You know, they can't support their own weight on their legs past whatever it is. I'm making it up something like week six. But I don't want to take us to. We we had a Sunday after church. Sometimes group of us from church will go out and do lunch and we did Sunday afternoons and people who participated in this. Some of them will listen. I know. Yep. Putting chicken flavor into chicken because we are engineering for certain qualities. And like bulk and perhaps other things are getting lost. There's there's there's always a selection. And these guys would say, well, you're just you're just you're that inherent conservatism that's naysaying. Just telling you my reaction. I'm willing to listen to more. Farfield, we're going to come back to the network state. I want to talk about this thing you just said. Let's come to the network. OK, yeah. So one thing that's kind of important about this is in this relate to the network. I think is, you know, the title of that book, Game of Shadows and some of the words cheat and fraud and so on and so forth. The fundamental issue and even with the Soviets and so on. Right. All of this stuff is being done in the shadows. It's on the border of the system. It's by the bad guys. What it reminds me of is actually in the Soviet Union itself, there were two kinds of groups that talked about capitalism. The first were the dissidents, the the guys who eventually became reformers and so on and so forth. That was a tiny, tiny, tiny minority of people. They're the people who could get outside of their childhood and all the propaganda on how evil those capitalists were. Weren't they imperialist? Weren't they pointing guns at us? Hadn't they killed our brave Soviet soldiers? Had Lenin's revolution? Hadn't everybody sacrifice so that you, the worker, could have this bountiful life and you're so ungrateful and evil. So that there's that small group of academic types who could get outside their head. But there's a much larger second group of capitalists. You know those guys were tell me the black marketeers and they live down to every stereotype of the regime. They would cut you for some vodka. They were totally unregulated shadow capitalists. So are those guys team biology? I'm just trying to know. My point is that when our moral premise in the Soviet Union, the moral premise was capitalism is bad. And if capitalism is a crime, only criminals will be capitalists. Right. Yeah. And it took enormous amount of effort over 70 years to flip that moral premise and be like, look, capitalism is at least acceptable if not good. And then what happens is all of this stuff, you unlock the basic dispassionate gears of civil society. You have accounting and you have supply chains and you have financing. You have all this stuff that we think of as like boring corporate stuff where it comes out of the shadows into you have courts that deal with edge cases because in the abstract, basically, once you've denounced capitalism and pushed it into a corner, the Soviets could say, and what happens if someone cheats you? Huh? Well, that's what happens under capitalism. And the answer is, yes, it does. True. That scams or whatever do happen. But we have courts and we have mechanisms. And, you know, in in the abstract, the whole thing can be denounced as obviously unworkable and so complicated. You have all these edge cases. You have the Chancery court, which determines in the liquidation who gets, you know, what kind of outcome you have. You have senior debt. You have all this type of stuff. Right. Meaning. Sorry, I know I'm mixing a few things. What is you have like Delaware law and corporate law. You have liquidation preferences. You have that. From Belgian blue to Delaware corporate law in 27 seconds. I like it. The range. The point is basically that there are a lot of details when you actually come in and implement capitalism. And from the outside, if you haven't done that, it makes it sound like too complicated. A Rube Goldberg machine that will never work. Why don't we just, you know, seize everything, comrade, and redistribute it from the state? And the thing that's already there is the thing that's functioning. And the thing that isn't there is the thing that seems can be attacked in a thousand ways is the system that doesn't exist. Totally. Point is, once that moral premise got flipped, once it was allowed for the bulk of 99 percent of people to engage in this. Yeah, there's a whole machinery that comes in. And so once we can flip that moral premise. Now, if you're looking at complexity, the pathway from the Soviet Union through Boris Yeltsin to Putin and. And. I. I'm not quite sure. If that argument is helping him. Because Soviet Union or Russia today, I don't know, is is is the. Oh, what is it? I have no idea. But it's it's not held up as sort of a model. So let's but but his point here is once you flip that moral. And we can say comes in. And so once we can flip that moral premise and we can say, look, life extension is good and more muscle is good. And the whole Icarus narrative is wrong. The Wright brothers are right. Icarus is a myth, right? Wright brothers. That's a reality. Right. We actually were able to fly. Icarus is just a mythical thing. The reality is a Boeing 747. Right. Or whatever. Airbus, you know, name name some recent flying aviation company that hasn't had some issues, but whatever. Right. The overall planes work. So in the same way, once we flip that moral premise and say, optimism, good enhancement, good, then we start earlier. And he talked about transhumanism. That's a that's a word we should get rid of. Let's call it optimalism. So there's a there's a remarketing tool. Optimalism, optimal is optimal is a good thing. So let's let's call it optimalism and not transhumanism. OK. Shifting it out of game of shadows and Soviets and, you know, the doping scandals and cheat all those negative adjectives. And we start going to the positive stuff of, you know, what Huberman is doing and what David Sinclair is doing and so on and so forth. I the reason I just want to identify this, I actually think that moral language, that moral premise is everything and it's often not articulated. No, I agree with you. And just like making the market. Setting the price depth charts. We talked a bit about the Overton window and sort of shifting that depth chart as a way of becoming political if you're an active player, so to speak. And I think that also applies here. I just want to say a couple of things about the doping and performance. Then let's get to the details that the relevance realization here is this flip into optimalism and. And then the anxiety that we have about that. And I think part of the reason we have anxiety about that is because in a sense, this this kind of optimalism we have been flipping for. It has not necessarily brought us what we want. So we're going to pick up this video here because there's a there's a portion coming up where where Tim Ferriss sort of tries to dial him back and say, well, in many of these cases, it's the right dosage that gives us the optimal. And and and Bellagio basically says, no, don't talk that way because that undermines the real critical need. Well, we'll just let them do it. Another documentary and you could learn a lot just by watching. First, I would suggest bigger, faster. I always say bigger, faster, stronger. It's bigger, faster, stronger. But I think for trademark purposes, they probably flipped it bigger, stronger, faster as a documentary that was that was made in 2008. And it is a fascinating exploration of performance enhancement. And it also shows the advantages that richer countries have in performance. And in a sense, now part of what I like about his argument is he is making the point that this imagined level playing field is pretty much just imagined and that we not only have enormous diversity of genetics, we have diversity of opportunities. There's just the playing field is just so complex. Doping and competition at the highest levels is very similar to let's call it tax optimization on the positive side. Tax evasion. If you want to look at it through that lens, they will look at something like in this documentary use of a rithropoietin. So EPO used to increase the oxygen carrying capacity of your blood, which is why athletes also will use blood doping. So they might have use of EPO banned by water. Right. So you cannot do this. It's pretty amazing that he doesn't know what a skein is, but he's got this stuff down now. Just so contextual in the realm of sports. That's against the rules. Then you have blood doping, which at different points and in different capacities has been either allowed or not allowed. It's the same thing. Right. If you train at altitude and then you develop blood that has more oxygen carrying capabilities and then you infuse yourself with that, that's kind of quadrant to then you have quadrant three, which is like sleeping in an altitude simulation tent. So what are the axes? Sorry, I missed the axes. I forget about the axes for now. It's just comparing four different options. And then there are a few others. And it's just to point out that the and again, I don't want to dwell on this too long. But the the you can look at four approaches to achieving the same ends with different legal status or different status with respect to the rules, which doesn't automatically mean all of them should be allowed, in my opinion. But secondarily, like there are countries that do not have. Olympic size swimming pools to train in and nonetheless have athletes who are sent to the Olympics to compete in swimming. Most of those athletes are going to school in North America. So I do think that there are in some respects incentives that are aligned with athletes to preserve the current state of doping, because with more money, with more state support, you can actually game the system more effectively than not necessarily lesser players, but less resourced players. So I would just say that I don't think all athletes would want to agree to nor teams nor states to say the All Drug Olympics. If people haven't seen the All Drug Olympics skit from Saturday Night Live, they should look it up. It's actually pretty entertaining. I'm going to look it up. I doubt I can play it without Saturday Night Live throwing a fit, but I'll watch it a second. Oh, it's an oldie. That's a hilarious graphic. There's the punch line. Remember when men had hair like that? Okay, back to our regularly scheduled program. Let me poke on this a little bit because let me add one more thing. Then you can poke on this too. I would also say definitely I'm not a doctor. I don't play one on the Internet, but people should muscle mass is good to a point. Preserving muscle mass, avoiding age related muscle atrophy. And this is where it's interesting because, okay, now we're getting into, okay, now we want to we want to counter the age of decay. We want to counter aging. Sarcopenia, super important bone density, et cetera. But there are arguments to be made that stepping on the gas with anabolism could be contraindicated for longevity past a certain point. So I would just say there's a there's a balancing act between sort of autophagy and and a number of things we know work for longevity as it stands right now, at least in mice and and possibly in canines. And that balance is something I think people should should look at. There will be a future guest on this podcast. Dr. Matt Kaberline. That conversation is going to get into a lot of that. But please feel free to push back or tease apart. This one thing I actually I love this is great. I'm learning stuff also. But I think the the framing of it in terms of athletes and the Olympic Games or drug Olympic Games and so on. The thing is, you know, as you're aware, in this century or in this sort of phase of humanity, we're moving away from spectator sports. And like, I don't really care that much about the Olympics or the NFL or something like that. But I do care about physical fitness and running and, you know, lifting and so on and so forth. So fine for somebody who wants to go and do it professionally. But I do care about the average person's health. And for the average person or any person, that's not a game. The absolute metric is what is their personal muscle mass? What is that? You know, when when 100 people, the absolute metric, what is their. What is their ideal? What is their. I mean, that's that's what we're barking up. Talked about bullwhip. It's that's where that's the tree we're barking up here is an idea. What is the ideal? And now ideals settle down with innumerable contextualities in many respects. But all of those specific contextual ideals also work towards, in a sense, the ideal. It's it's a hierarchy. Run around a track. Maybe one of them wins, but all of them, the other 99 also get a cardiovascular benefit from that. Right. And that's kind of what I'm focused on is not the zero sum aspect of who wins this zero sum competition, where it's like this artificial and constrained environment, but rather the non zero sum of how do we improve people's health across the population generally? Even if it is true that these guys who are like, how do we improve their health generally? And again, there is a sense in which maybe you can sort of have distilled health into one number. I'm dubious because there's obviously sort of a layer of physical health, but there's relational health and emotional health. And I'd say even spiritual health. And so, again, we're you know, I find this terribly. Reductionistic. Extreme elite competitors have something to teach us broadly, like nothing on the field really matters to anybody outside the field beyond the entertainment, unless there's some cool discoveries that come out of there and we're curing testicular cancer or we're having treatments for them that make them run around like Lance Armstrong after after his thing. That's that's kind of where I'm coming from. Yeah, I think we're more on the same page than than you might imagine. Oh, yeah. Yeah. The point I'm making is that the dose makes the poison, right? Paracelsus with so many things. And this includes a volume of exercise. It includes drug intake. And much like we were talking about technology and looking around corners and seeing what will be. I mean, the drug makes or the dosage makes the poison. I mean, that's all relevance realization. And I'll just wait to hear what comes next. Obvious or at least widespread, say, five years from now. You can do that with performance enhancement sports very easily, too. You look at racehorses and then you look at, say, patients with wasting diseases who are using various interventions because it is there or they view it as their means of last resort. And then you have bodybuilders and then professional athletes. And then you have rich people. So if you just kind of track that progression, you can spot a lot of things super early. That's a great funnel. Yeah, you can spot, say, medathin and provisional, things like that. Ten years before it's widely, widely known as a possible performance enhancer for cognition, which I would not recommend people do. By the way, it's still pretty poorly understood. Honestly, just monitoring that funnel and publishing that funnel on a quarterly basis would be one of the most important newsletters. Yeah, that would be an awesome funnel to kind of track. I put it into the four hour body when I wrote it in 2008, 2009. It's still reliable. You can track that stuff. It does require some manual labor just because competitive horse trainers aren't just going to sit down with you over a cup of tea. Now, this business of an ideal is well, we're going to get to this because, of course, Tim Ferriss is going to be lauding the fact that this isn't all theoretical for him. He's applied this to his life and in that sense sort of sets himself up as an ideal or at least someone who is worthy of emulation. To you the first time you meet and tell you all about their doping regimen. Right. For a lot of understandable reasons. I agree with you on the exact dose of something more is not always bad. I agree with all that. The only thing that I'm saying is just and it seems like a small thing, but it's like I just don't like to even use words like doping shadows, cheating, etc. Because that is conceding territory to folks that want to pathologize improvement. And that's only right pathologize improvement. Boy, I think I'm coming at is it like to sort of pull that chip that's that limiter chip that's in our heads, you know, and remove that. And right there, it's like Kings North, bang that limiter chip and Kings North would be back there screaming, no, pulling the limiter chip is exactly what we've done. And that's created the mess we're in. And what Bellagio here in some ways is sort of the anti Paul Kings North. And all this this image is too good. I'm going to have to capture. Because because because there is shining bright in terms of the oh, it's shouldn't take screenshots. While I'm live doing the video. Digital presence. Yeah, digital. And you're looking for people, everybody into your house. If they want to leave your house, of course, you let. Oh, I lost it. I got to go back. Thing that I'm seeing is just and it seems like a small thing, but it's like I just don't like to even use words like doping shadows, cheating, etc. Because that is conceding territory to folks that want to pathologize improvement. And that's the only thing I'm coming at. Is it like to sort of pull that chip that's that limiter chip that's in our heads, you know, and remove that chip and basically like actually no limits. So I think I think it is important to develop an awareness of the words you use, because at least if you understand those words, they sort of form the concepts and the boundaries of your thinking. At least no, no, no, no boundaries to the boundaries of what you deem acceptable and unacceptable. Right. So you know, no boundaries. You should be very aware of the language you use. Again, I don't want to dwell too long on this. I will just say that if the opposite of pathologizing use of just to choose one class like anabolic androgenic steroids, if the opposite of pathologizing it is is freedom in the form of anyone taking however much they want, whenever they want. I don't think that swing to the opposite end of the pendulum is going to be a net positive for people. So so the awareness is important. Right me up, baby. No limits. But as is the due diligence. Right. Like I have used a whole she's like. All slew of these compounds post surgically to ensure full recovery of my left shoulder, which I had completely reconstructed. And I've talked about this publicly because I'm not ashamed of it. I think it was absolutely strategically, medically the right thing to do. I'm not recommending people do that. There are both medical and legal consequences that can follow from all these things. So speak to your GP, speak to your. They're going to they're going to advise limits. If you want to discuss this kind of thing. But I just want to make it clear that I'm not just I just want to make it clear. So I don't get sued because this is my podcast. An observer in this sphere. I do think there are times and plays. Oh, no, no, this is my this is my street cred. This is where it makes a lot of sense to use these extremely powerful molecules, but they can be misused with long term consequences. Totally. So two things there. One is the reason that the Soviet example is actually quite good is they would also kind of jump to, oh, so your for capitalism. Well, then everyone can auction everything at all times. And everything is always, you know, prices and evil hedge funders will take your house. And the thing is that all I'm saying is let's not pathologize this, let's not put this in a box. Let us actually think. I mean, you don't have to go to the other extreme of. Royded up, whatever, whatever, you know, the thing that jumps to people's minds. There's an entire infrastructure, an entire. How about bully whippets and right it up cows? Continuum that can be built out when we're not just balled up in the corner of. Game of shadows and cheats and doping and pathology. That's all I'm saying. It is a great title, though it is a great title. Just the fact that you remembered it and have said it so many times. It's a good title. You got to be. I mean, I know it's not your style of title. Oh, it's a great title. It's like death tax. It sticks. It sticks in your head, right? It's deliberate. So that's exactly right. I mean, there's actually this amazing app. You know that people came out recently, Dolly to. OK, yeah. What I'd love about it. You ever heard about this? You seen this? I have I have access to Dolly to you've access. I don't know what this is. I got to look something else up. Dolly to is a new A.I. system that creates realistic images and art from descriptives in native languages. OK, join wait list. I don't know about that. Explore. Watch video. Let's watch the video. Have you ever seen a polar bear playing bass or a robot painted like a Picasso? No, didn't think so. Dolly to is a new A.I. system from Open A.I. I don't know that can take simple text descriptions like a koala dunking a basketball and turn them into photo realistic images that have never existed before. Dolly to can also realistically edit and retouch photos based on a simple natural language description. It can fill in or replace part of an image with A.I. generated imagery that blends seamlessly with the original. It's called inpainting. In January 2021, Open A.I. introduced Dolly, a system that could generate images from text like this avocado armchair. Dolly to takes the technology even further with higher resolution, greater comprehension and new capabilities like inpainting. It can even start with an image as an input and create variations with different angles and styles. There you go, Chuckie D. You're evolved. Dolly was created by training a neural network on images and their text descriptions. Through deep learning, it not only understands individual objects like koala bears and motorcycles, but learns from relationships between objects. And when you ask Dolly for an image of a koala bear riding a motorcycle, it knows how to create that or anything else with a relationship to another object or action. The Dolly research has three main outcomes. First, it can help people express themselves visually in ways they may not have been able to before. Second, an A.I. generated image can tell us a lot about whether the system understands us or is just repeating what it's been taught. Third, Dolly helps humans understand how A.I. systems see and understand our world. OK, well, now we know what that is. Let's go back. Great. Good. So and there's also like open source, not open sources. There's more public versions of people can mess around. So the thing is that shows the power of words more to somebody who's of a quantitative bent more than anything I could say, because you can write three words in to Dolly to and get an image out from it. And it's it's effectively like an extremely compact programming language. I say like biology improving musculature. I don't know, something like that. Yeah, great. The point is that if you were to actually write that out in computer code to build some of those images, it would be thousands, tens, hundreds of thousands of lines of code for some of them. But you can literally do it in like three words. And, you know, when people say, oh, you know, I'm not a I'm not a number. I'm a name. There's actually a wisdom to that because words are like these super high dimensional vectors and you can combine them to these really complicated manipulations in just a few phrases. And what's kind of interesting is that three different technologies are all converging on the power of really, really short phrases. And those are A.I. as we just talked about, you know, where you just give a few words and the computer is able to figure out all of this stuff. Yeah, the logic's camera can't keep focus. See, this this this is it. This is it. Crypto, where you have 12 words or 13 or 14 words in the cinematic, which stores all of your cryptocurrency. Right. I mean, literally, you could store like a hundred million dollars in like those those words. You know, you could store all these possessions are a hundred million dollars in crypto possessions. And then obviously social media, where a few words can be a hashtag or a phrase that starts an entire movement and that is on every building and everybody quotes and so on and so forth. So those three points, by the way, why those three technologies? I know it's almost seems trite to say A.I. crypto and social. But those three technologies are, in a sense, like cognitive or social technologies in a way that rocket ships and internal combustion engines are not because those don't interact with humans. These do, you know, these touch humans in different ways. Anyway, so so basically I have grown. I used to kind of think that all the word games that they played in academia in the humanities weren't that important. And it was just bore me as to why they were doing this. And now I realize it's like insanely important because a slight tonal shift in a word, that Russell conjugation thing we were talking about, you would get a totally different looking Dolly to image based on the tone. Sure. That's a good point. And that makes it concrete. Right. Yeah. So it makes it concrete. Now, how about just a little King's North cleanser in sort of maybe I can put them side by side in the screen. That would be fun. Here we go. Everyone else who was paying attention for the last hundred years. And I'm really talking about this giant techno industrial monstrosity that is in our heads and in the world, which is really the project of modernity as far as I can see. And the project of modernity is to build a machine to replace God because we've given up on God and consequently we've given up on limits and living within the natural world and our place within that. And we've decided that through the use of technology, science and reason, we can effectively build a new world which doesn't seem to limit us in any way. And we've decided that any limits at all, whether they're the limits that our body provides or the limits that the natural world provides us with or the limits of even the limits of our behavior towards each other are disgraceful chains that prevent us from being free and rational and individuals. And so I think it's a bit. Back to the other. A lot of understandable reasons. I agree with you on, you know, the exact dose of something more is not always better. I agree with all that. The only thing that I'm saying is just and it seems like a small thing, but it's like I just don't like to even use words like doping shadows, cheating, etc. Because that is conceding territory to folks that want to pathologize improvement. And that's the only thing I'm coming at is it like to sort of pull that chip that's that limiter chip that's in our heads, you know, and remove that chip and basically like actually no limits. So I think I think it is. Puxley and everyone else who was paying attention for the last hundred years. And I'm really talking about this giant techno industrial monstrosity that is in our heads and in the world, which is really the project of modernity as far as I can see. And the project of modernity is to build a machine to replace God because we've given up on limits and consequently we've given up on limits and living within the natural world and our place within that. And we've decided that through the use of technology, science and reason, we can effectively build a new world which doesn't seem to limit us in any way. And we've decided that any limits at all, whether they're the limits that our body provides or the limits that the natural world provides us with or the limits of even the limits of our behavior towards each other are disgraceful chains that prevent us from being free and rational and individuals. And so I think it's a big it's just a very big, very old way of seeing that is manifesting itself in silicon and plastic all around us. And as I say, coming at that from the perspective of an environmentalist or a former one, what I saw was the green movement being entirely sucked into this way of seeing. And I became a I became a greener years ago because I was a very, very, very, very, very, very long time ago because I was entranced by the smallest beautiful model that the Greens used to believe in in the 70s when I was a little boy, you know, the world of Schumacher and Leopold Koeh and Gandhi and Tolstoy and everyone else who told us to live within natural limits in a way that would actually be nourishing to us. And the green movement instead bought into this machine thinking in which it saw climate change and other issues as technological problems to be solved with more technology, all of which sucks us into casting down limits. So now environmentalism has become a question of how many wind farms you can get up and whether you should use nuclear power and GM crops and whether you should do X, Y and Z to effectively create a quote sustainable limitless machine world. All paths kind of lead back to this modern way of seeing almost every question. I mean, Mary comes at this from as far as I can see from the angle of, you know, from the feminist angle. But as she says, it's the same question, actually. You can just approach it from all of your different sort of personal perspectives and it all leads you back to this attitude we have to nature and human nature. Now, Mark Andreessen is on Joe Rogan. And of course, I can't play Joe Rogan videos. But, you know, so again, we started sort of with Vervecky's question about the giant frame and well, agnostic about that giant frame. And of course, for me, that's in a sense the fun. But I think that those frames, in fact, scale all the way up and down. And so when you see, let's say, Balaji versus Kings North, you know, very different frames and then they get worked out. And of course, this is something massively going on in our society. But you have the massive frame and then you have the small frame. And here's again, someone sent me this little bit from Mark Andreessen on Joe Rogan about sort of religion, but then getting into how companies are managing these frames. Like basically fly everybody into a hotel or resort for three days, maybe some of them with families, maybe some of them just with the people. And you have a vacation together. Exactly right. And like real bonding, right? Right. Real. Have a good time together. Lots of free time. And this is, of course, the other three P's. This is the procedural. This is the perspectival. You know, getting them bonded in those things in order to work together. Know each other, go on hikes, have long dinners, right? Parties, fire on the beach, like whatever it is, have people really be able to spend time together. How much of a benefit do you think there is in that? A lot. A lot. Well, and then what you do is you kind of charge people up with the social bonding, right? And then they can then go home and they can be remote for six weeks or eight weeks and they still feel connected. And they're talking to everybody online. And then you bring them right when they start to fray, right when it starts to feel like they're... In other words, you get all their four P's working together, getting isolated again. You bring them all back together again. Interesting. And the benefit of that bonding is like as a person who runs a company, like how do you think of that? Do you think, oh, it makes people feel good about working there. And so they are more enthusiastic about work. And like how do you weigh that out? It's to form and reinforce the cult. So it's the religion of the company, religion, right? Yeah. Which we don't call it that, but that's what it is. And so it's to get that sense of community. It's that sense of group cohesion that like we're all in this together. I'm not just an individual. I'm not a mercenary. Oh, but this is going to want to permeate somebody's life. This is the one going to want to... I mean, when they go there, the resort had better have the particular food I need, either the vegan or the carnivore. Because can vegans and carnivores work together? I'm a member of a group. We have a mission. The mission is bigger than each of us individually. And do you have like a little struggle? Oh, by making the company the religion. We let people air their gripes and... Some companies have those. We're not so hot on those. We have other ways to deal with that kind of thing. More of what we're trying to do is brainstorming. So like creativity, like there's definitely a role for in person. And then it's for all of the like, you know, it's like employee onboarding is for training. It's for planning, right? It's for all the things where you really want people like thinking hard in a group, do all those things. But a lot of it is just the bonding. Like Ben and I run our firm, like we're constantly trying to take agenda items off the sheet every time. Because we're trying to have people just have more time to get to know each other. How do you weed out young people that have been indoctrinated into a certain ideology? And they think that these struggle sessions should be mandatory. And they think that, you know, there's a certain language that they need to use. And there's a way they need to communicate. And there's certain expectations they have of the company to the point where they start putting demands upon their own employers. So the big thing you do, I think, and this is what we try to do, is you basically declare what your values are. Right. So you want to be your company. You're going to be very upfront. You state your confession. This is my confession. I've looked at the world and these are my filters and these are our confession. And we're going to get you all together. We're not going to call it a church retreat. We're going to call it a whatever we're going to call. But it is a church retreat. We're going to get us all the same page. We're going to get our confession down and and we're going to decide if we're going to be woke like Amazon and others. And you want to basically say, here's what we stand for. And so we do we do this in a couple of different ways. For example, you know, one of our core values is that we think that technology is positive for the world. Right. And if you were the kind of person who wants to be a technology critic, like that's just inconsistent with our values. We don't we don't employ technology critics have many other places that they can work like. How so in terms of technology critic? What do you mean by that? Just like, you know, the kinds of people who want to go online or want to write articles or whatever about how evil all the technologists are and how evil Elon is and how evil capitalism is and like all this stuff. You know, there's lots of other places. There's lots of I guess Paul King's North need not apply to Mark Andreessen's tech company. You know, there's lots of other things counterproductive. It's just it's inconsistent with our values. Like we have we're optimistic about the impact of technology on the future. In other words, you know, we have an understanding of diversity that says that people actually are going to feel included, like they're actually going to feel like they're part of a mission and a group that's larger than themselves. Everyone regardless. Regardless. Yeah, regardless. And they're not going to feel like they're different or better. Because because human beings are so malleable that we can, you know, at this at this one level, we can all you can all be a part of this religion. It doesn't matter what tribe you're from. Doesn't matter what nation you're from. But as long as we can all say the creed together, we can be part of this religion worse than that. They have to prove themselves. It's a meritocracy meritocracy and that they don't have to take, you know, they don't have to. We're not going to have politics in the workplace in the sense of they're not going to have to take. They're not going to be under any pressure to either express their political views or deny that they have the political views or pretend to agree with political views. They don't agree with, you know, we're just not going to. That's just not part of what we do. We're mission driven against our mission, not all of the other missions. You could pursue all the other missions in your free time. Do you think the pursuing of a lot of those other missions is a distraction? And that. Yeah, enormously. Yeah, I mean, it can really run away. And that, you know, that is a big problem in a lot of these companies now. But you can define your company, you can define your culture and basically say that's not what we're about. We're about our mission. And then you just you basically broadcast that right up front and you basically say, look, you are not going to be happy working here. And by the way, you're not going to last very long working here. Yeah. Right. If you have a view contrary to that. So it's confessionalism. Now I want to go back to rebel wisdom's take rebel wisdom's retrospective with Zubin Demain Nia, if I'm saying his last name correctly. And again, because OK, so we've got Balaji wanting to take out the limiting chip and we've got Paul Kingsnorth shouting, you want to get rid of limits? And this is a disaster. And well, no, it's about personal transformation. And so what we have are all of these. We're asking questions about scale here. And and I think I think part of this is borne by the information age, because when you lived in your little village, you knew your little village. And so I've been again reading going through this trilogy of the Pacific War and the end of Book 2 had this had this big chapter about the way that the Japanese managed their media. And then as they just kept telling their people, oh, the war's going great, the war's going great, the war's going great. But people are listening carefully and no, it's not going great. And then the beginning of Book 3, they had how the United States is managing its media and how FDR was at the beginning and how FDR was at the end. And, you know, so now it's not that you have maybe your little tribe with your little shaman and your little but around your little campfire somewhere or you have your medieval village with your church at the center and Christendom. But but we're living in this we're living in this massive network. Prologue. Don't argue with people who buy ink by the barrel. American aphorism origin unknown. Franklin Delano Roosevelt's rapport with the press had deteriorated sharply since his first presidential term in office. Back in those honeymoon days of 1933, the newly sworn president had disarmed reporters with a fond and familiar manner, calling them by their first names bantering about trivialities writing birthday notes and inviting their entire families to White House parties. Think about how this how the United States has changed. It was changed dramatically by the Civil War. Germaine changed dramatically by the Depression and then the Second World War. He took any question as it came verbally and off the cuff. He kept the atmosphere light and mirthful. The president might remark that a reporter appeared hungover, for example, and asked the room for its opinion, or he might ask the security detail to confirm that a particular reporter had been frisked. He pretended to be a teacher running a school room and spoke to the journalists as if they were not especially bright grade school students. No, my dear child, you have got that all wrong. Listening to a question for many of us who grew up watching TV with White House press conferences with the White House correspond. I mean, this could you know that here's FDR sitting in a room with all the people around him treating treating, you know, acting like a benevolent father to to to these beloved children. And he let his mouth drop open in a parody of deep attentiveness. His facial expressions with vaudevillian exaggeration conveyed amazement, bewilderment and alarm. While considering his answer, he gazed up at the great presidential seal set in plaster in the ceiling overhead, drew in a long breath, puffed up his cheeks and expelled the air in a long blast. These antics brought forth hearty laughter from the reporters. The president did not always reply directly or truthfully or at all, but he tolerated follow up questions and engaged in informal back and forth exchanges. White House stenographers recorded every word of his 998 press conferences, including the small talk and batonage that opened each session. The transcripts run to many thousands of pages and occupy more than four cubic feet at the FDR library in Hyde Park, New York. By 1941, the first year of his third term in office, there were still flashes of that old warmth and wit. But now, more than in years past, White House reporters saw Roosevelt as a quick silver character, temperamental and even inscrutable, a man of unfathomable depths. In one moment, he lit up the room with his famous high wattage smile. In the next, he turned sour and snappish. It was not an FDR's nature to shout or even to raise his voice, but there was often a cantankerous undercurrent to his banter. And if he did not like a question, he was liable to give a reporter the rough side of his tongue. According to Merriman Smith, a United Press correspondent, the president could be as rough and tough as a 3rd Avenue blackjack artist, or he could be utterly charming, disarming and thoroughly likable. It just depended on the question, who asked it, and how Mr. Roosevelt felt when he got up that morning. Calling out individual newsmen to rebut stories they had written, he pressed home his cross examinations with the zeal of a courtroom litigator. Intolerant of euphemisms such as error or inaccuracy, FDR accused individual reporters of printing lies, or if that wasn't clear enough, plain lies or deliberate lies. The term lie characterized the motive of the perpetrator, leaving no room for the possibility that an honest mistake had been made, but that was precisely his point. Deploying the trend toward interpretive journalism, he dogmatically insisted that newspapers should have no role in news analysis or commentary, even in the editorial pages. Syndicated columnists said FDR were, They trolled for gossip, buzz buzz buzz, he called it, and passed those tidbits off as news. He labeled Drew Pearson the most widely read columnist. Now this is pretty amazing given the fact that, you know, there was so much hand wringing and dramatics when Trump was president. How horrible the contempt he has for the press! This is horrible, then you listen to this and this is 1941. Franklin Delano Roosevelt. ...of the era, a chronic liar. At a press conference in February 1939, when questions implied that FDR was attempting to circumvent congressional restrictions on arm shipments to Europe, he launched into a tirade. The American people are beginning to realize that the things they have read and heard have been pure bunk. B-U-N-K, bunk. That these people are appealing to the ignorance, the prejudice, and the fears of Americans and are acting in an un-American way. Asked whether he believed the offending papers had deliberately misled their readers, FDR answered with a question of his own. What shall I say? Shall I be polite or call it by the right name? Call it by the right name, said one of the newsmen. Deliberate lie. He read four or five newspapers each morning, usually before rising from bed. Roosevelt was a pious man who rarely swore, but the morning editions often put him into a seething fury, prompting a damn, or in severe cases, a god damn. As he read, his face darkened, his chin hardened, and his eyes glittered wrathfully. He might tear the offending story from the paper and bring it with him to the Oval Office, where he would thrust it into the hands of his press secretary, Stephen T. Early, complaining, it's a damn lie from start to finish. He became convinced that most of the American press, 85% was the proportion he often cited, was functioning as a mouthpiece for the embattled oligarchy. The Tory press, said Roosevelt, was shrewd, malevolent, and unscrupulous. It was owned and controlled by a cabal of rich conservatives who hated him personally and served up a daily diet of vitriol aimed at him, his political allies, his staff, and even his family. In the pantheon of FDR's archenemies, four newspaper moguls sat on high pedestals. William Randolph Hearst's national newspaper chain often published identical editorials denouncing Roosevelt and his policies. Media analysts correctly surmised that the invective was orchestrated by the chief himself, who wired instructions to his editorial rooms from his garish castle at San Simeon on the California coast. Robert R. Berthe McCormick, publisher of the Chicago Tribune, openly despised Roosevelt and everything he stood for, and his paper, the second city's leading daily and one of the nation's most widely read newspapers, disparaged the administration without even the pretense of objectivity. McCormick's cousin, Joseph M. Patterson, was founder and owner of the New York Daily News, the nation's first tabloid. With its big photograph format and sensationalist coverage of crime, sports, and sex scandals, the Daily News prospered throughout the Depression years, and its circulation eventually overtook that of the New York Times. Patterson had once called himself a socialist and was initially sympathetic to the New Deal, but in 1940 he threw in with the isolationist movement and his paper turned sharply against FDR. Eleanor Cissy Patterson, Joseph's younger sister and Berthe McCormick's cousin, was an eccentric and profane misanthrope who bought two Washington newspapers from Hearst and merged them into one. The Washington Times Herald. By the late 30s, the Times Herald had won the Capitol's circulation battle and was one of the most profitable newspapers in the country. It was a blatantly partisan broadsheet that attacked the administration nearly every day, and sometimes several times per day in as many as four daily editions. It's so amazing that, oh, I remember life in the, what, 1960s when news was impartial. Well, we're talking the 1930s and 40s here. Scurrilous anti-FDR editorials signed Cissy Patterson appeared on the front page. Newsboys hawked the paper on every downtown corner, and one or two were usually found shouting the latest headlines from the sidewalk just outside the White House gates. None of the four was a stranger to FDR. McCormick and Joseph Patterson had been his Groton schoolmates, and he and Eleanor had been friendly with Cissy Patterson when she was a young debutante on the cotillion social circuit. Earlier in his career, Roosevelt had counted Hearst as an ally, and had even called him a friend. His antipathy toward them and theirs toward him was intimate and deeply personal. Wow. Talk about an oligarchy. Since three of the four were blood relatives and the fourth Hearst was linked to the others by longstanding friendships and business dealings, FDR tended to regard the Hearst-McCormick-Patterson newspapers as a united front. But in 1940, as he ran for an unprecedented third presidential term, about three quarters of all American newspapers opposed his bid for reelection, and FDR's relationship with the press descended to its nadir. On the campaign trail, Roosevelt often went out of his way to denounce the newspapers, charging that they were failing to perform their vital role in American democracy. The press, he said, was a profit-seeking enterprise that found sensationalism and gossip more lucrative than sober, accurate reporting, and was polluting the nation's civil discourse. That fall in the New York Times, Arthur Croc cited the president's determination to preach a class war against the press and his steady implications that the press is unreliable and often venal. After he defeated the Republican candidate Wendell Willkie in a popular and electoral landslide, the attitudes of many newsmen, editors, radio broadcasters, and columnists hardened against the president. FDR had broken 150 years of precedent by running for, and winning, a third term in office. Now more than ever, journalists felt a constitutional duty to defy the powerful president and keep him in check. Looking back from the present, when his legacy has been engraved in marble, it is difficult to sense how polarizing and controversial a figure FDR was in his own time. It was taken for granted in media circles, even among journalists who liked him personally and were sympathetic to his policies, that FDR was an incorrigible trickster. He had often shown that he could manipulate or circumvent the press. He spoke directly to the American people by radio, and had done so with great success. I never would have thought I'd see connections between FDR and Trump, but there they are! Anyone middle-aged or older could remember the repressive censorship regime imposed during the First World War. The dignity of President Woodrow Wilson had been held inviolable, and any criticism of the president or his policies, no matter how mild or well-meaning, had been grounds to prosecute or shut down an offending newspaper. FDR had served in Wilson's administration as Assistant Secretary of the Navy, so he bore a share of responsibility for those earlier abuses. H.L. Mencken, recalling the travesties of 1917 to 1918, warned his colleagues that it was their duty, in wartime even more than in peace, to keep a wary eye on the gentlemen who operate this great nation, and only too often slip into the assumption that they own it. If the newspapers did not resist with determination, they would yield to a squeeze play that politicians have been working on them since the cradle days of the republic. And there matters stood on December 7, 1941. And you can read the book for that. Why play that? Before, you know, I was going to play the pandemic video. Oh no, here we are navigating. And, you know, Balaji is like, take the chip out! And King's North is like, they're trying to abolish limits! And religious people are saying, here's the answer. Oh, there was a... I hesitate to play this very interesting video with Scott Adams today that came through, yesterday that came through, where he's, you know, where he's talking about conservative illusions, about parenting, and he's got all kinds of things in it. I'm only going after the logic, because can I ask... He's just giving so many qualifications that he's like, I'm about to try to transgress my audience here, but here we go! At least he's going to try and deny some of his audience capture. Is there any conservative here who is opposed to thinking better about a topic? Nobody, right? You would only be opposed, I think, I think you would only be opposed to something that went against your most important ethical, moral standings. And we won't be doing any of that. Oh no! None of that, because that I respect. Oh yeah! Okay, so here's what I view as the conservative worldview. And this is relevant to teen addiction and the younger male teens. Keep it really small! I want to break out of my audience capture! Shooters, so that's the context, okay? We're going to eliminate to that context for now. And I would say the conservative says, if this is you, and you is just any person who might be a parent someday. You're just an adult in the world. This is you. And the conservative thought is that there are many books and organizations, and maybe you can listen to Christ, you can get advice. And if you look for these sources, you could be part of a great two-parent situation. And that the statistics and all common sense and all experience are all compatible with the fact that that gets you good outcomes. Now, I quickly, quickly want to add a caveat. Because this is the part of me that's left to Bernie. This is my opinion. This is only one way to do it. Probably the best way. Probably the best way. So will you agree with me if I say it's the best way? Now, of course, you didn't say what sex the two parents are. I don't lose you if I say that, right? If you're a conservative, and I agree with you on the biggest point, this is the best way. Statistically. But I would like you to agree with the following point, if you will. Like, we'll negotiate a little bit here. So I'm going to agree with you on this, absolutely, statistically, the best way to go. I need you to agree on this. You've got this. Plenty of exceptions. Can I get you to say that? Plenty of exceptions. This massive delocation and then another video that came up this morning. So I don't deny the importance of a mother. By no stretch. As I said, we're going to try to have as many... Just the importance of a mother to his kids. We have this notion that's rife in our culture, let's say, that's insisted upon that all families are equally... are equal. And I understand the emphasis on that from the, let's call it the tolerance perspective. But I think that it's badly flawed in one manner. And I think this will be the hardest thing, probably, for us to discuss, is that... You can't flatten out distinctions without a tremendous loss. You also can't flatten out distinctions part way without tremendous loss. You can't give a little bit... There'll be more on this later. And I don't think it's possible to dispense with the ideal of heterosexual monogamy. Now, as the ideal. If we think, well, there's an ideal individual who's responsible and mature and far-seeing and honest, an honest trader, a good player, an honorable person, an honorable, decent person. And then there's the minimal requirement for a family that's ideal, and that's something approximating heterosexual, long-term heterosexual monogamy. Something approximating? Why don't we just say, that's what it is. Something approximating is too fuzzy around the edges. And maybe you have two decent people united together, and then there's a firm platform for children. Now, the problem with that as an ideal is that we all fall short of the ideal. And so half, 40% of people are going to get divorced. And of the people who don't get divorced, a good percentage of them are in pretty... Pole enterprise. It's either Christ or chaos. If you reject Christ, you're going to have the chaos. And what Rubin and Peterson are representing is early semi-responsible stages of the chaos, as opposed to the full-tilt chaos that they are decrying as excesses. They are not...the conclusion of the argument is not to be described as excesses. And influences in your children's life, I would just say, well, it's difficult. It might be more difficult even if you're a homosexual couple, but it's difficult if you're...it's difficult enough if you're heterosexual. It's tough. And there are plenty of... So it's difficult. And the way this whole thing is handed to us, it's difficult. So let's legalize homosexual mirage, same-sex mirage, and make it more difficult. To differentiate... The dude has words. Exactly. If you say that a faithful heterosexual monogamy is the ideal, a guy on his third wife has to admit that his experience is less than ideal. It's less than the ideal. You can't say, here's the ideal, and I'm doing something completely different, and it's just as ideal. You've just thrown out the whole idea of ideal. Well, who isn't? And besides that, you don't want to dispense with the bloody ideal just because it's difficult to attain. Right. And just because we all are flawed in our own way. I mean, really, who...I think you said this to me at dinner, but it's like who amongst us is walking around as the ideal partner, the ideal person, the ideal everything, the ideal father, and all of those? The ideal anything, for that matter. Yeah. And virtually nobody is doing that. Well, if they are, then the ideal isn't high enough, because an ideal should be something that beckons to you from the distance, right? It's not something that's right there in front of you for you to grip. That's not much of an ideal. Well, we'd have a lot more people who are acting that way if it was that easy to grip, I suppose, right? Like, there's not a lot of people doing it. Yeah. Earlier, at the beginning of the video, Peterson said that he wanted to resist the urge or the impulse to flatten everything. But notice what they've just done. They've just flattened sin. So if everybody falls short of the ideal, now all of a sudden, there's no such thing as good parents. There's no such thing as mediocre parents. There's no such thing as bad parents, because all of us fall short of the ideal. So here we are. Here we are. And we've got Doug Wilson with the hard line. And we've got Scott Adams, you know, playing around here. And we've got Mark Andreessen saying, well, you've got to get the group and you've got to get agreement and you've got to agree on what the business is about. And so we're not going to get caught in all the woke things. And we've got, you know, Malasse taking the chip out and Kings North saying, no, I know me. I keep the chip in. The limits are the only thing that's going to rescue us, even though how exactly are we going to stop moving towards this cliff? And so all of this is how we're calibrating this picture of the world. And even with all of these tendrils out grabbing bits of pieces of information and opinions and perspectives everywhere. And, you know, FDR is war with the press. Trump is war with the press. And now we've got this new emergent media. And, you know, let's not worry about the big questions. Let's just focus on transformation. Yeah. And it's also the other factor is that we have these political biases, but they're being weaponized against us by you've got the colonization of inner space by the tech platform. Yeah. Which is kind of the pulse chip out. I mean, the colonization of inner space, the largest, that's we've got to get rid of get rid of all those negative names. And because this this this fear about losing limits is what's stopping us from the going out into the great frontier. The other part of this, which is why we focus so much on it. Tristan Harris talked about it in the social dilemma a lot. And you have to realize, like, which is, again, why we have to get to why the answer comes back to personal growth, because our psychology. OK, personal growth. But a plant grows up or for the plant to grow. It can't just grow isn't sufficient. It's got to grow in a direction that's not like the Bully Whippet is just musculature. And it's it's it's got to be part of a whole. She is now being weaponized against us very sophisticatedly by these platforms that are feeding all of these biases, all of these kind of negative patterns in ourselves of like tribalism. We've got this. Yeah, I think it's best to see it as sort of colonization or hijack hijack, exploiting of inner space because we've done as much kind of exploiting of the outside world as we can. And now we over the last 10, 20 years, we've been exploiting the inner space as much as possible. Yeah, attention. Yeah. The attention economy. Yeah. And I had a really interesting interview with Tristan Harris where he actually said that we have to treat we have to get back to treating attention as something sacred, which was the first time I've seen him say it in such a way. Almost really. I mean, I know that that's that's why you bring that's why you bring all your employees and your families together. And and so, OK, not woke ism, but profits for us. And and FDR understood attention as, you know, he's going to go out to the directly to the people through the radio. He's going to circumvent the press and he's going to he's going to get their attention and the Japanese are paid no attention to all of those little boxes coming off the ships and and it's attention is sacred and we're back to Peugeot land and worship, of course. Tristan has his kind of yeah, he's he's he's I think he's got kind of a history with with some of these kind of practices and sort of sees of awakening. So the practices of awakening. Yeah. So I think the dirty secret is a lot of these. But again, awakening is it's just so. You know, I can awaken in horror if I learn that the the mole on my skin is cancerous. That's an awakening. It's not a particularly good. Well, it's an important one because better be awakened to it if you're going to, you know, it's it's all of this stuff connects and scales all the way out. People do. Yes. Yeah. Oh, all of them do. Yeah. Yeah. And so that's the first time I've heard him make that link of awakening to. So my hope, my hope, our hope, I guess, is that it gets so intense that we're forced to awaken. Yeah. We're feeling so kind of exploited and manipulated and yeah, attacked by these platforms that the only way is out. It makes me wonder whether. But is there an out and where is that out? I mean, in many ways, that's what was his name, Alexander Aaron Alexander. So this attention hijack is the opposite of mindfulness. It is actually mindlessness. It's saying I'm going to allow my attention to ride a train of thought to thought to thought that's that's actually injected by an outside agent, whether it's the tech platform, whether it's these likes and dislikes, whether it's capture as an audience member by a podcast or whatever it is. And you're no longer present. You're now in this chain of thought. It's the opposite. So the question is, does that cause enough societal chaos and stress internally that that the suffering alone causes us to wake up or is waking up necessary to actually break this cycle? So it's a kind of chicken. And again, you know, wake up from what into what? An egg scenario. I think you have to come at it at both ends. Myself is my own intuition. But it does make you wonder because why is it that my friend Angelo, who, you know, had an awakening in 94 and has talked a lot about this and he's a doctor and we've done some shows he has seen a and I would imagine these awakenings are in many ways kind of a breaking out of NP of the of the standard menu of NPC characters into. But do you then do you then awaken into another just less popular, more idiosyncratic NPC? I mean, that's that's the that's the frightening. That's the frightening challenge. A rapid exponential increase in people who've had awakening type events where they're now like, oh, I thought I was this, but I'm this. And they see the world completely differently. So social media is that is that generally in his experience is that because they've had traumatic events that have opened them up or because they've had blissful events. It's a mix of things. There's plenty of people who've had trauma that it's a gateway, but he's noticing that even spontaneous awakenings and people who's you would look at their kind of karmic circumstances and go, it's just meh. They're waking up and he's he's he doesn't know why, but he's saying it's a real phenomenon. So could it be that as you start society starts to evolve towards integral, you're seeing this chaos, which will happen. And then that's why, you know, maybe that's part of the reason for the emergence of someone like Jordan Peterson. He spoke right to the thing in us that is looking for that meaning again. Yes. Yeah. Yeah. That's yeah. So Jordan Peterson was a big part of the the origin of rebel wisdom because I kind of saw him in 2017 just thought this guy is speaking to something really important and it's going to go viral, which it did. It's amazing watching the span of Jordan Peterson. I mean, I was very interested in Doug Wilson's video on this because I knew it wasn't wasn't going to like it. And Wilson is usually really up on Jordan Peterson. But of course, in terms of Jordan Peterson fan base, you go all the way from Doug Wilson to rebel wisdom. And it's like, wow, that's bread. Looking back and John Boeveke has talked about this as well. The with Peterson was fueled by the sense of the meaning crisis. I think a deep and the deep mythopoetics, the deep kind of religious perspective that he was bringing or appreciation for the religious perspective that he was bringing, I think was really important. But he kept being dragged down to the political level. Right. That was one of I think the tragedies of Peterson is the pre level. Yeah. Because that's where all the attention is. That's where the heat is. That's where the kind of reaction is. And you know, this this this drug that this drug that attention seeking becomes because it's attention seeking, it's money seeking. It's just that the change will be the you know, the shorts have come in now and in Jordan's channel and just the just the change in Jordan's channel over the last over the last week with the inclusion of the shorts and the clips. And I have no idea what's behind it. But but but there it is. So I feel like he he I don't think that was beneficial to him to continue to just go back to that that kind of it's almost yeah, it's almost kind of addictive thing to keep going back to that particular trough. Yeah. And you know, I'll say the first time I was exposed to Peterson was through mainstream media saying this guy's some conservative loony bin who hates trans people. And I and I took interest I was like, Really? And then I watched him speak, I may have seen a glitch in the Matrix, your film, and some other things. And I was like, this guy is pointing directly at truth. He's pointing at the excesses of postmodern green meme. But he's coming at it. Fascinating the integral. And those who don't know what integral I mean, you can look up Ken Wilbur and integral theory but that I mean, that of course is their template. I mean, Doug Wilson is, well, here's my template, you know, very modern, very square, lined up in there. And I think that's from a clearly integral perspective. He's actually he was incorporating meaning and spirituality back into the evolution in a trans rational way, not a pre rational way in those early days. And I and that was a crack in reality that I saw that I was like, Oh, the mainstream media matrix. It's I might call it a glitch in the matrix. If I were so inclined, that made me think, Oh, the mainstream media may not have a monopoly on truth, which I knew already. Yeah. But now I really knew it. Right. This was something I found at the beginning of rebel wisdom was Peterson in particular was a real selection for people who were willing to question the mainstream narrative because they would hear about this guy. They go and look at it and like, this isn't who I've been who the media saying here. I feel over time he has become more and more reactive. And the tragedy for me at least is that he's become more the caricature of himself, certainly on Twitter. Now, I know David Fuller gets a lot of criticism from a whole variety of you for a variety of different reasons, but takes a lot of real courage for David Fuller to basically express his opinion transparently, because if you know, if he if he would be sort of Jordan Peterson's favorite, I mean, he could I mean, it could be it could be rebel wisdom plus instead of daily wire plus. And that would be enormously lucrative for David Fuller. And you know, I have a lot of respect for that. I mean, it's that same respect that that launched Peterson when people saw him, you know, speaking against speaking out, speaking his mind obviously against a tremendous, tremendous weight of public opinion to speak the truth that that's what sort of, you know, David Fuller saw that through his lens. Doug Wilson sees it through his lens. And of course, David Fuller and Doug Wilson's lenses are very far apart. But, you know, this is part of the reason, you know, I have a lot of respect for for David, because saying what he says here, that costs him a lot of money. It costs him a lot of views. It costs him a lot of a lot of what what many would have him seek in this realm. Then that he was kind of accused of being at the beginning, I don't think he was for for quite a long time. But now he is kind of the the old man shouting at clouds on the Internet, which is a real shame. Do you do you think it's because he was on the front lines of this sort of charge across the trenches into integral? One of the front warriors doing that and he's going to go down and get knocked back until there's enough momentum. Maybe I think it's just a more complex nuance. I think that under the under the spotlight of that much attention and that much he was sort of like I've called him the one man lightning rod of the culture war and trying to conduct that much electricity. And I think there was a sort of slightly messianic tone to a lot of prophetic. Like I think he did see himself in the kind of tradition of he said before, like the Old Testament prophets who come along and say your your society is out of out of whack. You're going down the wrong the wrong path, which I think he very much was doing. Right. 121212 rules for life. The Ten Commandments. They're not far off. Yeah, two more. It's better by 20 percent. Yeah. You got Moses beat by 20 percent. Yeah. And and I think he very much had that. But there was a sense of him connected to something bigger than himself. There was a sort of archetypal power to to his. Yeah, the arc of the Peterson phenomenon. I've sort of very much covered the Peterson phenomenon as being distinct from him himself. Right. But there was this sense of the return of the repressed, the return of Jung, Jung as this the reality of the collective unconscious, the way it manifests through archetype, the way it manifests through story, the way it manifests through these deep embodied stories of culture coming into a into a cultural landscape that was largely formed by the kind of new atheist, rationalist rejection of anything that had kind of that spirit. That spiritual or religious overtones. And that was the force of what he was bringing was you. You're you're crazy if you're ruling out this entire kind of history of of human understanding and knowledge in favor of this incredibly thin, rationalist enlightenment conception of reason. And so he was coming with the force of all of that kind of that weight of the repressed, I would say. This is fascinating because, you know, we all go through these phases like we recapitulate societal phases and vice versa. I myself went through the journey of being the Sam Harris new atheist, like loved the end of faith was like finally someone speaking truth had always been suspicious of organized religion, didn't understand its role in in myself or in people in general. And just thought it was a regressive affectation that would out we'd out evolve as we out tribalized. You know, we get we got less tribal and so on farther from the primordial ooze. And it was actually it was fascinating. It was Sam Harris who cracked the door to meditation for me because I'd had experiences where I was like, this is not consistent with atheism or or the fact that there is it's all reductionist materialism. And Sam Harris's book Waking Up cracked that for me, but I was still quite conditioned by this atheist worldview that that sort of rationalist orange worldview. And it was so between Jonathan Haidt, who had a beef with Sam Harris back in the day and a lot of it was framed by outsiders as well. You know, see, Haidt is actually again, I think I can zoom in to mania. I don't know if I'm saying his name right. I think he's very much on to I mean, this this is an amazing retrospective for many of you. And I know that. And and and it's and it's and so now we've sort of got the two poles. Of course, you've got the world and you've got you. Religion has these positive merits that have to do with, you know, the elephant and unconscious stuff and Jungian kind of stuff and things like that. And then Peterson saying the same thing, actually. And then Harris doing a whole app about spirituality. Suddenly you start to feel your own self for me. This is just my story evolving into, oh, wait, no, there's this, but there's also this. And it then and Peterson really pointing right at it in a way that you viscerally feel it like you come to life. His lectures, I think you've said this before to me or to others. His lectures are like, you know, like a journey. The early ones, you're just like you're you feel an opening. It's almost supernatural, supernatural, meaning it's not reduced to, oh, just this idea, this idea. No, there's something that happens like a good movie or a flow state. Yeah. Some of his former students talked about his lectures as being like a psychedelic experience. And he even even some of his sort of strongest critics at the University of Toronto said, I saw an interview with one of them where the guy said, well, he's a lecturer there and said, I think I've had maybe one student in my life say that my my lectures change their life, whereas something like something ridiculous, like 25 percent or a third of Peterson's students say that his lectures were life changing. It's a frame shift in perception, which which you can tell when you and he was he had the ability to to reflect on his own thought as well in a really powerful way. Yeah. Which at the time where he was able to say, it's almost recursive. Yeah. It was like this is why my lectures are having the effect that they have, because people say when they listen to me that I'm saying stuff they already knew. It's like that's what archetypes do. That's the power of these archetypal stories is to arrange things that you already knew and that you can feel them go. Yeah. And arrange themselves within your psyche. And it's like these these that's the power of truth in a way is it has this sense of familiarity as well as the sense of novelty as a sort of weird mix of novelty and familiarity. Yeah, absolutely. You know who had that effect was Joseph Campbell. Yes. Had that effect. And if you go back and listen to Bill Moyer's thing with him, which I did recently, it's like it was in the 80s or something. And it's like it's brand new. And yet it's so primal, so primitive, so connected to some deep truth. You almost feel like it's new wisdom that's just so ancient. It's a very it's a very paradoxical thing. And it almost forces you into a kind of awakening path because you got the hero's journey is this. And and Peterson was doing the same thing. It's kind of like, you know, get the hell out of your chair. Go clean up your room like that's just the minimum necessary, necessary, but not sufficient. And then the goal is awakening. And that's why I feel again, awakening, awakening, awakening into what awakening for what? Because, you know, there's very much you can sit down and and pull out of them certain characteristics that they'll tend to be. They'll have plenty of propositional in there, but the proposition will be quite nested within the procedural and the participatory. A sort of sense of that's what I think Peterson should be doing more of is something like the power. I think it's the power of story. The Bill Moyers. I think that was right. Or the power of myth or something. Yeah, yeah, yeah. With Joseph Campbell. Like that's something I would love to see him do and kind of because that's what's really fueling him is that sense of the kind of. And I don't think people necessarily realize like how unusual that was. He was told to stop talking about Jung when he was in academia because he said people won't take you seriously. But he was obviously deeply passionate about it. He's come out recently and talked about his own psychedelic experiences, which he'd hinted at in the past. But in the recent conversation with Richard Dawkins, he talked about on multiple occasions having seven grams of dried mushrooms. Peterson. Yeah, massive heroic doses of mushrooms. That's amazing. It doesn't surprise me at all. We can talk about that, but it doesn't surprise me at all. What's interesting is that he had that conversation with Dawkins. So Dawkins had an amazing conversation with Sam Harris where they talked about meditation and psychedelics and Dawkins. I'm going to jump ahead past the psychedelic stuff into the culture war 2.0. Second self. So we were just talking about how the we were just talking about how the first self can be seen through as a type of illusion yet has truth to it. It's an aspect of reality. It's a lens through which we experience through this experiences. But the second self is something Peter Lindberg that you turned me on to that. Yeah, that that maybe describe it for us. Yeah. So Peter has an uncanny ability to say he's good, got good coinage game, which in itself is good coinage game. Yes, it is. It's very meta. I think he came up with that as well. Very meta. So Peter has the ability to to name and come up with really good frameworks for certain dynamics that really help kind of illustrate what's going on. I think he's one of the most interesting thinkers along those lines. The other framework, I think that's really important for people to get is his memetic tribes. Oh, it's a crucial piece. Yeah. When you sent me that it was a game changer. Yeah, like I genuinely believe that he wrote that in, I think, 2018. Right. And it was intended as a kind of psychoactive piece because it talked about the different. He talked about culture war 2.0, how culture war 1.0 was basically left versus right. It was split along sort of the classic kind of lines that were established in the fifties around fifties and sixties around kind of abortion and the classic left right dynamic. Gay marriage. Yeah. Yeah. And and how what we now have is a multipolar war where some of the most intense conflicts are actually on theoretically the same side. And you can take a look at that very. And I think go back to what I played about FDR. I think that's always true. I think it's always true. I think we're a little bit more aware of it, but we're so short lived. We know so little history that that that just feels. Yeah, I think it's always true. Easily like the never Trump Republicans versus the Trump Republicans or on the left, the kind of social justice warriors, social justice warriors or around the trans issue where you've got kind of the turf's supposed turf's. Trans exclusionary radical radical feminists versus the kind of trans rights activists like this is where the most heat in the culture now is, I think, around some of these other dynamics that are not strictly left versus right. Right. And he then came up with all of these different tribes and said these are the active agents in the in the mimetic landscape right now. Right. Okay. I'm not sure how many there were at the time. There were a lot. Yeah. Yeah, maybe 18 or so. Right. Got in my mind. But he he intended it to be a case of each of these tribes have has a specific goal. They have a specific kind of kind of prime movers within it like the chieftains of the tribe. They have specific fears. There's a whole like constellation around. I think I'll leave it there. So this video originally grew out of was going to do Thursday morning when I Thursday morning is usually when I sort of write the first draft of my sermon. And I had so much extra stuff I wanted to say about miracles than I knew I could say in the sermon and the rest the rough draft, which I don't know if I don't Sunday Rick Rick isn't here for Sunday. So stream might not happen. But you'll have the rough draft and it's a long rough draft. I don't know what I'm going to do in terms of sermon length because the sermon itself is usually 10 to 20 percent longer than the rough draft. By the time I get in front of a live audience and start adding things with people and we have to really be disciplined Sunday morning. But it was about miracles because miracles are one thing that sort of continues to point us out to the furthest reaches. So in this little corner of the Internet to a degree partly to avoid keep bumping into larger confessional religious issues where we're trying to keep things fairly local say around the individual or around the little tribe. But as I said earlier in this video I mean things naturally go all the way out to the edges. In some ways none of this transformation awakening enlightenment can be contained. It can't just be me and my little group me and my little family. It's our we have to place eternity in our hearts and that that eternity in the middle of our hearts that is eternity deep has to be addressed. And I think it's it's for that reason that even though the rough draft is I entitled at least so far today's Friday it might change by Saturday but a Christian primer on miracles because miracles are they are in many ways attention seeking but and miracles are ubiquitous in the ancient world. And that was part of justification. It's part of the knowledge that we are limited and fearful and we are in fact going going to die. But this this point made by Gerd Deesen and Annette Mertz about Jesus miracles I think is absolutely critical and it comes towards the end of my rough draft. Nowhere else are so many miracles reported of a single person as they are from the gospel of Jesus. This is what C.S. Lewis gets at in terms of his book miracles where he says you can you can cut the miracles out of Islam out of Buddhism out of just about every other religion and in some ways improve those religions. It's not the case in Christianity. And it's not the case in Christianity because Christianity understands that that it we have to in some ways go all the way out to the infinite. We can't sort of compartmentalize it and say well we'll keep our wisdom located contextually and know it's it's got to go all the way out because I'll just keep reading the uniqueness of the miracles of the historical Jesus line the fact that healings and exorcisms which now take place in the present are accorded an eschatological significance in some ways the point of the miracle is the opening the momentary opening of the aperture to see the infinite. It's it's the feeding of the five thousand it's the stilling of the storm. I mean Jesus miracles aren't simply random. They're they're very much pointed in a particular direction and they definitely have a particular valence and that valence is is release and exorcism release of of the of the mental of the bondage mental of the of the possessed someone who is you know addicted possessed taken over by something and and in some ways in demon possession the there's been a reciprocal narrowing of the individual to such a degree that there's another spirit which has come in and taken over and in order for that that others that the in order for the reciprocal broadening to happen that other spirit has to be taken out of the house but then as the parable goes the house needs to be filled. Health needs to be there in order for the virus to not simply come in again and have its way. So nowhere else are there's many miracles reported of a single person as there are of the gospels of Jesus. The uniqueness of the miracles of the historical Jesus lies in the fact that healings and exorcisms which take place in the present are accorded an eschatological significance. There's an apocalyptic nature to Jesus and the gospel and the apostle Paul picks up on that. Nowhere else do we find a charismatic miracle worker whose miraculous deeds are meant to be the end of an old world and the beginning of a new. And I think in some ways with the with the rebel wisdom you know awakening that they're looking for is they very much want that the end of an old world and the beginning of the new the breaking of one NPC and and and and the desire to go out. Into true freedom. That's what the language is about. That's what the goal is about. But that freedom can't be contained merely in my best life now. It's it's got to be connected to eternity or or it will always at some point reach. A disappointment and a limitation that asks it a little further. Come out. You were you were you were made for more than this world can contain. Nowhere else are so many miracles unique reported of a single individual as there are this the Gospels of Jesus uniqueness of the miracles of the historical Jesus lies in the fact that the healings and exorcisms so many of them are in those two categories take place in the present. But they're afforded an eschatological significance. Well this is a big messy unwieldy video. I hope it isn't just chaos. I hope it has some cohesion and I hope it blesses you in some way. Leave a comment. Let me know.