https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=XGoil4zuQPc

 Okay. All right. Thanks guys for coming and having this second discussion on miracles. I thought I'd just start by a quick recap of the situation and then I think the arguments will flow fairly quickly. So last time we talked, especially towards the end of the conversation when sadly my internet ran out. But you two guys were able to reach an interesting point where you had established a kind of continuity between the emergence that we see in nature and the kinds of miracles that Christ was doing. And then John raised the good point of, but why do we need God then? Like if we can explain miracles using, let's say, the emergence that we see within nature, then why do we need to bring something that is somehow beyond nature? And it's to try and address this that I wrote the last two articles I wrote, but especially the last one. During the last discussion, John, you brought up the fact that historically the need for something beyond nature and miracles showed up. You could see the debate in the late Renaissance between some neoplatonists and Christians and like, courtesians on the one side. And this debate, I tried to look into it, but I didn't quite find something I could really sink my teeth into because there was so much political issues in between the metaphysical debates that it was hard for me to decipher. But over time, after looking into Christological issues, I found something where definitely like we need to draw a line where like we definitely need to go beyond what we see within the naturalist worldview, at least typically, namely the incarnation. So I tried to therefore write something where I could stay as close as possible to the kinds of metaphysics that John, you've been defending in this corner of the internet, while still being able to make my way as close as possible to the incarnation and like say clearly where we depart. So I can try to summarize this briefly. I know you've both read the article, so I won't try to go into tons and tons of details. Excellent article. Excellent article. Thank you. That means a lot. And yeah, I'll try to just summarize and then you can both respond. So, the basic idea was at the ground of, at the ground of really, there is possibility at the ground of being that gets shaped by the ground of intelligibility, there are constraints on nature. And we see these constraints at different layers like there are constraints in the basic laws of physics that constrain the emergence of particles at the bottom of physics, for instance, there are other constraints that show up, let's say, at the level of our consciousness, which will shape the emergence, like, from our neurons in our body in an environment. And then there are higher level constraints still, for instance, the kinds of social level constraints that we mentioned last time when we talked about the placebo effect, for instance, that will shape the emergence of like, feelings and other things. And I tried to use this basic idea that there's a logos, there's a ground of intelligibility that shape things and try to get it as close as possible to where I could with like the incarnation. I start with the logos at the bottom of things, and then I try to explain how the logos can act through human intellect. And that's kind of a no platonic idea where, let's say, if I'm in the example, I use the example of an engineer doing mathematics, if you're doing... I just want to interject to let people know that within mathematics, Platonism is a respected, even a prominent position. So you're not shuffling in something from the bottom of the deck here in any way, just to strengthen your argument, actually. Thank you. Thank you. Yeah. And because it works because in mathematics, like, the truths we're dealing with are so abstract, let's say if you take the Pythagorean theorem or any other kind of mathematical truth, you end up with something that would be true, even if time and space themselves and things like that. You're dealing with some very, very abstract level of reality, and humans can mediate between that abstract layer of reality and concrete reality. If I'm an engineer, and I do mathematics and I use this very abstract relationship to create something, then this very abstract mathematical relationship will end up shaping the world through me. So you can see this as the logos, the ground of intelligibility acting through human intellects to shape reality. It's the old biblical idea of Adam mediating between heaven and earth. Okay, so that's where I go to then. And then the step I try to make, which goes further, is to say how the incarnation goes further than this typical case of humans mediating between heaven and earth, where I want that in the case of the incarnation, rather than having, let's say, just sporadic actions of the logos through human intellects that happen here and there when we engage in, like, this or that activity. That in the case of the human nature of Christ, you see a hypostatic union, to use the precise term, you see a union in one person where the logos is constantly acting through, like, irreducibly the human nature of Jesus. And then you get this picture where throughout all of the development of nature, and I use Berkson there, and his idea of how it is that you can see in evolution, the apparition of more and more free kinds of life, like life forms that are able to be shaped, let's say more and more abstractly by the logos. So they have more possibilities open to them. Yes, yes, yes, yes. Maybe that's a better way of putting it, because it's more consistent with the premises of your previous argument. If you'll just allow me to interject there. I'm just trying to help you out. I'm just trying to help you out right now. Yeah, that's true. Thank you. That's how I wrote it in the article. It didn't come back to me quickly enough. But yes, that's right. So we have, let's say, humans, we have a lot more possibility than animals and animals have still more possibility than plants, which have still more possibilities than minerals, for instance. But it's this fact that we humans have more possibility, which means that like the logos can shape, let's say the bottom layer of physics, like can shape the ground of, can shape the possibility of the ground of being, the logos can then shape possibilities through human intellect. And I want to say that then what happens, what is different from what we see in nature. Currently, we don't see humans that are getting shaped like every instance by the logos directly. We see people who have like glimpses. But the claim for the incarnation would be okay, at this point, we have something different, where the human nature always offers its potential to be shaped by the logos directly. And you have this cooperation then where the logos is always acting through the human nature of Jesus. So that's where I read the fair amount of Christology to try and make sure that they wouldn't say any heresy there. But I think that, so on the one hand, I'm sort of trying to stretch what I can see from within your language, John. And on the other end. I really respect and appreciate that. I just want to do something else to help you out just for viewers. When JP is using the term intellect, he's not using it the way we currently use it today, as we would when we were in the early days. He's using it in more of the ancient neoplatonic Greek sense, which is our capacity to grasp, you know, abstract and profound patterns. And so it's not the same. It overlaps, but we shouldn't hear just that sense of intellect that we use in the world today. So, for example, and JP mentions this in his in his article, an artist who renders some beautiful music. Or some great work of art is also demonstrating news is also demonstrating intellect in that sense. And so the platonic sense of intellect is much broader than our current sense. And so I want to emphasize that because what JP is saying here isn't sort of, I don't want it to be thought of it as just sort of a purely conceptual thing that's happening. Some of his examples like the mathematician and he and JP, I believe, does that for good reason, because as I said, Platonism within math is a well-respected position within mathematics. But if we go back to the original meaning, it's much more it is much more comprehensive of our humanity than our current word intellect would indicate. And I think that's also needed to just again to strengthen the argument you're making, JP. So I just wanted to put that in there. Yes, thank you. And then what I'm ultimately trying to do with this is sort of a top-down move. I'm trying to do metaphysics and to see how I can bring in the logos through human intellect. And then on the other end, I would sort of try to plug this in with what we discussed last time, especially, as I said earlier, the point where you two guys got to when I when I lost my internet connection, where you we want to say that on the one end, the miracles, like the events that happen in the world. The events that happen within Christ's lives are within Christ's life, sorry, or events which are higher levels of emergence from what we see in nature. They're kind of weird events that explain the other the multiplicity of weird events that we see within nature. So I sort of try to get this bottom-up move from like emergence up until like the human nature of Christ. But I also try to get the top-down move from the logos through that human nature of Christ. Hopefully, I get to like, say, okay, this is the point where I have to break from the kind of naturalism that I think, John, you would be comfortable with. But like, at least now it's clear. That's my basic idea. And you and you and you tried to argue. I mean, you acknowledge that. And again, thank you for that. That was that was charitable on your part. And I want to say for anybody who reads the articles, I put a comment in when JP says John would agree with this, John would agree. He's right. He's he's getting it correct. And so he's not misrepresenting me in any way. But then you said, you know, the argument sort of stops here, but you at least want to propose something that's continuity. And I really liked the metaphor. I want to explore it with you. You know, differences of degree become differences in kind. We talked about that last time. And then this idea of a new kind of life, right? Almost the way, you know, we have, you know, intelligent life emerging out of non-intelligent life. You're proposing something at least analogous to that. Am I understanding you correctly? Yes, that's correct. Yes. OK. And I thought that topic. And again, I see the movie made at the end there just to strengthen. I mean, you argued last time that at the core of CS Lewis's argument, right, is that the incarnation is the greatest miracle that makes the other miracles possible. And therefore, I think zeroing in on the incarnation here was actually, you know, completely legitimate move. So right now, I just want to make sure that, you know, you that you that I'm fully appreciating your argument and seeing it in the strongest possible fashion. Thank you. If you guys want to respond right away, I know you also mentioned Nishitani in your in your comment, John, and I ended up reading the book after your comment because it has really piqued my interest. And what religion and nothingness? Yes, yes, exactly. Yeah. So, well, I do have some things to say on the basis of that. But I mean, I kind of want to hear Paul's initial reactions first. Right. Just like you allowed me the chance to say how I was receiving it. I'd like to hear how Paul is receiving it before I respond, because I want I want this to be as inclusive as possible. I don't mind just watching, too, but I love the paper. I thought it was a couple of moments. I think I'm sorry, I'm sorry, JP, that you lost your Internet connection. But the end of the conversation was was quite interesting. Lewis, you know, when you you know, when I when I look at how you mapped it out, I really love the way you mapped it out. And I'm really glad that you did that. I think it's a great way to do that. I think it's a great way to do that. I think it's a great way to do that. I think that was a great way to do that. I think that was a great way to do that. I think that was a great way to do that. I think that was a great way to do that. I think that was a great way to do that. I think that was a great way to do that. I think that was a great way to do that. I think that was a great way to do that. I think that was a great way to do that. I think that was a great way to do that. I think that was a great way to do that. I think that was a great way to do that. I think that was a great way to do that. I think that was a great way to do that. Humanity is a sibling to nature, but also we are the stuff of Earth and the breath of God. Humanity is sort of this weird, amffibian creature that is not fully natural. And we continue to bear witness to this position whenever we use words like, you know, human, you know, manmade climate change as if that is unnatural. I mean, and that's a persistent relic of our language that we have. And it's, it's interesting, then the how the logos comes in, in terms of a mission in order to, because the idea is that humanity, humanity rebelled, and so lost its, its comfortable relationship with its sister nature and lost its communion with its source for at least half of its being so in that way for that way for Lewis, human beings are also sort of a, you know, a union between nature and God in his book miracles. And so I thought the way you laid things out is was exactly was very fair to Lewis's book. And I think it and I think it anticipates then what, what we talk about in terms of miracles here that there is somehow with with the, how to phrase this, with the power of the author. Nature is capable of things that the sister alone doesn't is incapable of, and I thought you, you really illustrated that beautifully in terms of math and the engineer that, you know what what we find with human engineers is this capacity. That human engineers pull from nature a capacity to do things that we don't find naturally occurring. And so I thought your paper was dead on faithful to Lewis's work. And I thought I found it very comfortable in terms of my own framing of the world, given the influence that Lewis has had on me. Yeah, that makes me want to bring out another point that I think I should have brought in my summary, namely that in the logos constraining possibility, since the Big Bang basically you see like the logos coming to greater and greater expression, where, like, and you can see this in Nishitani as well, where, like we, let's say, it's especially clear in humans we can bring out more of the logos than animals or plants can for instance, and the idea that john you brought up earlier as well that I mentioned then what I would see the incarnation as is as the, the first fruits from the dead, a new kind of life, as you mentioned, where in the same way that the logos can come to greater expression in human beings then can in other animals, then the idea is that after the The logos has constrained the possibility, like since the beginning of time for humans to appear and even within Israel, like you can see all of the weird constraints that Israel has had to become like this pure vessel of possibility for God to act, you get like this, this constant constant act of the logos at the grandest scale, until the logos can then have a vessel of possibility to act like at the scale of just one person to bring in a new kind of life which would then have it. So I'm trying to bring in like both aspects of what john you mentioned earlier and what Paul you just brought up, like this, this author writing himself into the story like the logos coming to greater expression until you get to Christ where you have a new kind of expression of the logos, which, like the claim is that this will spread. So, yeah, thank you. So, I mean, thank you for reading the initiative, Tony. I think that's one of the top five most profound books I've read in my life. I've read it twice and I plan to read it again. And I think the Kyoto school is really, I mean, the Kyoto school should be more in all of these discussions because that is the school that is bridging between Eastern and Western philosophy, but directly directly, you know, directly to the meaning crisis. Religion and nothingness is about the meaning crisis nihilism. Nishatani's book The Self Overcoming of Nihilism is that, you know, so Nishatani has had a profound impact on me. So, first of all, so I thank you for doing that, Paul, I'll try not to speak at a disadvantage to you because I don't know if you've read it but JP and I have but we'll try and keep it as. Yeah. I recommend it. It's a masterpiece and it's generally regarded as such. I think deservedly so. So I'll try to be as explanatory as I can if I invoke it. I don't want to leave you out. Oh, before I said that we're amphibians, I always carry around my frog. So I carry them around my frog because the idea that we're amphibians is actually directly from the neoplatonic tradition. So the frog is my neoplatonic tradition and my rock is my, the Zen and then the Kyoto school, of course, is the bringing of the two together. So I'm always carrying them around to remind me. So a couple things. First of all, one more note of appreciation, man, I'd like to do a little bit of advertising about it. And this has to do with something, you know, that Greg Enriquez and I are going to be releasing on his podcast. We're trying to make a case for naturalism as something. And so the, if I can have just two minutes on that. Yep. The idea is, I make the claim that most, almost nobody's a materialist anymore because people don't, we think that everything's made out of matter. That's rather kind of a, that's basically a 17th century ontology. There's all kinds of things. There's fields, there's forces, there's causation. There's the curvature of space. There's the continuum. There's potentially multiple universes, blah, blah, blah, blah. So technically I would say most people are physicalist and then there's variations of physicalists. There are reductive physicalists who say everything can be replaced ultimately by the language of physicalism. And then there are non-reductive materialists who say, no, no, there are things that can't be reduced. They are condensed. They are not. They will never be inconsistent with the physics, but they are non-reducible to it. And this has to do with a lot of the stuff we've been talking about. Real emergence, the fact that the level at which people are doing science has to really exist or the science doesn't really exist. And then the science can't tell us that everything is reducible to the bottom layer. Right. You've heard me make these arguments. So that I'm a non-reductive material, non-reductive physicalist, not any kind of materialist or reductive physicalist. This is a position, by the way, that's not, I'm not some weird, freaky, fringe person in the scientific community. I think I'm fairly mainstream. And so, and I get it that you guys want to still, I'm trying to say thank you. So just, just to make sure that I'm not saying that you guys are not doing anything that's not, I'm saying that you guys are not doing anything that's not going to be a problem. I think you guys want to still, I'm trying to say thank you. So just hang on that you still want to criticize the sufficiency claims of naturalism. But I want to thank you for making it clear that naturalism, non-reductive physicalism, right, is not materialism. And it shouldn't be criticized or straw manned as some kind of materialism. That's unfair. That's unfair. I wanted to, I mean, JP, you were, you were, you were meticulously careful about that. And I wanted to acknowledge and thank you for that. I think that, and even your, even your, there's a sense of trying to say like I can get, I can come up with an account that might be consistent, although not reducible. That's also in the spirit of what we're talking about here. So I wanted to say, say thank you. I'm going to start up Nishitani because there were the, and I thought this might engender some deepening of the discussion and then I'll make that point. And perhaps we can open things up a little bit. So Nishitani of course is coming out of the Zen Buddhist tradition. And his definition of religion, I think is really apropos here. He calls it the real self realization of reality, which is this fundamental and I want to be really clear, you know how I use realization in the double sense. I got it from Nishitani. He's explicitly using realization in that double sense. The real self realization of reality. And the reason I brought that up is that sounded very much like what, and JP is nodding, so at least my intuition was at least prima facie. Very much what JP was talking about that, right? There, right? That in human beings, we see the possibility of what, you know, the logos coming to this greater and greater self realization. It's much more implicit in inanimate things, more explicated. And this is a Aristotle and Platonist, right? Much more explicated in animals and so on and so forth. Now the reason why I brought it up, and so here's the point of challenge. So I tried to be really friendly about this because I really appreciate what you've done and I want to respond in kind, right? Thank you. Is that Nishitani is offering that and he defines it as religion, so he makes it very clear. And it's the kind of religious state, if I can put it that way using his language now that I've given his definition, that is the response to the threat of nihilism. Hence the book, Religion and Nothingness. When we get to the real self realization of reality, we can take the no thingness that has a purely negative sense in nihilism and it is inverted. It is aspect changed to be the most profound positive thing that we can experience. It becomes the field and right, so you guys are familiar with this from your own Christian tradition. The no thingness of God is different from the no thingness of evil, right? And what Nishitani is claiming, I was invoking Augustine there, right? What Nishitani is claiming is this state of enlightenment is precisely the thing that brings about that shift in people's realization. And he argues that that is the fundamental response to nihilism. Is that fair to your reading, JP? And Paul, does that sort of at least make a prima facie sense to you? Yeah. So and then I want to invoke one other thing because I evoked Augustine. I'm trying to use the American pronunciation. You guys say Augustine. I was always taught Augustine, so I don't know what that's supposed to mean. But I want to point to something in the confessions that is really interesting and it always has, it's always intrigued me. And I take it that you, that Augustine is, you know, especially for you, JP, but I think Paul, you've invoked him several times and he's one of the, he's one of the masters of this whole discussion, the logos and all of this. And in the confession, the thing that I want to point to is not his conversion, but the experience he had before his conversion. Yeah, he relates that he has a mystical experience, union with the one, but he can't maintain it. But he thinks it in some sense prepares him and opens him up to the possibility of conversion. So the meta, then if I can say it in trying to use the Greek language, the Neoplatonic metanoia prepares him for the Christian metanoia. I was always intrigued by the fact that right. Augustine admits that he was able to achieve it temporarily. And JP points to that, at least maybe something similar with the mathematician. Is that fair? Yes, yes. Okay. All right. So I'm really, like I said, I'm deeply appreciative of the way I've been treated and I want to respond deeply and kindness is important to me. So, let's say we've got somebody within the Orthodox Christian tradition who, and his, his thing is, well, I achieved it but I couldn't maintain it. And then he, he has the whole original sin theory the gravitas that pulls him down, right. But Nishitani belongs to a tradition that doesn't have that idea and has the idea of the Buddha, and not just the Buddha, multiple people who achieve what I would call enlightenment and this does become their permanent and ongoing way of being. That's what they report. And that's what the tradition holds. And so, what I, again, right, is that this seems to be a state that, and you guys know that I tried to give an account of enlightenment within awakening from the meaning crisis and that a naturalistic account. So, isn't it, isn't it, and of course, we also have within the neoplatonic tradition porphyry reports that, you know, platinus achieved union with the one and he was able to do it multiple times not quite continuous, but he was close to that, etc. Is it not possibly the case that other individuals have achieved a continuity of the real self realization of reality. And it's reported in these other traditions, I mean, I'm not, I'm not like a card carrying Buddhist or anything like that. You guys know that. But, so what I'm what I'm bringing up is, I think you're right about differences of degree producing differences of kind and I think, I think it. The idea of enlightenment described as a new kind of life is beautifully accurate for how I see enlightenment, and don't forget Plato's theory is a theory of enlightenment you come out of the cave into the light. Yeah, right. The platonic and like even the Zen and don't forget the Kyoto school from Suzuki on saw deep resonance between the Zen account of enlightenment and the platonic account. So I'm not doing something slippery here, right, that you get accounts of individuals who have achieved enlightenment. And I want to say well doesn't that hold out the possibility that this is a state that is sorry for this part you get this is the part that will be wincy, that is naturalistically realizable by human beings, the Buddha famously argued that no divine intervention was needed for enlightenment. The gods were irrelevant. That's what makes him. Yes, there's gods in the Buddhist world but what makes him a non theist is exactly that claim, right. And he explicitly said he wasn't a god he refused to perform miracles. He's kind of the opposite in some ways right. So, that's what I'm holding out as the challenge, the challenge topic, and I hope it's taken in good spirit because I offered it in good faith. Yes, yes. Do you want to respond. First, sure, sure. I guess I would, you know, I, in some ways, I asked the question, what are we looking for. And, you know, I've been ever since my. After this weird world of Jordan Peterson and then this little corner of the internet. One of the things that I had never had to deal with on a, on a ongoing basis in my ministry was the reality of psychedelics and people's ex I'll say people's exploration of reality with with psychedelic drugs. I've had quite a bit more experience of working with people with street drugs. Let me, let me say, let me offer this idea that in the Gospels, Jesus regularly goes to solitary places to pray. And, you know, he takes his disciples his disciples don't seem particularly good at it because and often the times he goes with them. They don't quite know what to do. They fall asleep. But that's that's sort of normal with this kind of thing. There is there is the one time when Jesus is transfigured, and Jesus tells them to, you know, well, let's just keep this between us, which, you know, at least until after the events that Jesus anticipates, but the, the times that Jesus goes to the mountain, and we assume that Jesus' union with the Father are for Jesus in continuation with miracles, such as turning water to wine, multiplying loaves and fishes, raising the dead. And so I guess what I would offer is that, whereas I don't have, I don't feel a need to sort of demand exclusivity with respect to human experiences because none of us can see from the inside. And so what is going on in a with a with a Buddhist monk who is an expert at at what what they are doing in the temple, or, or any of any, you know, what we basically see on one level as a person, you know, you know their stories of levitation and stuff will set that aside for now but basically what we see if we go to someone One variety of pursuit of the divine via an inside experience is a person sitting tranquilly and still for a while and then they will come out and they will give a report of, you know, to the degree that they can of the ineffable let's say. But one of the things that I think is central to Christianity with respect to the Gospels, and so often misunderstood, is that the miracles that Jesus does are intended to in some ways be taking what happens inside that personal connection with the divine and manifesting it in materiality. And so if you look at say Lewis's book on miracles. When you get to the end of the book, Lewis talks about miracles of the old creation and miracles of the new creation. And what I would say, Jesus, you know, if I would continue on the line that Lewis sort of gives us indication of What I would say Jesus does is what he does on the mountaintop when he, you know, the, the, the gospel simply report, he went to the mountain to pray. Okay, doesn't be doesn't come down and say oh this this this this this the Apostle Paul give some renderings of, you know, some little clues about he's taken up to the third heaven, yada yada yada. Yada yada yada. But what happens in the miracles in the multiplication of the loaves and fishes in the water to wine is that Jesus is saying I am taking what has happened inside of me in my communion with the Father, and I am expressing it in the world with this miracle here And and sort of like the experience within, let's say, a meditative union with God, the, you know, the, the multiplied loaves and fishes do decay, the, the, the wine is consumed, the, the dead that Jesus raises die again. The point of that of those miracles are in some ways analogous to the engineer and the bridge. And, you know, I part of the reason I really liked JP's continuation is that the, the engineer and the bridge and the multiplication of loaves and fishes are also within a continuum of God reaching through us via logos and manifesting his work in the world. Can I respond to that JP or do you want to respond to what I said or how should we, how would you? I think I can respond right now it's, I think it goes in, in the same area as Paul so probably wants to respond to, probably you can respond to both of us, John, then. I think there's, there's like differences in how we conceive of the logos or Dharma and how we also conceive of the experience of. Thank you for doing that, by the way, Dharma and logos are very close translations of each other. Thank you. I think in some translations of the Bible in India, that's the word they used for logos. Exactly. And so I think there's like in the same way that we will differ john I think in how we can see what the logos, and I would change possibility we will also differ in our human experiences union with the logos. In, in the article I don't know if you noticed but I never talked about supernaturalism, I tried as much as possible within that article to see if I could even say something that would be compatible with non reductive naturalism. I didn't like just come out and say that, okay well john is a secret supernaturalist and like within his anthology. That was very accurate and kind of you at the same time. I suspect that there's like a, a deep. I think that the, let's say the kinds of supernaturalism that I see Aquinas defending or Church Fathers defending is much closer to the kind of non theism that I see Nishitani defending as well. I think basically a lot of the, it's the worry that lots of people have against supernaturalism is almost the same as the worry that Thomists will have against, like, people denying divine simplicity, like we, we don't want to say that this supernatural is some sort of parallel track to the universe. We, we want to say that it's the ultimate ground of everything that is simple immutable and so on. And the way that the logos will incarnate in Christ for instance, isn't because like some event happened in the, in the ground of being like that logo changed or whatever. We want to say at least in the classical tradition that it's the relationship between some entity in the world and the logos that appeared and the logos itself didn't change. So, anyway, I do think that there will. I'm not sure exactly what the differences will be between let's say Aquinas as God and Nishitani emptiness, but I don't think it's as far as let's say most people could could surmise. I've heard David Bentley art, mentioning that the, like the kind of non theism that we see in Buddhism for instance, he sees it as as an healthy rejection of many kinds of theism or bad theological attempts in Christianity. He's one of the few of the big popular names and who talks about non theism in a respectful and serious fashion. And, and, you know, and his, what the experience of God, he actually uses the three characteristics drawn from Vedanta to try and like bliss and stuff like that to try and describe it. So he he is somebody from the West who's I think sincerely reaching out to the east if I can, I don't like that language but we don't have other language right now. Yeah. So, yeah, I think that's right. So, that's exactly why I recommended Nishatani because I think there is. And you know and like I said you from DT Suzuki on and Nishatani, you see people you see the, the people in the Kyoto school recognizing resonance with neoplatonism. And then you see with john Caputo, you know, also a sort of a, I guess a post Christian non theistic theologian who's fairly significant right now, because he's one of the field theologians I think who's read who's wrestled with postmodernism, like very successful and come out with something very powerful him and Mark Taylor I think are the two premier examples. Yeah, I think that's a good example of that. Yeah, I think that's a good example of that. Yeah, I think that's a good example of that. Yeah, I think that's a good example of that. Yeah, I think that's a good example of that. Yeah, I think that's a good example of that. Yeah, I think that's a good example of that. Yeah, I think that's a good example of that. Yeah, I think that's a good example of that. Yeah, I think that's a good example of that. Yeah, I think that's a good example of that. Yeah, I think that's a good example of that. Yeah, I think that's a good example of that. Yeah, I think that's a good example of that. Yeah, I think that's a good example of that. Yeah, I think that's a good example of that. Yeah, I think that's a good example of that. Yeah, I think that's a good example of that. Yeah, I think that can I, there was a second step to my response that ties in. Sorry, it's good. It's good. I just don't want to lose track because I was trying to tie it in with what Paul said as well. Because in the same way that we, so we will have some disagreements about the logos itself. I'm not sure exactly how those will play out in practice, but I think those map down also to how we see the logos incarnate. And there was a place in Nishitani's book, Religion and Nothingness. I even remember it's on page 201. He mentions that. I mean I read it like over the last week so it's fresh. He mentions that. Okay, so the role of people who achieve enlightenment is to like induce enlightenment in others as well. And, but the fact is we live in a history where most people are not in a state of enlightenment. And he mentioned that there hasn't been much thought within Buddhism about like how, how, let's say history, like how you can see the unfoldment of logos in history and how enlightenment is supposed to spread in history. And he even mentions that he would have expected it to come up in Mariana Buddhism, where there's like this great idea that comes close to Christianity where people take a vow when they like. The bodhisattvas. Yes. Yeah, yeah, yeah, the bodhisattvas, they take up a vow that they will not enter into Nirvana until they have brought all beings into Nirvana themselves. So, like they just keep reincarnating until they can bring everyone to Nirvana, to enlightenment. And that's, at this point you start getting close to the idea that within Christianity, the way that we conceive of the logos, even though the logos remains immutable, doesn't change, even though emptiness. Even though emptiness remains the same. We want to say that there's, there's like some, the ways that Dharma is constituted or the ways that the logos is constituted will reach towards greater and greater incarnation of the logos of the Dharma. And so, the idea that there's really an incarnation is sort of coming down into potentially to bring something down. So, what, like, the movement that I see within Mariana Buddhism towards like this drive to sort of come back down to spread enlightenment is like reaching towards what I see in Christianity where the logos also comes down to spread the new kind of life that we see in Christ. So, I see those kinds of two things where in the same way that Paul was talking about the experience of Jesus on the mountain coming down to bring something down to bring patterns into like incarnation. I would argue, but it's all, I don't have like clear-cut arguments. It's part of why I like to have this conversation. I see that there's like something different about the way that the logos incarnates within Christianity that I don't see like exactly in how the logos incarnates in Buddhism. Sure, but that's a symmetrical argument, of course. Yes, yes, that's true. That's right. So it's like differences of symmetrical property. So, I'm glad you would see though that there's at least sort of approximations or relevant similarities, because one of the things that you get in the Nishitani book, and I think this needs to be said about Eregina too, is like, and I've kept trying to emphasize this, to replace the hierarchical model, right, with the complete interpenetration of emergence and emanation. There's no emanation without emergence. There's no emergence without emanation. They're completely interpenetrating. And to use your language, if it's not trespassing, the complete and utter identity between God's transcendence and his immanence. If you keep them as radically opposite and not fundamentally ontologically identical, you're actually dividing God in a way that trespasses on the unity of God, I think. That was Eregina's argument, at least, as far as I could see it. And so, it seems to me that if that's the case, what we're talking about isn't, I want to be really careful here, isn't like an ontological case of something incarnating, but more, as you said, at a level, there's levels of realization and a particular level is available. This is why I like the new life. There's a particular level, and any being at that level will have that kind of life, have that kind of realization. And so, that's kind of what I'm arguing for. Now I want to respond to Paul, and that I think that's like the point about the, so one of the things that's always intrigued me, and I'm glad we're in a good faith discussion because I can talk to you guys about this without, right, is the opposite attitudes. The opposite attitudes towards miracles in the two traditions. There's indications that the Buddha was capable of some miracles, but he steadfastly refused to perform miracles. In fact, he said, this is how you will know somebody's not one of my disciples if they offered to perform a miracle. And if, and I don't know if you guys, if I've ever related the Buddha with the woman who lost your child? No. Okay, because I want to tell this story because it's a way in which the enlightenment comes into materiality in a really palpable way. So if you give me a moment, you know, and you guys got tons of parables, so. Right. So a woman comes to the Buddha. And she says, you know, her son has died. And she wants him to raise him from the dead. Now, nobody thinks this isn't a ridiculous request, by the way. Okay, so she said, will you raise him from the dead, will you raise him from, and he, no, no, no, go away, go away, go away. And she keeps coming and then he, right, very much like Jesus with the woman at the well, right, okay, let's, he says, I'll raise your son from the dead, but you have to do one thing for me. And she says what she said, and by the way, it's a mustard seed again, which is really kind of weird. You have to go into town and you have to get a mustard seed from somebody's house. And she says, Oh, sure, great. And he's Oh, no, one condition, you have to get a mustard seed from a house that has not tasted the grief of death. Oh, of course. And she goes in, and she knocks on the door and she, do you have mustard seed? Yes. Has anybody suffered grief from? Oh, yes. And she goes from house to house to house to house. And now think about the mathematician having the insight. Yep. And then she goes, Oh, right. And she goes back to the Buddha, and she says thank you. And that was the response to grief, right. And she gets a kind of insight. Now, to me, Paul, that sounds like a very powerful, you know, materialization, if we'll use that word, right, of enlightenment into the, you know, the healing of a woman who is experiencing one of the most profound, you know, you know, negative experiences that human being, and he's transforming it into what grief can do for human beings, which is make them feel better. Which is make them human in a way, like one of the wisest persons in my life said to me, don't get deeply involved with somebody who hasn't tasted grief, because they haven't reached the depths of their humanity. And that was like, Oh, right. And that's what he's doing. And so, like I see, I'm offering, I'm saying that's not the same thing as a miracle, but it's like, it seems to be to be a materialization that is of considerable value. So that was offering as a response. I, when I think about, you know, there's obviously the wisdom, the wisdom of that story is profound. Yes. Yeah. And, but, but when I, when I ask myself, I know, you know, I know very little, I should read an issue Tani spoke because I really am not conversant at all in Eastern. I mean, I've been I've spent my whole life, you know where I am and doing what I am. So, so going back to Lewis Lewis and his book. I mean, part of what part of what Lewis offers in that book for me and part of why the book was so helpful was, it does. It does connect. What what in, at least my formation within the Christianity available to me when and where I grew up was sort of a disconnected world. And the, the, the stories of Jesus are these are these very sometimes strange. It's certainly not a fairy tale. Well, I shouldn't say that, but it's it's certainly not mere wish fulfillment. No, no, I get what you meant. Yeah. And, but yet it is. It is the, it is the. I guess, maybe, I don't know, maybe I'm not doing anything more than read it or read or read or a reiterating my point that in some ways, the experience, the experience of union that we can that we can have to whatever degree we do. I think those degrees scale to, I mean, not too far from my, from where I live as Yosemite National Park and if you go down there during the summer, you find the valley floor is just swamped with tourists from all over the world to look at rock. That's, that's what they look at. They look at rock. But when you go to Yosemite Valley, and you walk in that valley and you see El Capitan and you see Half Dome, and you know many other features. You, you say I mean, people go there because, you know, there's, there's a lift, there's a, you know, something happens at a very small level but enough to have people travel from all over the world Asia Europe, all to come to Yosemite Valley. I think part of what Christianity offers is the, is the realization that the, the good materiality of this world can somehow be joined with its author in a way that is not simply psychological. And that that in fact so Lewis's central, central chapter in in the book miracles is the grand miracle where of course the incarnation comes, and he dives all the way to the depths, and he pulls the rest up with him. And into into a, and of course in Christianity, the result of all of this is a new creation. And of course within the Christian tradition there's a lot of trying to get at okay what on earth are we talking about with this of course so of course we've with Dante, you've got the beatific vision and so that has been an attempt. But in, you know, in the ends at the end of the book of Revelation, for example, there's this, there's this new creation and this of course is also seen in the book of Isaiah, where maybe for now, the, the devoted disciplined practiced holy man can can discover wisdom and beauty and, and in a sense, the, the, an escape from death and a, and a taste of eternity which is, you know, as Augustine, difficult to maintain difficult to maintain for very long. I think inherent in Christianity, and manifest by the miracles is the idea that materiality itself will participate in what right now only we the strange amphibians can touch on for only certain sacred moments. And that is, in fact, the gospel. And now there's lots of questions all the way on down about that. And, and this is why I think in the Christian tradition. Right now for example in the midst of a pandemic. When in church, we thank God for, of course this will be controversial with everything's controversial. I just had my second Pfizer shot in my arm this morning. But okay, which I'm glad. Yeah, so the, so the, you know, the, the scientists, you know that that entire civil as civilization machinery that has led to an mRNA vaccine in my arm to combat this virus. This is all the spirit the work of the Spirit of God. This is, this is a part of the, this grand movement that God has undertaken exemplified in the incarnation, which is moving us towards final union, which, which now maybe we only experience at the, at the limits of our capacity. But by virtue of a vaccine by sanitation by irrigation by, you know, all of the stuff that is happening in technology that is happening in culture that is happening in art, all of this is moving us towards final. Some final reunion with. With what we were made for. And so, and I think the, the critique of miracles that I hear in your story. I don't find alien at all in Christianity because Jesus was very critical of the crowds who were looking for him for easy solutions easy answers, And he would often say, you know, you ask that, you know, a perverse generation asked for a sign, I'll give you the sign of Jonah, and then he says Jonah spent three days in the belly of the fish, and everybody probably listened to him and thought, are we going to take a trip to the sea. And of course, he was speaking about resurrection but I think the entire flow of this and Christianity is is not, you know, is not. I think it's intelligible and understandable. And I think part of the reason there's a lot of ways that we went wrong but I'll leave it right there. I hope that is intelligible because I, I actually don't think many people understand that this is what Christianity is really about. But I think it is, that's, that's how I understand what I understand Christianity to be about. Well, can I just ask an understanding question. So what I'm hearing you say, and again, not a challenge but just want to make sure I'm understanding you that what Christianity is saying is something like all of nature could be brought to this higher level of realization. I'm not understanding you correctly. Yes, that's the central point of the miraculous element in Christianity is to point to that redemption of the world. To use more sort of religious language. Have I, have I said, yes. And that's Lewis's contention in the book too. Right. Okay. I just want to make sure I understood you correctly. Yeah, yeah, and I think we see that in the original to right of how all of nature is meant to like all of your nature uses nature in that term that's like different from what we're using right now, but let's say all of material reality is supposed to also come back to the creator through humans, ultimately. And, but yeah, as far as the response it seems. I suspect we reach a point where it gets difficult to get deeper at the issue metaphysically, and Paul in large part was speaking existentially, and I think this is kind of what we have to do. Like, as far as choosing. What does the incarnation of the, like, what, what do we choose. How do we choose to conceive of the logos and its incarnation in the article I was in large part trying to show that it's at least intelligible to speak of the incarnation, even if like we can. I think some of us would likely want to disagree at some parts, I wanted to make the claim that it's intelligible, and I really like the way that you to just put it in terms of how it's not just humans that get to participate in the logos but like all of creation is meant to participate in the logos through humans. And earlier Paul you also talked about your experience like living with people and being able to offer them this experience. And I don't know a lot about Buddhism. I mean, I read the Nishitani book and I just watched a few like lectures and videos online to get an idea but the way also that the, to bring it back almost to the point I said earlier about history, the way that enlightenment is spread is different. I've heard and you please correct me John if I'm wrong but I've heard that in practice in many places where Buddhism is more spread, like the practices that the monks will do are very different from the practices that the lay people will do. I mean, with, let's say, that's the same in Christianity to be. Yeah, that's true. But I mean, like the sociological fact than something that goes to the heart of the religions. Yeah, yeah, yeah I think that's true you can see that the parallel phenomenon where there is kind of an idea that the monks will reach enlightenment through meditation and practice and so on, and the lay people are doing other kinds of practices that will prepare them in the future life where they will be monks and then they will achieve enlightenment. Does that sound fair or am I getting a wrong sample? Yeah, a little bit. Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah I think Paul made an excellent point. And I think JP, I think the point you made, and I think you're trying to get back to is there's a commitment. Just like Paul said there's a commitment to the materiality of the world. I think your point is in Christianity, there's a commitment to history. That's important. Yes, I think so. Yeah, yeah, okay, the logos will manifest through history. Yeah, and I'm trying to end that and that what you're saying is in Christianity, these are brought together in a powerful way. So first of all, I want to emphasize that we talked about the amphibious, right, the neoplatonic tradition, I carry the frog around. And that's because the frog is a different kind of organism, a different kind of life. And so the neoplatonists thought they could achieve a new kind of life, not just a momentary thing. And the same thing with the Buddha, and this is the story of how he got his title. So he sits under the Bodhi tree, he achieves enlightenment. He's walking down the street and he's met by people. And I think this I put this in the series, but I'll just remind you of it. And they're just sort of like impressed by his countenance, it's shining, right? Phenomenon, right? And they say to him, are you a god? And he says no. And they say, well, are you a heavenly messenger? No. Are you a prophet? No. And then they're frustrated and they say, are you just a man? And he goes, no. Which in that last answer is important. And they say, well, what are you then? And he says, I am awake. See, so he's not he's not trying to talk about a momentary. He's talking about, right, an ontological change. So I wanted to say Buddhism is making a psychological claim is making an ontological claim. And again, I think the Neoplatonists are too. That's why the frog, right? The symbolism is clear. And so now I want to put that out because I think I want to sort of push back on what it's just a psychological thing. I don't think that's fair. I think it's existential ontological. Now, I do want to come back to the points that I do think I think are really good points that you guys are making, which is the redemption of history and the redemption of the material world. And that something is being pointed to with them. If I can put it this way, there's something being pointed to in the incarnation above enlightenment. That is a way of talking about the redemption of history. And of course, JP, you connect that to the history of Israel and Paul, the redemption of the materiality of the world. And so if I if I have I because I think those are good points. I just sorry, I didn't use your previous point, Paul, about psychology wasn't a good point, but I think it could be responded to. But these two points, I think, are excellent, because, you know, I've always. And I hope this isn't insulting because from my point of view, it's honoring I've always conceived of Jesus as an enlightened being. Right. I've conceived of other people as enlightened Socrates and, you know, and the Buddha and these figures that seem to be able to cause Titanic seismic shifts in history and culture. And those three figures clearly have that have that. And that to me is evidence of something being at work in them. Different than the momentary experiences of Augustine or you and I. Right. And Paul, you've made arguments similar about this, you know, it's the world changing aspect of Christianity that points to something deeper. And I think by fairness, we can say, well, there's world changing aspects in the Buddha. There's world changing aspects and Socrates. So we should take that as evidence for something deeper than a momentary state. I think that's a fair argument on my part. Yes, yes. Right. Right. So, what I hear is, and you guys are acknowledging that and thank you. I appreciate that. That's good. And so what you're saying is, well, you're not saying this but I'm saying it and trying to play in your ballpark, you know, Jesus is enlightened like these other figures, but there's something more about history and materiality that we don't see in the other enlightenment figures. I think that's a very good point. I think those are very good points. And maybe part of what is met by incarnation above and beyond enlightenment is exactly those two points. Jesus isn't just enlightened, let's say he is right, but there's also that enlightenment is also redeeming the material points to the possible redemption of the material world and history. Right. I'm not sure I've ever thought of that. I'm sort of, I'm just, I'm just like grokking it. For those of you who know Heinlein. Right. I think that's a very good point. Now, I guess the, and JP already acknowledges this so maybe we're getting to this point. I don't think those two points can be established argumentatively. I mean, their promises. Right, their promises. Yeah. What you, you know what you can say, perhaps, I hesitate to put words in your mouth but you can say something like, maybe we can get to this, you know, enlightenment, and we can get and that gets that closes the gap between naturalism and what you guys are talking about considerably. But then there's still the gap is open, because the incarnation carries within it two promises that are not promised by these other examples of enlightenment. And that can't be reached by naturalistic argument but nevertheless it's, we've closed the gap considerably it's it does that feel fair to you to. Oh yeah, oh yeah, yes, yes. Oh yes. And I think the gap. I mean, gaps are funny things, you look at a spark plug for example, a gap is really important, because the gap sort of allows a connection that at closing would not allow. Yep, yep, yep, yep. And, and, you know, I want to get on on part of part of JP's point. You know I'm, I'm often I'm often critiquing or even sometimes criticizing the Protestant tradition even though I am a Protestant so I'm allowed to do so. But one of the things that, and I won't say that the Roman Catholic tradition didn't do this but I know that the the the reformers emphasized it. The. So, part of what Luther pointed to and and very much the Swiss Reformation which was wing Lee and Calvin and others. The other thing was that the. Not everyone. Not everyone will get to be a someone who will go into a cloister or a monastery and have powerful world transforming visions, but that the, the Mason, and the farmer, and the mother, and the, the daughter and the son, and even the cow. People do in their way, do the work of participation in this reunion with the divine. And, and that is, you know that that was a profound point made by Luther and again, like with all of these things there's back and forth in it. But the, and so for example when in the, you know what the Swiss reformers have been doing some reading from the The Reformation period lately, part of what the swift Swiss reformers wanted to do was the the city. The city and of course are following Augustine here. They want to manifest the city of God in our midst, and and that also was a participation in this. This movement and again, I mean these arguments in terms of comparing East and West, West are always fraught, because they're they're probably far more complex than any of us have the data to really intelligently intelligent intelligibly make. But the fact that that science arose as it did in the West, I think also speaks to this, because there was a theological disposition towards manifesting, you know we can, Christianity talks about it a lot of different ways, the kingdom of God or the will of God, manifesting this in stone and in wood. And of course you see some of that with the East with, you know Feng Shui and Zan, you know, all of those things but manifesting it and that this was not technology was not anathema to this process. In fact, technology was a part of this process, and that the, the development of technology was itself part of the religious quest, as much as the devoted monk, their prayers or meditation in the monastery. And I think that is, you know, it was so interesting to me so this week. Part of what's been delightful about my, my few years on YouTube now is on one hand I'm always got the meanderings of my mind and the conversation. I also have the discipline of the preaching schedule. And so this week I am preaching out of the Gospel of Luke, where Jesus comes into a locked room, and he shows them the scars, but you know after these these post resurrection appearances they always have difficulty recognizing him. And so, you know, he says, it is I myself. It is I myself and so as I'm meditating on the sermon that I'll preach this Sunday I'm thinking about. Okay, what, you know the book of Colossians, the Jesus that they knew was sort of creation 1.0. Now the resurrected Jesus is sort of creation 2.0, and there's continuity in the scars which is such an interesting thing to find continuity in, especially because, you know, the violence within the story is, you know, it's an attempt to kill God and it's all the way back to Genesis three in a sense, and a magnified sense, yet at the same time. It's in that that he says it is I myself. And, and then of course, in the Christian story. Jesus, you know spends a few weeks popping in on people, and then he ascends, so they all get the story okay he's going to the control room of earth which is, you know, and Lewis goes into that in his book miracles. The point of that is that something of him himself with the scars gets into all of his followers via the Holy Spirit, and they are the ones now again back to the reformation, they are the ones learning to farm better learning to mother, better and care for the home and develop technology. And so, and, and even those who would never enter a monastery, still participate in this as in the development of a vaccine. And so again to me that's that's Christianity. I'd like to just add one thing on that front pole. I think the fact that. Okay, if you have within Christianity the fact that the logos manifested itself through this incarnation that can culminated in the self sacrifice of the incarnate logos. And that's something very concrete to unfold the logos industry for everyone like it's readily accessible. I know tons of people for instance to get a spiritual experience at some time during liturgy by contemplating this self sacrifice of the logos. And then this makes them, even though like they don't need like any sophisticated theology or knowledge I know plenty of like simple people who won't never spend time in a monastery we still get the, the spiritual experience, and which they will then unfold in their lives by doing their own stuff sacrifice on behalf of people around them. So, like this redeeming of of history that happens within the incarnation this redeeming of matter can apply to even very simple people won't let's engage in the same discipline of special exercises that monks will, for instance. I want to try and pick up on this. Some very powerful things. First of all, I had an insight. Sorry that sounds pretentious but I had a realization why the topic of teleology keeps coming up. And you know that I'm getting into discussions with people about it. Perhaps, this is a suggestion is, is this discussion of teleology, an attempt to see the unfolding of the redemption of materiality and history at work. I mean, is there a connection there, right is the team is, is this what people are doing, like I'm asking an open conversation, are they saying, okay what's like I'm not saying they're doing necessarily this explicit self dialogue but I'm speaking on their behalf. Right. So what's unique, you know it's the redemption of history the redemption of materiality, and therefore, I should see signs of that, you know, teleology should be present in matter. I'm thinking of the discussion I had with Sam, and it should be present right at it should be present in history, there should be a T loss and matter and a T loss in history. Do you think that's a fair connection I just made you think that that's why. So the discussion of teleology is perhaps the place where this comes out argumentatively if I could put it that way. Now, about the self sacrifice. Again, I mean in terms of historicity. You know other people have made this is not unique to me. You know, there's a lot of motifs in Christ's death is trial and death that are borrowed from Socrates, right there that was prepared like so it's it's it's definitely right that it's definitely that that person who, right, who, who dies willingly. In order to, you know, manifest truths that cannot be manifest by living. I mean that that's that many people you know Socrates basically demonstrates the unexamined life is not worth living, and the only way he can actually demonstrate that in a way that would be transformative of other people is if he dies. Right, if people are forcing him into the choice, the unexamined life or death, he chooses death and he does it voluntarily, because he could have fled, and he does it in order to really make clear. Right. The truth of that claim that the unexamined life is not worth living. And I think that, again, I think that's reachable to me, I mean it still reaches across the centuries, it had a profound impact on me. Are you guys both here. Yeah, yeah, yeah, I hope so. Now you froze. Yeah. Okay, you're back. Normal. What did you hear, how far did it get reaches reaches across the centuries are you guys. That's when I stopped talking was perfect. You know, pregnant pause there. And you're, you know, so I was listening to, I was doing a little work in Ren Girard this morning too, and I would say that that motif and and the Gospels, I mean, the Jesus story is amazing because on one hand, it is self sacrifice and on the other hand he's a victim, I mean though both of those things come together, and, and, you know, potentially there could be, you know, some of that and in Socrates as well but you know this sort of gets into sort of, you know, Jordan Peterson land because you have these questions about, you know, in terms of the, you know, if there's physics, if there's physics in the world with respect to gravity and, you know, all of this stuff. Is there also sort of relational physics out there that this this willing sacrifice and the power it unleashes in terms of, you know, how we are relationally, you know profoundly has echoes through the world. And so, you know, again while I've in my sermons I've been a lot of people will say things to me like, not a lot of people but I hear it, at least anyway. Okay, pastor I'll grant you, because everybody wants to look at the, the first, Louis makes his point in miracles as well the first five minutes after the resurrection I don't know if a dead person come back to life blah blah blah blah blah but every now and then someone will say okay, I'll grant you the walking out of the tomb, talking to his, his buds, shooting up to heaven. So what. So what. And, and I think, you know, with. So if we would have, if we would ask the question. Okay. If Socrates after three days would come out of his tomb. What would he do. That's wonderful, Paul. That's very good. My laugh is not a bit. That's good. Because I've been playing this with the site, because Jesus does things that I would expect them to go up to Herod and pilot and say hey, ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha, you don't do any of that. I don't think Socrates would either but but the, the question of how is the future transformed and for God for your project. This is a very big question, how the because when I look at your religion that isn't a religion, you, and I mean this in all good faith, you want to see your efforts now transform the world and not just if the numbers of people. You know the numbers of people experiencing, you know, you know mystical experiences you want to see the meaning crisis addressed. And this is relationally, and it's, of course, there's physicality involved in it because someone who is someone who has an awakened from the meeting crisis and this, you know, will be a better father, and be a better partner, and be a better citizen and in fact, you want your efforts to And, you know, we go out into the world, and in Jewish language bring shalom. So that, and of course soccer is death is the same, you know, does the same thing. And just one one cool thing I'd like to add about Socrates is a in several Eastern churches, you'll see some Greek philosophers painted let's say as icons on the outside, because we don't recognize that the, like, they were deeply influential on the tradition and on the other side of the And in Catholic theology, especially in the last few decades with the interactions with other religions, it has become fairly mainstream, let's say to say that. And let's say that enlightenment happens through the logos. And let's say it happens one way within Christianity for people who have a historical link to the incarnate logos, but it can also happen in other kinds of cultures can be like approximated in all kinds of good ways by other people who get into communion with the logos, So it's more of a hierarchical claim I think the same kind of a gap that we were talking about earlier. It's not only on the churches right. Because I've been to the Vatican, I've seen the School of Athens, at the heart of the Vatican. Right. So it's also in the Catholic tradition too. I mean, I think, I think. Yeah. The point about Socrates though did not take away from the, like, the, like, the point that I wanted to acknowledge on behalf of both of you the redemption of the materiality the promise of the redemption of materiality the promise of the redemption of history. And you guys seem to agree with me that that where that people are trying to take that up argumentatively is T loss, but that's of course again where I, I'm not convinced by the teleological arguments. What, let's dig into tell us a little bit more, because I'm very interested in the ways, because I look at your project john and I think, you know, I want to see, just like Mary had said on her channel, I want to see john helping, you know, people bound by the meaning crisis be free and I've You know, I've talked to Mark and Manuel and many people over that have worked in that discord server and you know when Manuel talks about, you know, he, you know, started meditating and that helped him get rhythms in his life, you know, I do nothing but share that because, you know, So, amen Mark you, you know, get your life in order that's what I want for you I want. And we all want. So, I'll shoot where was you were frozen there for a sec what did you say Paul, I got to the point where you talked about Mark and Manuel and then I couldn't hear what you You know, when I when I talked to them and I see that, you know, they're, you know, they have, you know, they have been blessed by you I'll use Christian language, they've been blessed by you and your work, I cheer that. Yeah, and, but but the. So the question of tell us is very interesting because, of course, in Christianity. You know, it was so interesting in one of the Jordan Peterson Sam Harris things, Sam Harris actually used this illustration which I blew my mind that he used it because in Christianity to a degree theologically, the future pulls us towards it. You know, not just I think often we imagine as progressivists that we are pushed by history, which in fact we are but tell us is sort of the future pulls it towards us but you know Christians have been asking questions about this to, you know, there's open theology, where, well how set is the future and it's, you know, it's funny because a lot of Christians that are really high on tell us will say, I know but that if you start asking them detailed questions. And I'm asking him detailed questions to say well we can't know so it's like, how much do you really know. There's a, there's a great place in in the summer where I think we're speaking double. Okay, I think I'll keep going. Yeah, there's a point in the summer where Aquinas talks about God, shaping the world through both necessary causes and contingent causes. I think that in the same way that I think there's a lot of confusion about the supernatural when we turn it into some sort of parallel universe. There's also a tendency to take the teleology going on within creation as the teleology that let's see we humans act on the world. I think. The way I, I mean I'll have to look more into this but the way I tend to sit is more that the logos shapes constraints the emergence within creation, and it will emerge closer I'll go with. There's there's movement on within the philosophy of biology. My colleague, Dennis waltz here at U of T, where he's reconfigured the notion of T loss because when you talk about function if you talk about biology you're talking about functions we talk about function, you're invoking some kind of TV theology because things are done for on purpose, right. I think he has been working. I hope you can hear me because you guys. Yeah, yeah, yeah everything. Yeah. Okay, good. Okay, great. So, he has a. Yeah, he's been re. He's been restructuring reconfiguring reformulating that's what I'm looking for. The notion of teleology more and more around this idea of constraints constraints that are conducive to an organism survival. As opposed to causes that make it survive. Right. And this language I think is very important and very effective, and it's a very different picture from the for the forward pulling magnet. That is the typical way final causation and teleology is understood. So I agree with you. I agree with you, JP that I think, I think there is movement even within the scientific community, at least within the philosophy of biology to try and re under we understand teleology as this constraints that can do in contrast to causes that produce, that's sort of a slogan way of putting it. And then for me that moves it out of the future magnet and it's more about again, the complete interpenetration of emergence and emanation. So, it would lead to something like the complete interpenetration of teleology and causation, or a fair or efficient and final, but we should maybe get rid of that language because I think that language is contributed to, to the miss the misapprehension. That's a good move you made Paul, I mean, you know, maybe again, we can close the gap a little bit more by right, getting a naturalistic account of teleology that is not so antithetical to the sotero logical account. That's, that's a good point I acknowledge that I think that's a very good point. I think, you know, in this has been true over a very long time for me. Part of me asks from for and and john you are about. I have as much trust in you as a conversation partner as I do with just about anybody even though we've never met physically yet, just just in terms of my interactions with you. Part of me always asked the question. What are we really afraid of with respect to some of these. Some of these theistic frameworks. And, and I know that there are plenty. I mean, human beings have used this stuff to do plenty of bad but if we dismiss, if we dismiss things because human beings have used things for evil. We've got nothing left. Everything goes out the window. I think, I think part of what we fear is that I speak to this as a Calvinist because my tradition has been as scary on this as any. I think what we fear is, is the loss of our own freedom. And I think john, probably one of the biggest, you know contributions that you have made for me in terms of my view of the world and my thought life is And as is colloquially used doesn't work very well, but your, your images of reciprocal narrowing and reciprocal broadening and agency. I found tremendously helpful to sort of get out get away from some of the limitations of freedom language. And I think we fear that a, a, a, a personal yet, a renek powerful God that pulls us towards him, which is also pulling us towards our potentiality. And in my view, Christianity, and the miracles of Christ himself, lead me to say that this process leads towards reciprocal broadening and actually the enlargement of my agency that in fact, his agency and my agency are not in competition. Yeah, yeah, yeah. And I think this is what I hear from you with you with your longing of, of, you know, my intimations of where you want to go. And I think this is true and right that what and Louis says this many different ways you know God as our father wants us to be sons who grow up into manhood. And, and so, you know, I hear a lot of fear from people of that they fear that the bigger this God gets the, the, the, that that we will then somehow be our relationship with that God will will reduce us to reciprocal narrowing and less and less agency, but I, I, I've always seen it the other way around. I agree with you, I think that is the case in a lot of anti theism. And, and I want to acknowledge that might. It's reasonable to believe that's a bias in me because of my negative experience of a version of Christianity so I don't want to dismiss what you're saying. I would say though that there's other, I think there's other things. And you know and the classical problems are there and they're the classical books precisely because they're there which is, you know, the problem of evil. It's hard for me to see Auschwitz as part of the redemption of history. It's like if that's the only way you can redeem history, wow, like, and I'm not saying that I have the right to judge God or anything, but if we're going to offer history as evidence, we have to consider history as evidence we can't play, according to a double standard right And so, yeah, it think it's Auschwitz. It's the fact that I see 99.99% of the universe just smashing into entropy and not showing any of this movement. Those are the things that I think are also at work. I acknowledge the first point and I acknowledge that it's probably vectored into me because of my personal offering. I'm not dismissing it, but I'm saying I think there's other issues that are also part of why there's a challenge. I think it's, you know, I think there's also a fourth thing which is, you know, just the cogency of arguments and theories which I think we should also not dismiss. I think science has progressed the way it has not just because of happenstance, it's progressed because it's unveiling something about the nature of reality that we have to take into consideration. I don't want to have the last word but I've got to go soon, gentlemen. But I would like to propose we have another discussion that way we'd have a full blown what trilogy around that final around that final point. Because to me, now what come, I mean, a lot of gaps where I think really wonderfully trunk here, and I thank you genuinely both of you for doing that. I think where we come to this T loss redemption of history redemption of materiality, and the sort of four points that you are all nodding so you weren't denying the plausibility of them being also the case, you know that we bring this. We have a discussion around that and I'm not asking you to solve you guys to solve the problem of evil, that would be a ridiculously unfair thing to do. Maybe what I'm asking for is what's the connection between the argument that you've made here, and then I think I've shown you I genuinely respect it. And these classical problems. I mean, there's some at least explanation and explanation that I think would be very valuable to hear valuable for me and perhaps valuable for your respective listeners as well. That was great. Yeah, maybe that was really great. Excellent paper. I'll try to do my best. Yeah, this was really fun and really insightful john you brought out my point better than I had so that's always impressive when you do that, and very useful to me that often. Because I, I mean, and maybe this is apropos of everything we've said, I'm learning and learning again and learning again and again. Socrates is point of following the logos of the argument, be really willing to follow it. And especially with companions who are also willing to do that too. So that's, that's the, I want to give credit to him for that. So gentlemen, you will let's try and set up the third the logos I think we were genuinely doing the logos here. And thank you so much, I was looking forward to this all day, and it exceeded my expectations. So thank you very, very much. Thank you. Thank you both. Take care. Take care everyone. Bye.