https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=gBKR491XTcA

 Welcome back to the Freddie and Paul show. You got to get your face in there Freddie to lean in a little bit. This is episode 27. We have a special guest today. Kimmy is on with us today. Hello. Kimmy lives in Fred's house with him and we went out to Carl's Jr. and had a great lunch. We had a lot of very interesting conversation today and we talked about how we wanted to get some of the things on the show. Right. One of the things we talked about was Kimmy mentioned she was in church yesterday. Yeah. That there are, she was surprised that there are more stories in the Bible about people being raised from the dead like Lazarus. And Kimmy actually had a very interesting, a very interesting story. Do you want me to tell it Kimmy? Okay. Kimmy once took a drug that was prescribed to her but she had a very bad reaction and she actually, the EMTs told her she was dead for five minutes and in that time that she was dead she saw herself leaving her body and she met her father who had died previous to her and she enjoyed that moment that she had with her father and then when the EMTs brought her back she came back and her father told her that it wasn't her time and Kimmy remembers that and that's a very powerful memory for her. She grew up and she was had a military family so she lived in all kinds of different places and so but she thought it was very important that people understand that there are a number of different stories in the Bible like Lazarus where Jesus raised people from the dead and so we we talked quite a bit about that. What else did we talk about Lazarus Fred? You said that Lazarus, yeah like you said a lot of people didn't understand why he died and came back because they thought Jesus could only be resurrected. So basically what I'm saying is I guess that wasn't true what they said because he was resurrected. Resurrected got it and then basically what I'm saying is is what I'm saying is I thought that was interesting because I thought Jesus could only do that because I thought he was King of Kings King of Lord King of all things and I was very impressed that that what was it? Lazarus was able to do that because that's very amazing. Well Jesus raised Lazarus and there's and we talked about this a little bit Jesus resurrection is a little bit different because Lazarus Jesus brought him back but Lazarus would die again and when Jesus on Easter when we celebrate Jesus resurrection he is raised he is raised and he doesn't die again and I those of you who know what I talk about he's not subject to decay and Jesus continues to live he sits at the right hand of the father and so we we talked about that so Jesus the resurrection is a little bit different but these other resurrection stories raising people from the dead there's a number of them in the Bible which were interesting which one did you tell me remember the guy was a king was that Saul which one was the king where we talked about we talked about King Saul in there yeah what was it what was his job to do you okay back there okay anyways King Saul was king of Israel okay started out good then kind of didn't go so good no but what was his job he was king of Israel I know what do we have to do what were some he was supposed to fight the Philistines and organize he was in charge yes he was in charge so he was trying to keep them safe from the Philistines who were bothering them and the Ammonites and some of the other surrounding nations I had a question were the Spartans in the Bible Spartans are not well not really the Spartans are over in Greece and in the Old Testament they're mostly focusing on the on Israel and the surrounding kingdoms Egypt Babylon so the Greeks come a lot later and that's that's after the Bible period that's after the Old Testament period when they finally how about the Philistines the Philistines are in the Bible yes yeah they're in the Bible and Philippians Philippians that's from Philippi which is in the New Testament okay that's that's a well I'm pretty good at these words yeah Fred you know a lot of those I could have been a preacher maybe to pin a preacher maybe anyway anyway so I want to talk about yeah I wanted to tell you the Kings beat the Timberwolves the other night oh that's good that's good yeah um did you know that Caspi went to the Timberwolves no I didn't know that no see DeMarcus Cousins went to the Pelicans yep and then another guy went to the Pelicans and then we got this guy named healed and then we got another guy I can't remember who we talked about this yesterday it's gonna be okay okay okay so anything else Kimmy that you'd like us to talk about no okay um basically Paul what I wanted to know is if me and CJ rehearsed something do you think we can make a special Sunday where we perform as long as it's a Christian orientated business deal well we'll see we'll see it depends on my schedule and I like to perform in church yeah I know I know so be awesome I think everybody like it yeah I could just sing I wouldn't have to rap necessarily well you sing every Sunday yeah but what I'm saying is I could sing me and him can perform in front of everybody and I think it'd be awesome because CJ said he would do it okay well we'll talk about that it's possible we'll talk about that okay that's enough for today you can do rap we're at six minutes now we're getting long okay I'll just make a one minute rap one minute rap okay say his name again Lazarus Lazarus Lazarus resurrection from the dead on a microphone instead one MC they call me Freddy D from the sack town really though G 916 till we drop got Paulie D riding in his ride king of the hip-hop he is the man if he can't do it no one can don't you understand I'm not you 70 Sam I'm Freddy D and put Kimmy in it too man really though cuz her hair is fresh on the microphone like the war to the West gotta keep it going till the night is through hi mom I love you very much too that's sweet we got a center well you got it we got it there's way we do it can you gotta put your finger up and say one love all right