https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=jpatnDCZTmA

 Hey Sacramento, what's happening? It's your boy Fred D. We got my boy Charles J. Out on, at home right now. But I got a forest with me right now. And I got my mom and I got Pastor Paul. Pastor Paul had a good sermon and now we're going to talk about whatever comes up. We're going to talk about the sermon. So let's hear the reviews. How did the sermon go? The sermon was good. I didn't fall asleep. Criteria of the sermon. Criteria, you get the one love on that one. I didn't fall asleep. Okay. I was a little bit troubled about how David handled the Amalekite. Amalekite, giving him the information. Why were you troubled about that? I mean he gave him some news about this guy because Saul was trying to kill David. And so then Amalekite gives the information and gives him the information that Saul killed himself. Right. And then David. That's not what he told him though. Oh. He didn't say Saul killed himself. Do you remember what Saul did? What was he thinking? Why was he so rambunctious? Why was he so goofy? He's like a goofy Lou. Saul fell on his sword. Okay. And what the Amalekite said. But you should have treated him the way you wanted to be treated. That's right. He would have been better. He would have been a good poopy Noo Noo. Saul had some problems. Right. Get your turn to talk. Okay Nancy, what do you think of the sermon? Well what I learned out of the sermon is we should not like somebody. Like. Okay. Maybe you don't really like them but you like them because they have money. No that's not good. No but you. That's a gold digger. You tolerate them because they have money. They have power. And that's kind of our inward feeling sometimes. Friendship is the best policy, Mollis. Yeah I know friendship is the best. Because friends cannot be over-earned. Right. Friends are priceless. Right. Friends are priceless. There's no money on friends. Right. Okay. That's pretty good. Anything else on the sermon? I liked it. You did a good job Pastor Paul. You get a one love on that one. Thank you. So here we have the post sermon review at Livingstone's Church. Right. On the Freddie and Paul show today with special guest Forrest. Because we mentioned Forrest in the first episode. We knew we would have to have Forrest in. And Nancy. Nancy Lynn. Nancy what? Nancy Lynn. Nancy Lynn. And Nancy Lynn with the commentary on the service. Alright Fred send us away. Alright. Thanks for tuning in to the Freddie and Paul show. We'll catch you on the flip side. And tune in for some more treats. Because we'll be treats for good. And we love you. One love. One love. I don't know what that means. But one love. One love means we're all one. Oh okay. That's a good thing. One in the spirit and one in the Lord. Like holy, holy, holy. Okay. Okay.