https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=AnUj2vmRbU0

 This is episode 16. 16. 16. Doing it big. Doing it big and we got we got Philip the Jesus sign man here and Freddie and a special request Freddie was gonna do a rap about the Jesus sign. Yep. Go ahead Freddie your rap about the Jesus sign. Okay well one more thing Paul. Yeah. Do you think before I do my performances I should drink a cup of coffee? I don't know Freddie. You got a lot of energy anyway. I do. Caffeine gives you energy. Jesus gives me the power. Because he's the power of the hour. Okay. Alright I'll do my Jesus sign. I'll do my Jesus rap. Here we go. Jesus is a reason for the season. God bless you in any reason. Coming like this and coming like that. Because Christ is the one and he ain't wack. He's funky fresh. Good to go. Rocking on the mic like solid gold. One two three. You know it's me. The boy they call Freddie D. I got my pastor. Pastor Paul. Rocking on the mic because you know I stand tall. One two three. You know it's me. Because I got my boy CJ down with me with the magic. Nine one six till we drop. Rocking on the mic. Toll of that hip hop. Rocking non-stop. People living and giving staying on top of their life that they're living on. Freddie D and I'm down for the show biz. Thank you Paulie D. I thought you were going to talk about the sign. I did. Jesus sign. Good to go. On the microphone. Really though. The Jesus sign. You got to read it right because it's so good like one two three all right. J-E-S-U-S to the best. Always like this and I have to say it to my chest. One two three. My pastor Paulie. My boy CJ and my mom is good to go. Without a word to say. We got Justin doing big things. Really though okay. Peace out. And this sign has been I've been making them for 40 years. Red stands for blood and the white for purity. Black is for sin. Okay. And I have Bible verses on the back. Okay John 3 16 19 and what's J-E-R? Jeremiah. Yep. Jeremiah 29 11 and Proverbs 16 verse 9. Super. Thank you very much and we're doing good. All right. So hold on. So who do we got to watch today in the NFL football? My fantasy football. My season is lost Freddie. No no no. It's gone. It's lost. It's the season is terrible. Okay. So requiem for the jaws and the pit bulls. Amen. Good for the Jesus Christ. Got to put it back on the shelf. We'll put it back on the shelf. One. Ready? Okay. Come on. One. Love. One. Love. All right. I love you Paul.