https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=CRn-lJPB7Hs

 Episode 15 of the Freddie and Paul show we have a special guest today Charles J. The magic! Charles and Freddie have collaborated on numerous projects. This guy picked us up from the airport and we went to Philadelphia because mom was not feeling well and she figured Paul would be good guidance for us to be picked up from him because he's got it going on like Donkey Kong. So we're gonna talk about the sermon that we had today. What do you guys think of the sermon? Well John the Baptist he got in some trouble but the thing is I guess they understand that he was okay and he should have been forgiven for what he did so he paid his dues and then and then he was able to come back across and make the way he wants to be. No no no that is what happened so so so Herod okay one of that one of Herod's sons married his niece. John didn't get arrested? Yeah he did get arrested. I know but he paid his dues I'm saying. No he got his head chopped off. What? Yes! He did! He got his head chopped off! That's sick! He was going to serve it on a platter right? Yeah! That's gross man! Yeah! I love Barton! So no and that's and that's and so that's what happened to John the Baptist. Okay I thought he got arrested I didn't know he got his head chopped off. What's really going on? That's mean that's that's canine. That's right. Well not that birthday was she danced. Yeah. Herodias' daughter danced and he got all excited and said you can have anything you want up to half my kingdom and she asked her mom and her mom said John the head John the Baptist head on a platter. Oh wow! Okay! So that was the story. That's great! Yeah Herod's didn't play around that they did you know. Anything else about the sermon? CJ what did you think about the sermon? Oh well again that's probably the part if you took a nap it's okay I'm not offended. No he's not. It's okay. Don't. He's tired that's all. He works hard and he works hard for the money every day so hard for the money. Sing it Donna! All right so anything else for this week's show? What I want to ask CJ is would it be okay if we rehearse something and we could put the camera down there and I can bring my instrumental and we could do a Christian rap in front of Paul? As we rehearse together. Okay no problem. All right so we might have a we might have a performance. We can't do it in church though it's got to be after church because yeah because God wouldn't like that because he would think we're doing the funky chicken and he'd be go like finger licking. Yeah I don't think I don't think he'd like that. No. Clattery bro. No. No. All right. Thank you for being my friend Charles. Oh thank you. I love you man. And thank you for coming to church. Thank you Paul. Thank you Paul. Okay so we got a lot of handshakes. Oh what team do you like? Kings, Lakers, Niners, Bears. You like the Bears? Oh wow okay. Bears are good. Oh my other gear but not every single that's a lot of money going out right now. That's a lot of money going out. Okay so look forward to CNS and maybe we'll have Paul do a verse. Maybe I'll do a verse. With us on the stage. That would be something. But I'll bring the instrumental. Okay. And you can videotape it and we'll be on YouTube. Okay. Okay. God bless you. Do it Justin. I mean Justin. Do it CJ. Go like this. Go like this CJ. Go one love like that on three. On three. On three. Ready? One. One. Two. One. One two. Do it. Do it. On three. No we're doing it first. On three. On three. On three. One two three. Okay. One. Love. Amen.