https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=qqOhUefT0_c

 Welcome back to the Freddie and Paul show. We have a very special guest this afternoon, Mr. Denzel Washington. You might recognize Denzel Washington from various movies and screen appearances. Just here this afternoon to enjoy the show. Hi Mom! Hi everybody out there. Merry Christmas. Santa Claus brought you a good present. We just finished our Christmas service and Freddie sang. Thank you and I appreciate you. Freddie has a good voice. He sang very well I thought. Denzel showed up a little late, fashionably late. That's usually when Denzel shows up. I told Freddie he could talk about the Raiders a little bit today. So what happened with the Raiders? The Raiders won because they were throwing passes to Crabtree. Cooper was making first downs. Cooper got a touchdown. Murray got a touchdown. Car threw. A little bit on the Raiders. We don't need to play by play. Okay one more time. I'm almost done. Then in the fourth quarter Car got injured, right? Am I right? You're right. Okay now he needs to have a comeback. We're in the playoffs. He broke his tibia. Car is out for the playoffs. So what do you think Denzel? What do you think about Car's ability to come back? Do you think he's coming back in? Not this year. No. The Raiders will have to get a backup. Second string right? And you have to try to win with your backup but not with Car. I'm afraid to say that Cooper didn't score a touchdown because Cooper is on my fantasy football team. Oh I was wrong. It would have been great if Cooper scored a touchdown. But Murray did right? I think Murray did. It would have been great if Cooper did. Okay that's enough football talk. Hi mom. Say hi to mom. Hi Nancy. Nancy Lynn. Okay what was the sermon about today? Oh. Got so busy singing. Shepherds? Remember the story about the Shepherds? What was the other guy's name? The one guy you said one of the guys and I forgot. Was it David? We talked a little bit about David. Oh Joseph. Joseph and Mary. With Jesus in the manger. Jesus was in the manger away in a manger. Right. That's what you're saying. The little Lord Jesus laid down to sleep there. That's right. And we've got to remember we're cadets. We're the Christian reform. Always a cadet. What did you think of the sermon Reg? I'm sorry Denzel. I really enjoyed the sermon. I do audio sermons. This is in particular a very good one. Very timely too. Given all the social issues that kind of percolate and come to our lives. It kind of opened my eyes to a lot of issues. Thank you Reggie. Reggie is an elder here. He's my boss. So if he gives me a bad grade then I'm in trouble. That's the way it is. Anything else we need to talk about? We're about out of time. I want to do a rap. Okay. Go ahead. Reggie Fair is going to have a good year. Rocking on the mic because you know I'm here. One, two, three. You know it's me. Merry Christmas to everybody. Don't you see? I got my boys Pastor Paul that stands tall. And when he's on the microphone he's not over the wall. He's the man in command. The Raiders won this week, man. Really though, what you got to say? When I'm on the mic it's like kid in play. But when I'm rolling and when I'm tight, I love Christmas very much and to all a good night. Emmanuel, God is with you. We are cadets. Be trustworthy, pure, grateful, loyal, industrious and cheerful. And everything you do. And be productive. And treat others the way you want to be treated. And have a good holiday time. Because if you read a book you can take a look. And it's the reading lame-bo. Reading lame-bo that is ready for you. And I love everybody out there. I hope you enjoy our show. We were at McDonald's did a live program. The Christmas extravaganza. Christmas extravaganza. So everybody tune in. And we'll be back next week, next Sunday. And then in a month Paul will probably take me out to Golden Corral. And we will have a program at Golden Corral. So everybody tune in. And another thing Paul, I'm coming out with my music soon. So everybody will be able to select my music. And CJ couldn't make it today. But he told me to tell everybody he'll be next year. And he'll be doing it right. And one of these times me and CJ are going to perform. We're going to land the plane. In Jesus' name, amen. Ready? Amen. We've got to show rage again. You've got to go with one love. That's what we do. One love. Yay. Awesome.