https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=6_nbzvBdNic

 Welcome to the Freddie and Paul show. It's been a few weeks and we have we're back in the fed. We have Charles J. on as our guest this week and Freddie and Charles for those of you who don't know Freddie and Charles have done a lot together. They used to be on the radio together and we were celebrities. We had this lady one time Paul. She said I had to go to the side of the road because my side was hurting so hard. This guy and there was other times we had this guy in Kid Chris. Oh boy he was so funny but he was funny style. I mean he was okay Paul but he would I don't know. He's too far apart. He's a shock radio. Yeah trust me we were on shock radio definitely. I had to bring him. We were just comedians. We were number one. We were number one. We were number one. We were number one too. We were on 102. 102 if you're listening we'd be happy to come back. Hi Byron. We would do it anytime you would want because we are the magic and CJ knows it all. He is the king of the microphone. He's got it going on like shock a car. Now you've been so very jolly here. I'm a fan though. So what should we talk about today? Should we talk about Super Bowl? I guess. Well whatever. Your Patriots won. The Patriots did win. It was an amazing game. Did you see it? No. Okay so we're not going to talk about Super Bowl because he didn't see it. I've seen the halftime show. What did you think of the halftime show? Dirty Gaga. Different. She goes off on me. I think that's why Beyonce didn't join her because I think Beyonce was supposed to join her at that show. But she's flying kind of on the ropes a little bit too high. I know. And Beyonce would have been with that baby. Them two twins and they're trying to fly on the rope. I said way home to Beyonce. I didn't know she was pregnant. I said she looked like a big Egyptian goddess with a big stomach. What happened to her stomach? I didn't know she was pregnant. I said what happened to her? So I'm seeing why she wasn't flying over the rainbows. That was pretty amazing. Everybody thought they were flying over towards the slittier lady Gaga. Pretty gutsy to be hanging from a wire that high. Yeah. Twist and shout. Twist and shout. Come on baby now. Twist and shout. She didn't sing that one. I'm going to sing one of my funky songs. He likes that song. Okay. How about? We're going to do a little rap right now. Okay. And this guy's going to rap after me. Here we go. I'm running. But finally a new state of rap. I got my homeboy CJ. That's a fact. Got Pauly D on my side. We're going to go to Golden Corral and original ride. We're going to take you to the top. Take you to the middle. My boy CJ. He don't play the fiddle. He's so funky. He's so chill. You better move. Biscuit you're over the hill. I take one, two, three. Talk about yourself. Just like that. You big Pillsbury dough. You're so darn fat. You know this. You know that. You big buttermilk biscuit. I like that song. This is random. How do you follow that actually? No, I don't rap. I can't rap. I can't rap. It wasn't good. It was good. It wasn't good. This rap was decent. I heard it. Go ahead. Bus one. Bus what? No. No. Nah. Oh I do like that one though. Yeah once upon a time there was a man named CJ. He buss the fresh raps every day as he cruised down the street. His name was known from Kelly's, Texas. All girls want to know his name. Like Dice. I played him all the time. Is that Christlike though? I played him all the time. Okay I'm done now. Hey Dion what's happening? We love you Dion. We love you brother. That's true hip hop though. So what do y'all think of the Demarcus Cousins trade? I thought that was dumb because they had a good center and he was part of the team. But now we got Tyreek Evans back. We got to scan him healed and another guy. So we're just going to have to see what happens and hopefully they can get the team. The coach can teach the team with camaraderie and play as a team so they can be a good team and maybe win some games here and there. They lost three in a row Paul. I'm pretty mad at them right now but it's okay. Hi mom. Hi mom. How you doing? That's fine. And CJ we're going to be on 102. So 102 if you're looking at us get a hold of CJ because you can email him or whatever. And we'd love to come back to your show in the morning. But it'd have to be at 7 or 8 in the morning until 10 in the morning because this guy goes to work. He works hard for the money. So hard for the money. Did you have caffeine today Fred? Yeah. I gave you one. I gave you one. I gave you one cup of coffee and one soda. But remember when I went to the Golden Corral I behaved myself. I only had two cups of soda. Any final things before we land the plane here? I guess CJ might think of something. Can we bag on each other? Bag? You just did. You just called him a buttermilk biscuit. Is that a biscuit or something? A buttermilk? Now he's trying to take my jokes now. I don't know who that is. Chilly Willy here looking. Alright we're going to land the plane. We got it. How do we finish? We got to do the one love. One love. Amen.