https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=KMkySU5JOhw

 Hi, this is Paul and this is Rough Draft for Sunday where I run through the current status of my sermon that I'm preparing for Sunday. On Veterans Day this year, Eric Weinstein, who works for Teal Capital in the Bay Area, sent out a tweet and I missed it because obviously I was in Massachusetts dealing with my sister's death. But I caught up with it as some chatter from Twitter and Esther O'Reilly had written a piece on it and I thought it was an incredibly powerful and poignant tweet. And it says this, A century ago my great uncle Sasha was killed serving at the very end of World War I. The simple pointless loss of a sibling kicked my great grandmother Mary from Orthodox Judaism into atheism, altering everything in my family's arc. Those of you who have been watching my videos for a while have noted that this dynamic of the decisions that we make have ripples into successive generations is one that I ponder often. And so that aspect of this tweet caught my attention. And then the last sentence of it, moral. It's the wise and kind gods and it's interesting that as Eric Weinstein attends synagogue, but he at least publicly from what I've heard considers himself an atheist. So he's he's kind of right there on the in the liminal space between them, let's say. And so he he observes the Jewish practice of of even a circumlocution for even the generic word God, not not to say the name moral. It's the wise and kind gods we make that fail us. Now there's there's so much care and nuance in that last sentence that again this tweet just caught my attention and I've been continuing to to think about it and process it. Because there's there's there's so much tantalizing ambiguity in it that you can you can in a sense it probably reflects the the ongoing internal conversation. He's he and his brother and other members of the so-called as he dubbed them the intellectual dark web are continuing to ponder. And as a few commenters on rebel wisdom called me the pastor of the IDW. Well, I have the the strangest flock that you could imagine. Some of them are are career atheists. Others are avowed atheists and the most Christian the most Christian one of them doesn't go to church. And instead of using the word believe always says he acts as if Jesus is Lord and rose from the dead. So but this this tweet really caught my eye. And and I thought just summed up so much of where so many people are. I watched a or listen to a conversation between Bart Ehrman, who's a very prominent New Testament scholar, who is also also an atheist and Sam Harris and Ehrman. Spent most of the most of the podcast with Sam Harris going through all of the all of the holes he finds in the New Testament. But then at the end of it, he says none of this is why I don't believe I don't believe because I can't believe that a good God would allow this much suffering in the world. And so what great Uncle Sasha's grieving sister. Came to the conclusion of Mary, apparently, was that it would be better to get rid of her religious beliefs than to continue to abide and observe the practices of Orthodox Judaism. And so she became an atheist and that then set the family on a long trajectory of of atheism that her great. Grandsons continue to work through. Now, over the last couple of weeks, I've been reading really fascinating biography by Abigail Santa Maria on Joy Davidman, who was C.S. Lewis's wife later in his life. And it's a it's a fascinating biography in many ways. She was the quintessential modern woman. She was brilliant. She was educated. She was a genius. She was for a long time a a leader in in the communist, at least a thought leader in the Communist Party in the United States. She was an atheist. She was all of these things. And through reading the writings of C.S. Lewis, she became a Christian, a Christian, a Christian that was was all wrapped up in Dianetics. And then she almost became a stalker of C.S. Lewis. The she while she was still married, she was pursuers pursuing C.S. Lewis and and basically trying to get rid of her husband in some ways who who didn't want them to split up. But it was a very complicated marriage. And then she she in a sense smuggles her boys out of the country, which today would be a very serious offense. And in order to try to it's an entire it's a very complicated story. One that I had a low resolution image of before, which I think was was greatly corrected by this by this biography. And it really sheds so much more light and so much more complexity on the life not only of Joy Davidman, but also of C.S. Lewis. Now, quite famously, Joy very soon and not long after their marriage dies of cancer and C.S. Lewis, who was a very reluctant partner in her schemes of romance, eventually succumbed and fell deeply in love with her and and deeply enjoyed their marriage. They were they were a couple so so terrifically in love. And then to have her die sent Lewis just down to the bottom to the to the point that that Lewis says some of the things that that great grandma Mary would have said. And and in a grief observed, he says this. But meanwhile, where is God? This is one of the most disquieting disquieting symptoms. When you are happy, so happy that you have no sense of needing him. I think that's where a lot of people are in a in a secular affluent society. So happy that you are tempted to feel his claims upon you as an interruption. If you remember yourself and turn to him with gratitude and praise, you will be or so it feels welcome with open arms. But to go to him when your need is desperate, when all other help is vain. And what do you find? A door slammed in your face, a sound of bolting and double bolting on the inside after that silence. You may as well turn away. The longer you wait, the more emphatic the silence will become. There are no lights in the window. It might be an empty house. Was it ever inhabited? It seems so. It seemed so once that seeming was as strong as this. What can this be? Why is he so present a commander in our time of prosperity and so very absent a help in time of trouble? I tried to put some of these thoughts to see this afternoon. He reminded me that the same thing seems to have happened to Christ. Why has thou forsaken me? I know. Does that make it easier to understand? Not that I am, I think, in much danger of ceasing to believe in God. The real danger is of coming to believe such dreadful things about him. The conclusion I dread is not, so there is no God after all, but so this is what God's really like. Deceive yourself no longer. And you can see that in this tweet in Great Grandma Mary's departure from Orthodox Judaism and entrance into atheism. One of the thoughts that I had while pondering this tweet though was that no ancient would reason like his grandmother. This is a distinctly modern approach to the problem. In fact, the problem of evil never really had a grip until the belief of a God of love was fully embraced and increasing so after the rise of Christianity and the Roman Empire and strengthened again and again during the Middle Ages. And it wasn't until the rise of the Enlightenment that we began to have the suggestion that we could live without this God that suddenly we decide we will walk away from this God in anger and disappointment. Now, an ancient would not do this because an ancient might feel themselves ready to curse God as in the words of the wife of Job, curse God and die. Or that someone is the unfortunate, inevitable victim of capricious gods. And again, if you read Greek mythology and the religions of many in the world, that was simply the assumed posture of humanity. But it seems that in the Enlightenment we came to the position that we began to believe we don't need God for this world. This world can go on quite well without him. And so in my anger, I'm going to do the interesting task of both denying he exists in anger towards him. Lewis, at an earlier day when he wrote his book, The Problem of Pain, before he had ever met Joy, was quite more rational about this and made an intensely helpful observation, I believe. The Christian doctrine of suffering explains, I believe, a very curious fact about the world we live in. The settled happiness and security which we all desire, God withholds from us by the very nature of the world. But joy, pleasure and merriment he has scattered broadcast. We are never safe, but we have plenty of fun and some ecstasy. It's not hard to see why. The security we crave would teach us to rest our hearts in this world and to oppose an obstacle to our return to God. A few happy moments of love, a landscape, a symphony, a merry meeting with our friends, a bath or a football match have no such tendency. Our Father refreshes us on the journey with some pleasant ends, but will not encourage us to mistake them for home. And this, in many ways, is at the heart of our objection to this God. Why won't he offer us settled happiness? Why won't he give us the world we can so easily imagine to be possible? Whether it is possible, well, that's a different story. Alvin Plantinga, I should probably drop a slide in. Alvin Plantinga in his book, God, Freedom and Evil, where he works through the problem of suffering in a strict philosophical sense, comes to the conclusion at the end of the book that philosophically the problem of evil really isn't an issue. That there are, we know way too little, in fact, to be able to come to a philosophical conclusion with respect to God and suffering that somehow the travails of this world are incompatible. But he says at the end of it, that doesn't get rid of the pastoral question. Actually, I'm going to put in another addition to the slide. Tim Keller comes to the same conclusion in his book, Walking with God Through Pain and Suffering, that it's not really a technical problem. It's not really a technical challenge to the shape of this world or the idea of the existence of God. But it's a pastoral one. It's one we feel. Now, it's helpful to note that there's actually a demand beneath the complaint. And that demand is created, in many ways, by the Enlightenment. We, like the Prodigal Son of Luke 15, want God's stuff, but not him. Now, in the ancient world, such an idea that you could have the world without the gods, well, that was just unimaginable. And so, while people would suffer, again, the idea, like Job's wife, would be curse God and die. But now, in the modern world, in the secular world, we imagine God is inessential. And we can, in fact, get by quite well on our own, perhaps even better. So, better to get rid of the old man, and we, through our technology and our politics, or whatever means necessary, will, in fact, create for ourselves. Now, it's tricky when we think about ourselves, because in actuality, none of us imagine this will come within any of our lifetime. And it's some imagined future secular eschatology, where we suppose that this new age is going to dawn. But we wish to be squatters on his estate. But he, however, would have us restored as sons and daughters. Secularity presumes the land to have no owner. Ancients presumed the gods were simply uninterested. So, we are happy squatters in denial about that day. Well, about what day? Well, we imagine that with our technology and our smarts, that somehow we will bring in some kind of utopia. And whether that utopia is brought in on the wings of some political movement for social justice, or some philosophical movement or scientific movement based in rationality, none of us imagine that this will happen in our lifetimes. And, in fact, we're just there in the struggle. Now, those at Living Stones will immediately recognize the person on one side who is Daniel, who for years lived outside of the church in Squalor. And he imagined that that day, the day of the consequences of the life that he was living, would never come. All the rest of us could see that day. But those of us who live more legal lives, lives that are looked upon as more normality, who have jobs and have insurance and have retirement plans and all of that, well, we imagine we are squatting quite nicely and with our amusements and our distractions, well, we'll make life work in this world. Luke 21 says this, shaken. This is an image of uncertainty. And this uncertainty, in fact, has lived over the earth, not just within the Christian sphere, but over the entire earth. In fact, the Aztecs had so much human sacrifice because they believed that the gods were going to tear apart the world. And so they needed to be appeased by the highest sacrifice. And that meant human sacrifice throughout Christian history. All sorts of troubling things in the world have brought Christians to believe this is it. This is the end. World War I, World War II, Napoleon, on and on and on. The world has wondered, will this be the last day? It's only here in the modern sense that we are squatters in denial about that last day. And as a culture, we have pushed back ideas of death that somehow, well, maybe it won't come to the whole earth, even though we know it will. But it does, in fact, come to all of us. So skeptics laugh at family radio with their presumption. And as well, they should. I mean, both Christians and non-Christians took shots at it when, in fact, their prognostications did not come true. And then we say, well, nobody knows. But that isn't true. I think about the fact that before 2008, we saw housing prices go larger and larger and larger here in California. And everyone say, well, well, nobody knows when the bubble will burst. Well, well, surely it must burst. Well, maybe it won't burst. Well, maybe this is a new normal. Maybe things will continue to get better. Maybe this will go on and on. That is a faith position. It's not a rational position. It's not a it is simply a form of secular faith. But there were people who had an idea when the bubble would burst and they bet on it. And some of them won. And in fact, that movie, The Big Short, was all about that. Not knowing precisely when doesn't really undermine not if, but when. So the Bible talks about the Day of the Lord. Now, it's complicated the way the Bible talks about this, because we like to think in linear terms. And in many ways, the Day of the Lord is kind is an idea that holds together many things, both both in terms of the grant, the one grand picture, our own individual lives and different events during history. And I like to think of it like a pre echo with an echo. There's one loud sound and then afterwards, the sound waves reverberate out. Well, the one grand Day of the Lord comes at the end of the world as we know it. But that that day was pre echoed throughout history, both in individual ways and in communal ways. So the destruction of Jerusalem in 586 B.C. was a pre echo of the Day of the Lord. The plague of locusts and the prophet Joel was a pre echo of the Day of the Lord. The darkness at Golgotha was the Day of the Lord. All of this was the Day of the Lord. And the Day of the Lord comes to each of us. There is a final day and each of us has our own final day. And many of us have small days of the Lord within our lives, lives where you get the phone call. And a beloved person has just been snatched away by death. The doctor sits you down and says you have cancer or suddenly you feel a pain in your chest or the bank calls. And is repossessing your home or the boss comes and you've been laid off or your spouse sits across the table and says, I no longer want to be married to you. I'm leaving. Goodbye. Or you look on the phone to discover that your spouse has been having an affair on you. The Day of the Lord pre echoes through history and it comes to us all. And no one today denies that there will be a final day. But for each of us and all of us, it comes as we squat. While Jeremiah was confined in the courthouse of the guard, the word of the Lord came to him a second time. This is what the Lord said. He who made the earth, the Lord who formed it and established it, the Lord is his name. Call to me and I will answer you and tell you great and unsearchable things you do not know. For this is what the Lord, the God of Israel says about the houses in his city and the royal palaces of Judah that have been torn down to be used against the siege ramps and the swords in the fight with the Babylonians. They will be filled with the dead bodies of the people. I will slay in my anger and my wrath. I will hide my face from this city because of all of its wickedness. Nevertheless, I will bring health and healing to it. I will heal my people and I will let them enjoy abundant peace and prosperity. I will bring Judah and Israel back from captivity and I will rebuild them as they were before. So what's going on here? Well, he seems to on one hand be saying the day of the Lord is coming, but he's also seeming to say that that settled peace that C.S. Lewis imagined and looked forward to, that that was coming as well. I will cleanse them from all the sin they have committed against me and will forgive all their sins of rebellion against me. Then this city will bring me renown, joy, praise and honor before all nations on earth that hear of all the good things I do for it. And there will be an awe and will tremble from the abundant prosperity and peace I provide for it. This is what the Lord says. This is what the Almighty Lord says. This is the name by which it will be called. The Lord our righteous Savior. The thing I think about when I read tweets like Eric Weinstein's tweet is I ask the question, is this a good exchange? Giving up her orthodox Judaism didn't bring her brother Sasha back. What did she earn with this exchange? Was it out of spite? We declare the land unowned or in the ancient world secular. And this improves the lot of the suffering squatters? In what way? Most of the suffering we have come from the other squatters. This doesn't change a thing. They are still at the mercy of the most powerful squatters, the chief of which is death. Luke continues. And here they are, 2000 years, and we're still listening. Be careful or your hearts will be weighed down with carousing drunkenness and the anxieties of life and that day will close on you suddenly like a trap. For it will come on all those who live on the face of the whole earth. Be always on watch. Pray that you may be able to escape all that is about to happen and that you may be able to stand before the Son of Man. There's the new slide I wanted. I wanted to bring because this is what we do when we squat. We fill up our lives with well, with worry, with amusement, with distraction. And we do all this while we squat. That you may be able to stand before the Son of Man. Well, who is the Son of Man? Well, this is, of course, the term that Jesus is the Son of Man. Well, this is, of course, the term that Jesus used to talk about himself in the context of the Roman Empire. He is the Son of Man. Well, what kind of man is this? Is this the other addition to the slide? Hang on. I would agree that the wise and kind gods we make fail us because any god we make will fail us because any god we make will just can have no more power than that. And then we have. But what about the God who made us? How about the wise and kind God who made us? Can we trust this God? That's the question. That's what joins the ancient and the modern complaints. Can we trust him when we learn that we have no power? Well, the Son of Man is the one who comes, the only kind of emperor who comes to us and says, This is my body given for you. This is my blood. I give it for you. I give you my life. Give your life for each other.