https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=xkuw8dDAThA

 Hi, this is Paul. I'm continuing to think about the Weinstein's world salvation efforts. They're right now some of the most active, some of the most interesting members of the IDW, in my opinion. And I was thinking about them and thinking about Fukuyama's essay, not even the essay itself, but just of the existence of the essay, the end of history, and how Fukuyama wrote his essay and then the book at the end of the Cold War. And after the collapse of the communist world, from that perspective, from that point forward, well, what did it look like? Well, it would just be democratic democracies going forward. Of course, the Islamic world came roaring into the news with 9-11. You've seen the rise of the woke, and so the imagined end of history from 1989 or 1991 doesn't look like it looks now. In many ways, what both brothers have been doing have been basically dabbling in their apocalyptic anxieties. Brett and Eric and many others see apocalypse, meaning understanding it as the end of the world more than revelation, just on the horizon. And understandably so. The Walking Dead, science fiction has turned dystopian. Dystopian, the dystopian genre has been very popular lately. Just look on the horizon and argue that we need to get a sustainable solution to the human problem. And I spoke about that in my last two videos, that the problem is people, and the only way to save humanity is for people to change their nature. And Brett has talked about that, and I've commented on it quite a bit in terms of his assassin robots idea, genocidal spelling bee. And then Eric Weinstein's conversation with Daniel Smaktenberger. Through the comments, I've learned quite a bit more about him. I didn't really know much about him at all. But it's very interesting how, well, we should just transform human nature. And as a pastor, I hear that. And the naivete of it, the size of the challenge of it. One of the things, and I often remind people that what I do is I am a pastor. Well, what does that mean? Well, pastors are people who run churches. And right now, pastors are in the news for some of them being slow about shutting down their worship gatherings. And there's some real reasons for that. I was thinking about making a video about that. But what do pastors do? Pastors work sort of like therapists. Pastors are in some ways sort of ancient therapists. A lot of people get them confused and some pastors get their own roles confused. Pastors are curators of stories, which are people. Pastors work with people on the stubbornness of exactly the kinds of things that Brett and Eric are talking about. We work with people all the time. And we don't just work with, like therapists do, maybe one or two or maybe a nuclear family at a time. And we don't work with people like politicians do. And of course, politicians in a democracy and politicians in a tyranny. Pastors work with people in groups from 50 to a few thousand. But those who are pastoring churches of a few thousand, that pastor works in rather different ways than the pastor of a church of 50 or 100 or 200 people. These small size, smaller size churches. We work with people every day who are dealing with exactly the dynamics that these guys are talking about. And so when I hear them just transcending their program, I just snicker. Because, boy, if I could get people to transcend their programming, I'd do that real fast and say, whoop, done with my job. But I don't. And the issues that arise, what exactly is the good? And that's why I read from GK Chesterton's Heretics in the last video. What exactly is the good? We sort of know the good by seeing the bad. And so good becomes bad avoidant. But the good in and of itself is a terribly different thing. And so when we come to these moments when we imagine we see the end of history or we imagine we can plan, let's get a group of people and conspire to use politics and science and all of these things to arrive at the end of history. Count me as dubious. Count me as dubious because religions and Christianity and the church have been working on this for a very, very, very long time. In fact, I would argue it is the longest sustained conversation in all of human history. It is bigger than politics. It is bigger than technology. It is bigger than anything else when it comes to human beings. What is the good and how can we get there? That's fundamentally a religious question. Now it's a common longing. And right away you can see when I grew up and what music was on the radio when I was growing up. You've got Jim Croce. If I could save time in a bottle. You've got Dan Fogelberg. Why can't we make love stay? And in the comments section you can add, go ahead and put your YouTube link in for the song that embodies this end of history notion that I have a glimpse of the good. I want to freeze it and I want to stay in this moment. And there's problems with that too. Think about, let's say, a Down syndrome child. And a friend of mine has a Down syndrome child. And on one hand there's joy and glory in it. On the other hand, their child never grows up. It's the Peter Pan syndrome and it's the Lost Boys. And so would we really want to put time in a bottle? Would we really want to freeze this moment? Of course, Thomas More's Utopia, Hegel and Marx all dabbled in this. And it's likely that Christian eschatology is, you know, is in a sense the working through of these questions. When you arrive at eschatological verses in either the Hebrew Scriptures or the New Testament, there's sort of a freezing, but there's a leaning into evocative images that in some ways are guilty of the same thing. I mean, streets of gold, gold and silver are, you know, gold is a metal that doesn't tarnish. And that's why it's golden to us. And we associate it as we do and go to Jonathan Pujol's channel to learn all that stuff. In Brave New World, it's very interesting because on one hand they've kind of arrived at a decadent end of history, but the stewards of that decadent end of history know that their decadence is fragile. And so, you know, keep pumping the soma and keep the entertainment and the porn going and keep the rules going and shut down the native because the last thing we need is someone getting all enthusiastic about something. And, you know, it's interesting in the IDW because, you know, every now and then you can sort of hear Eric talk about, just try to inspire people to do something big and bold. And that's true. And that's sort of an anti-decadent, that's an anti-decadent theme. But it's not a theme that promotes the end of history because the end of history is, well, it's sort of settled in there. And so what we really have to ask is, is do we, do we endlessly progress or do we finally arrive and go ahead and back and look at Bauman's Pilgrims versus Tourists that I talked about in a previous video? C.S. Lewis tries to get at this in his Narnia book, The Last Battle. Now, now again, C.S. Lewis is known for people in, depends on what camp people are paying attention to Lewis. But those Narnia Chronicles, I think are Lewis via fiction, via fantasy. And of course, Lewis and Tolkien sort of found the genre, you know, real borrowing on McDonald too. But, you know, what Lewis is trying to do with his Narnia books, and it's audacious that they're children's books, but it's sneaky, brilliant that they're children's books, is he tries to seed early in the imagination these ideas that are so foundational but difficult for us to articulate. And if anybody would know that, it would be C.S. Lewis because he more than many could articulate them well. But Lewis in The Last Battle of further up and further in, and it's both progressing and arriving at the same time. And it's sort of the synthesis of these two ideas where we really sort of want to grapple with. You know, Dante, of course, wrestles with that. You know, again, Chesterton's observation of Dante is just brilliant. Dante had the range that he could do the Inferno, the Purgatorio and the Paradiso. He could do all three. That's an astounding thing because today all we can really do is the walking dead. And sort of like The Good Place, every utopia we try to find turns into a dystopia. And I think there we're channeling our anxieties and channeling perhaps some leftover stuff from the collapse of the Soviet Union and the fall of how many utopian cultic efforts. Can we see that we are doing theology here? This is really what we're trying to do. So go back to the source. Look at Isaiah 40, which is, I mean, the Book of Isaiah has got to be a masterpiece on anybody's list. Isaiah chapter 40, which is a hugely important portion of the book, one of my favorite chapters in the Bible. A voice says, Cry. And I say, What shall I cry? All flesh is grass. And all its beauty is like the flower of the field. The grass withers. The flower fades when the breath of the Lord blows on it. Is this pandemic the breath of the Lord? Is it the day of the Lord? I mean, notice how the Bible works with these images. And again, sometimes when I watch people try to grasp and wrestle with these ideas, I think, you know, Brett and Eric, you should have spent more time in synagogue because there are resources here. There are resources here that make all of us look like children at the feet of the masters. And this is exactly, I think, part of why Peterson went whoosh. Is because Peterson recognized that. But these guys, they can't do what Jordan did because they're shy. They're shy of the good stuff. And maybe rightfully so. Now, I don't want to have this sound like a cheap shot because it isn't. Because the church, which has been steward of the good stuff, has been woefully decadent and unable to actually facilitate bringing it out in its glory to a starving world. And that's exactly what Jordan Peterson did in his biblical series. And I think that's why the series went whoosh. And I think, I've been thinking about the fact and wondering, you know, about, you know, after wave one, the trough after Jordan Peterson's wave one, and I hope he gets another wave. But the trough, what built into the trough was, I think, in some ways, decadence set in for Jordan. And it was the decadence of, well, it's what always causes decadence. It's the decadence of wealth. And every time I would go to, I went to three or four, and I listened to more of his so-called book tour after 12 Rules for Life. And I think decadence, Douthat's Decadence, is exactly the right idea to think about a lot of those, because there's some of Peterson's brilliance in there. But it's, I think, against Douthat's decadence is exactly the right image. And if you read Douthat's book, you'll get the idea. He needed to go, he needed to do Exodus. So did Peterson. Now, when I talk to some people who have been around Jordan for a very long time, some of them will make the charge that Jordan's basically a very interesting one-trick pony. And that his fundamental ideas, just by virtue of the giftedness and quirkiness of his manner, always seems to be coming fresh, but after you listen to him for a while, you realize there's nothing new there. Could that be it? Or could it be decadence, that the money and the fame and the busyness and the... For pastors, we have what's called a Messiah complex. And Eric sort of talks about this with respect to fame. You get too full of yourself that you can't see beyond yourself. And so was that... So Jordan's in the trough after the wave, and Breton and Heather made a comment about him. And I sure, I mean, many of us are praying, those of us who pray for Jordan's healing and for his return, because his voice is needed and I'd love to see him take a stab at Exodus. But, you know, lightning doesn't really strike twice. So can there be another chapter? We don't know. But you go back to the source material and you look at just verses 6 through 8, Isaiah chapter 40, all flesh is grass. It's the age of decay and it's beauty. And I looked that up because, of course, if you're reading an English translation of the Bible and you see a footnote, I just did a conversation today with a Swede who does subtitling. And that was a really good conversation. And I don't know if it'll come up before or after this video, depending on, you know, how I sequence the conversations in terms of when I release them is always sort of depending on what I've got and what's there and how it's fitting into these monologue videos and so on and so forth. So I looked up, you know, OK, so I'm just reading in the English translation. OK, switch over to the Hebrew. The hesed and all it's hesed, that's all flesh, all it's hesed. And hesed is one of those key important words in the Hebrew scriptures. Sometimes it's in the King James translation, it's often sort of a loving kindness. It's a loyalty. It's a joint obligation. It's love. It's kindness. It's loyalty. It's steadfastness. And the majority translation in the new Revised Standard Version is steadfast love, enduring love. All flesh are attempts at enduring love are like the flower of the field. It blooms and it decays. Now, it's that again, that image is evocative because what is the flower of the field? The flower is the reproduction of the field. So it's not only beautiful, it's reproductive. It's the germ of life itself. But then the flower fades when the breath of the Lord blows on it. Again, you have to think God number one and God number two in this thing, because you can't understand the pandemic and the end of how God ends our decadence. And perhaps the flower of the field is the decadence, how God ends the decadence with the breath of the Lord blowing on it. And the flower fades and the grass withers. Surely the people are grass. The grass withers, the flower fades. But the word of our God, the devour in Hebrew, the logos in, I didn't look up the Septuagint, I just assume it's logos, will stand forever. Isaiah 20, 20, Isaiah 25, getting towards Easter. On this mountain, notice the importance of sermon on the mount, Sinai, you know, the mountains where mountains play in imagination. On this mountain, the Lord Almighty, again Lord in lower caps is always the Tetragrammaton, Yahweh, the name of the Lord. The Lord Almighty will prepare a feast of rich food for all peoples. A banquet of aged wine, wine of course, is this stuff of glory that comes from fermented grapes. And the stuff of glory is something that we both desire and our desires doom us, like the ring in Tolkien. The best of meats and the finest of wines, on this mountain he will destroy the shroud that enfolds all peoples. The sheet that covers all nations, he will swallow up death forever. The sovereign Lord will wipe away the tears from all faces. He will remove the people's disgrace from all the earth. The Lord has spoken. In that day they will say, surely this is our God, we trusted in him and he saved us. This is the Lord, we trusted in him, let us rejoice and be glad in his salvation. Israelite particularism gets transformed in the New Testament where Jesus universalizes it and Paul picks up on it. People are always afraid of the book of Revelation, singular, it's not plural, Apocalypse, the Apocalypse. People are always afraid of the Apocalypse, but it's in the Apocalypse that what the Apocalypse is in the New Testament is a reworking of Old Testament prophecy that is being now updated with the Revelation of Jesus and what he did and what he said. That's what the book is. And so you take this kernel in Isaiah 25 and it comes to full flourish in the imagination of Jesus and in his life and in his death and in his resurrection. But now the secularist exclusion, the arena is impersonal. And again, if you've not been watching my talking about Kaufman's book and Christine Hayes over at Yale and talking about the metaphysical, the meta-divine realm versus the Hebrew conception of God. The arena is impersonal. There's no agent above us in the secular world. Ourselves are buffered as Charles Taylor says. Although it seems people are re-groping to find consciousness and intelligence that is above us and that keeps seeping up. We need a higher intelligence. It's not I need a higher intelligence, maybe they need a higher intelligence, but we need a higher consciousness. Is the market an agent? Sure, acts like it. And again, go back to my conversation, which was really revelation to me in terms of Jonathan Peugeot's taught me a lot about principalities and powers and rebel wisdoms talking about cooperative consciousness. They're all groping after this, but the secular constraints are binding and chafing at these conversations. And now they're afraid of the woo and rightly so. Rightly so to be afraid of the woo. And you know, so the Verveky project, you know, John is working so hard to kind of hold that line. And and but John, you know, far more than most is so much more gracious to those of us who look at the line and say, line, shmine. I'd rather be called on woo. But I'm a Protestant, so we Protestants invented calling out the woo. Maybe listen to my listen to my conversation with the with the indigenous fin that's coming up. Great conversation to coming on the channel. The human drive is to secure myself. But again, look at the look at the conversation I did on on on religion as as risk management, because what what he did was tap into that Old Testament idea of being cut off. Because myself is not just me. It's me and my father's and my forefathers. And it's my family tree. And it's it's all of this together. It's that ancient conception of a life is not just me living now, but it's my ancestors and it's my future. And so when you listen to Eric and Brett talking about this, that's that's what they're talking about. That's the language they're using. And the Jewishness is not absent from them. You know, I don't know if they're just intentionally trying to avoid the language to be heard by a popular crowd. But again, the the the the buffers on their self are chafing. The human drive is to secure myself. The body decays. The story that is me does not. The end of history, as we see in both of them, is a self-projection project. They've got their politics. They've got their their ideas about what is good and what is bad. They've got ideas about all the controversial ideas about politics or economics or sexual ethics or I mean, Eric. Eric said something to the effect to the effect in one place of, you know, we've got to abolish gender. And I thought, oh, and you think Elon Musk is ambitious. But but the self and ourselves are are these are these type we try to be tiny little sources of these utopian vision. And one self is by no means sufficient to do any. Oh, just me and my friends and me and some of my selective friends or me and my party or me and my tribe can't be done. And then don't forget, Freud's dismissal of religion because Freud wasn't just so wasn't as much accurate about the religions he confronted and wanted to dismiss as he was prophetic about what we do when we make our own religion. This is what we do. We just project it into the sky. But in a pluralistic age, all such individual projects are hopelessly individual and culturally specific. And that's why so many people, they listen to these guys and they just they just get annoyed at the hubris of it. And I don't think these guys are trying to be offensive. They're they're they're trying to do a good thing. They're trying to save the world. They're trying to save the world. But trying to save the world is the source of almost every utopian nightmare. And again, it's it's the again the irony of the critique of religion. You know, Alastair McGrath, I mean, he played it so cool. He just sit there and listened and listened and was a good guy. And then just at the end says, almost sounds like you're advocating for a new religion. The utility of God, number one, and the I'll put I hope I remember to put a link to the Discord server, the bridges of meaning Discord server that I've been associated with and been on the bridges of meaning. Discord server has done some fun work of. I don't know what I do, whether I don't know if anything that I do is any good for the same reasons that I can't make up a new religion. I'm too small a thing. And we talk about this in Christianity, part of the when people will talk to me say, pastor, I have a hard time praying. I'll say, pray the Psalms. Why? Because one human life is too shallow a vessel to be able to meet God in prayer. So pray the Psalms or Christians have been doing, you know, use the Book of Common Prayer or find somebody else's words to pray with because one human being is too shallow a vessel, which is. And so in the bridges of meaning, they take some of my stuff and they write it down. And that's where I can see where if I'm actually helpful with anything and seeing what comes back to me and what what gets mirrored by others because it gets sifted by human beings. And so much of what I do is probably worthless. But every now and then, you know, a clock is right. Twelve, you know, twice a day. So every now and then I'll say something and it's helpful. And that's how I know that's how I get feedback. Part of the reason I keep doing rando conversations is that it's it's one of the best ways of feedback is is is me not being in charge of the thing. And that's exactly the utility of God. God number oneness. God as a arena is is is discarded and by because, oh, that sounds too religious. So we're going to talk about being with a capital B or we're going to pray to universe or spirit or higher consciousness or or something like this because, oh, dare not say the word. Does the word matter? Yeah, it does. Because yet in that tiny little word, there's so much packed and it and it connects us through so many other people. It helps us escape the the gravity of our own shallow vessels. And and so what we saw and again, I didn't see this until the Jordan Peterson, Sam Harris, the first one with Brett in Vancouver. And and Sam and Jordan are talking about two different things. And Jordan Peterson is talking about God number one in a way and Sam Harris is complaining about God number two. And and and this just marks that over the last what what has happened basically in the last five hundred years is the recession of God number one and the church. You know, not only the church, but the philosophers and the theologians and many others in the fear of losing this have inflated God number two to try to compensate. If the urge to put time in a bottle is projected through the individual self, the results are predicted predictable. It looks like that shallow vessel that is every single one of us. God. The the alternative to the meta divine realm, God. Is everything, but more than everything. And again, language here is really deceptive. And I'm not going to say that P word that I know Luke wants me to say just because I'm stubborn and want to troll him. But also the utility of God number two, Katie Bowler, I just got made aware of her story. She teaches at Duke Divinity School. I might do some videos that are more critical in the future of some of her stuff because I've listened to a few of her podcast now. But but very interesting because, you know, comes out fully on with God number two here because she's a young woman and promising career and church history and religious studies. And that at age 35 is told she has terminal cancer. Oh, that'll focus you. That'll change you. What is it? Was it Samuel Johnson? Nothing like a noose to focus one's, let's say, focus one's consciousness. God as agent is the discarded for human spirit technology. Oh, I believe in the indomitable human spirit. Yeah, right. That human spirit brought us a lot of stuff. Good and bad. Technology. I believe in technology. Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. A lot of different ways to do things. Good and bad. God as agent is the variable for final agency, just as as God as arena is the variable for in him. We live and move and have our being the expansion of God number two in the recession of God. Number one, the cry all flesh are like grass and it's hesed. It's it's loving kindness. It's steadfast. Love is like the flower of the field. It fades. God number one and God number two. We can't live without either of them, it seems. False hope. Here in Brazil, we don't have tests, but ready pits we have in the pandemic. Show me your alternative. I'm not advocating human indifference or inactivity. I would argue similar to you to what Brett was arguing that first and second degree agency. When I'm sick, I pray and I go to the doctor. I do both. Why? I'm not, you know, I go to the doctor because of God number one and I pray because of God number two. Our hesed is like the flower of the field. Could the coronavirus COVID-19 was that stoppable? Absolutely. It's a white swan, not a black swan. It was utterly predictable and people had been predicting it again and again and government offices were formed and Bill Gates had given money to it and and it had started in China and you like me, we were watching it on the news and I was following it carefully and someone in church says, what about this COVID thing? Is it going to be anything? And I said, you know, I don't know, but when it comes to pandemic, it's not it's not if but when. Could humanity have stopped COVID-19? Absolutely. Why didn't we? Because our hesed is like the flower of the field. If you put your stock in humanity's ability to save itself, sell. COVID-19 unstoppable, of course. Why wasn't it stopped? Why was it not being utterly? It was completely predictable. Isn't the quality of our hesed predictable? Why is religion a successful adaptation? Again, I think about Brett's answer to this. Well, it's all it's all archaic and obsolete. How do you know? That's the problem. We can't stand above it. We each have to decide in the moment, but we can't stand above it. We don't know what pieces are in art and it was Peterson and I haven't found that quip. I probably should listen to them all and find that clip because do we change? That's a bad idea. Do we not change? That's a bad idea. Peterson said it's bad idea on both sides, but that's what we're dealing with. Peterson saw this clearly and he better than most could articulate it. Because I think he better than most seriously understood religion as a successful adaptation. And took it seriously. And so when you saw Sam and Brett and Jordan, Brett was rightly sort of in the middle between them. But I think wing goes to Jordan with the pandemic. And I agree with Heather and Brett. I surely don't want to see Jordan get this illness. He's had enough in his life that he's been fighting for. But Jordan was right. Jordan was right. Your human spirit calls don't impress me. I've seen the track record of human hesed. It's lying around on the streets in front of me my entire life. Because of Christian mercy has been lived in poor neighborhoods. And I'm not impressed with Humanitary's track record. We perform what we are religiously motivated to do. And I heard something or saw something. And as much as I blog and tweet and try to record everything that I think is significant that I hear, I can't get it all because basically who inherits the earth? It's the people who care. The people who are motivated. And is there a bigger motivation than religion? When the sky, when the airplanes flew into the twin towers and destroyed those buildings that I saw built. What did, what, there are many lessons that we could derive from that. One of them is if you care enough, you will shape the future. We perform when we are religiously motivated. The one who cares ultimately endures. The one who cares can break doubt that decadence. The one who cares inherits the earth. The meek inherit the earth. The problem of generic religion that secularism so indulges us in is Nathan Pyle's art so beautifully encapsulates it. And so here's this for those of you who are listening to the podcast, here's this mug that you can purchase from him. So go ahead and purchase it. I mean I'm going to track this down and buy one. Planet's best life giver from my perspective. You know, you don't love motherhood as much as mother. Okay? Now motherhood is important and understanding abstraction and there's a way in which motherhood is truer than any given mother. Yeah, yeah, yeah. That's very true. But if your mother is threatened, you show up if she was a good mother. If she embodied motherhood as motherhood was supposed to be embodied. The details matter. You can't be religious in general because you're not smart enough nor live long enough to fill in the particulars. You can't just, I'm going to, and that's exactly what I'm, I'm spiritual but not religious. You'll never get around to being of any substance. Just like I was birthed by a woman is different from I know my mother. And those of you who don't know your mothers or are estranged from your mothers or your mothers were not good mothers, you feel that void. Reality always has the frontier between the finite and the infinite. Again, one of these great treasure things I've gotten from John Vervecky and his work. It's, it's, we don't believe it. And so, planet's best life giver from my perspective, that's spiritual but not religious. Details of mom matter. Religions are not all the same. They mold us and shape us in ways we are not aware of. Just listen to that conversation between, between Glenn Scrivner and Tom Holland or my conversation. My conversation with Tom Holland. I thought, you know, Glenn tried to put a point on it or, you know, anything Tom Holland, Tom Holland's Delingpod podcast. I mean, they're all excellent and Holland's been making the same point. The stuff that we're chafing at and working on now, it all comes from the same stream of a man giving his life on a cross. We are heirs of very long development, full of particulars, not mere abstractions. Because you, you care and you find it moving by the particularity, not by the abstraction. We are not transparent to ourselves as Jordan so eloquently and so articulately reminded us. You have so much time, you only have so much time in this age of decay, baby. How will you spend it? Hear this video. Choose your sacrifice. Jordan Peterson's best advice for young adults. To the, the parents come in. You're an old infant. You're a lost boy. What have you done with your life? You're decadent. You're clueless. You choose your damn sacrifice. How will you spend the time that you've been given? What will you spend it for? You won't spend it on the in particular. If you want to be powerful, as Rick Warren said, I remember this from one of his conferences. Remember, it's amazing what sticks in the head. Be specific, he told pastors. Because it's in the particularity that there is power. Who will you give your life to? What will you give your life for? Peter Lindberg, who's been working on the letter stuff and started a stoic channel and in on YouTube had a the first part of this, the second part. I found the second part interesting, but I really like. When I listen to Stephen Jenkins talking about death, I watched someone do what I've seen hundreds of pastors, including myself, try to articulate, but do so not anywhere near as well as he did. So I want to play some of the first part of this video for you because it gets back to my last point. You only have so much time in this age. You're a particular you. You have something to do. You know, in the Jordan Peterson moment, get after it. Whoops. Here we go. It simply means your capacity to be grateful for being alive is rooted in the deep abiding and ongoing understanding that soon enough you won't be. And if you can't pull that off, you know, those it's not a tightrope act. It's a it's a mingling. If you can't pull that off, you're just not a grown up. That's it. I mean, it doesn't sound so Petersonian. Very tolerant. It isn't very tolerant. You know, tolerance is for people who got a lot of room. But in a time like this, notice tolerance. If you're an engineering, what's the tolerance? It's room. So he's dead on right. Tolerance is for people who have a lot of room. And what what American affluent decadence has afforded us is, well, I won't die young. I've got all the time in the world. Well, odds are, yes, your odds have been more in your favor. But hunger games still lurk. The notion that that you get to have your, you know, your own take on what it means to possibly, possibly die. No, it's not possible. It's one of the few givens of your life. I can tell you this now. Now, it again reminds me of that. What was her name? Williams, who stood up at the Golden Globes and, you know, and talked about how, you know, she would take control. And it's like, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, I get it. I get it. But you know what? That's a rare privilege. That's a rare thing. And you think that's going to last forever. There's tolerance in there. There's a little bit of space, but you don't know how much space there is. You really don't. And that's what's so unsettling and possibly decadence busting about this pandemic. The breath of the Lord makes the grass wither and the flower fade. I used to be the death guy, although your association with me and my face is still that. But I seem to have moved on to certain in some people's mind. But when I was, I saw pretty routinely the idea that people proceeded as if they knew they were going to die. If you were to ask them, of course, and you raise the contemplation to the level of something deliberate. OK, a very handy example. So I'm in a room full of people I don't know. And apropos apparently of nothing, I asked them, how many people in this room know they're going to die? Well, you know, the predisposition of my audience and so on would be that virtually every hand would go. And here's the thing. I would have to say, how do you know that you know that? He's getting into John Verveckis, four P's of knowing, perspectival participatory. Is your knowledge of death participatory? Well, if you go to church on Good Friday, it might be a little bit more participatory for you. Second order awareness, right? A much subtler thing. If I I would have to say, how do you know that you know that? The second order awareness, right? A much subtler thing. If I asked you if you're alert to this piece of information, you'd say yes. But if I asked you what does it do to your days? This is a much different question. And the chances are very good that it does virtually nothing to most people who have their hand up. So a good parallel. And again, that's Peterson's action. Oh, you got all these things that you're talking about, things that you know, things that you say you believe, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah. It isn't until you act. That's the illustration is going to make a great illustration. It gives but pretty good. So that would be I mean, you're too young to remember this, but it wasn't that I'm not. I remember long ago people were lining up at the gas pumps, particularly in the United States and fist fighting for position in the lineup because there was an oil shortage. I sat in a lot of gas lines in the Dominican Republic. I remember that even better. It was very temporary. Right. And it was an aberration. If you had to ask people in those days, is there enough oil in the ground for everybody? Yes or no? They would have said yes. And how could you tell they believe there was enough oil? And the answer is by how they lived and how they purchased. Right. And how they oriented themselves and decisions they made every morning. A more COVID example would be how do you know there's going to be enough food a week or two from now? How do you know there's going to be enough toilet paper? And by how much you hoard. How far away from work they lived. I mean, it went on and on and on. That's how you could tell that people knew there was enough oil. Now, the truth is there wasn't enough oil. There was never enough oil. But I didn't say if it was true. I said that people know it. People know there was enough. And the answer is yes. Now, literal internet, I know you're all going to jump on correcting the man, but the point of an illustration is the point, not the other part. Take out the word oil and you put in the word dying into the exact same scenario. How can you tell that people know that they're dying? And the answer is you can't. And I'm talking about sort of dominant culture in North America. And the reason you can't is because the word know means something. It doesn't mean awareness. It means there's a level at which your life is ongoingly informed by this thing that you know. You know how to breathe and you do so. At least most of us. Most of us know how to walk around and we do so. Most of us know where we're supposed to go to work, at least until recently, and we do so. That's how you can tell that the knowledge is there. But the knowledge of dying leaves no trace in North America because it's not knowledge. It's suspicion. It's fear. It's idle curiosity. It's not a known thing. It's not a known thing. It's not a known thing. It's not a known thing. It's not a known thing. It's not a known thing. It's not a known thing. And this is why I lost my job. That was my job security. It was predicated on the understanding that nobody knew that they were going to die. Virtually nobody knew. I can show you to the cows come home examples of people who came to their dying either shocked or feeling abused or feeling, you know, sort of mishandled or mistreated by life because the inevitable and the given finally came to call. Well, if you knew you were going to die, where does the sense of grievance about dying come from? And more often than not, people look shocked, you know, and finally take this notion about sudden death, which is often the objection that was raised to my stuff was, you know, but this is all very useful if you see your death coming from a long way off, which is hilarious because the people who did see their death coming from a long way off didn't thank me. I can tell you that. But the people who who imagined that somehow sudden death is a completely different animal. Obviously I've never died. And secondly, this apprehend this thing. If we know that we're going to die. There's nothing sudden about dying. Because the word sudden means, I didn't know. Not that you didn't know it was today, but you didn't know at all. And again, this is the the full knowing the participatory knowing even the procedural knowing what is the procedure of death. And so here was a guy who was basically doing hospice and, you know, nurses and doctors and hospice workers and pastors. And I mean, the funeral director gets thereafter. So, you know, sort of the grieving part. But. You know, sometimes you'll go and visit someone and the doctor will say they're they're inactive dying now. It's participatory. It's the work that we're doing when we're dying. And what America does is puts up this facade that says, oh, no, not you. Don't worry. No, no, it comes. It comes to all of us. My wife is a school teacher, and so she works with little children. And I'm the pastor of a church full of people in their 70s and 80s and 90s. It gives you a different take on the world. Sudden death. I didn't know. Not that you didn't know it was today, but you didn't know at all. Sudden death is a confession. That's about truancy. That's what you're saying when you talk about sudden death as a shock, as something somehow is beneath your dignity or has no mercy in it. In actual fact, there is no such thing as sudden death. Not no such thing whatsoever. That's dereliction of duty to imagine that there's something called sudden death. Your death is a given and it's an ongoing reality. And the amazing thing about these days that we're in right now is when we watch older people and old folks home die in their dozens, suddenly, suddenly, we imagine that this is a visitation from some darker place. And. The flower fades, the grass withers when the breath of the Lord blows on it. Where does the notion of dark death come from? From the sense that we don't get a vote. I mean, most North Americans are addicted so, so terminally to self-direction that anything like what we're going through now, the idea that you have to stay at home as a kind of punishment or as a kind of arbitrary whimsical invasion into the natural order of things. It's just, it really speaks to how thin our understanding of our daily life actually was and our capacity to live it in any deep sort of way. Very, very compromised. And that's really what today these days are for is glimpsing ourselves in the act of being shocked by things that were though unprecedented, completely predictable. A voice says cry. And I said, what shall I cry? All flesh is grass and its beauty, its hesed, its steadfast love is like the flower of the field. The grass withers and the flower fades when the breath of the Lord blows on it. Surely the people are grass. The grass withers, the flowers fade, but the word of our God stands forever. On this mountain, the Lord Almighty will prepare a feast of rich food for all peoples, a banquet of aged wine, the best of meats and the finest of wines. On this mountain, He will destroy the shroud that enfolds all people, the sheet that covers all nations. He will swallow up death forever. The sovereign Lord will wipe away the tears from all faces. He will remove the people's disgrace from all the earth. The Lord has spoken. In that day, they will say, surely this is our God. We trusted in Him and He saved us. This is the Lord. This is the Lord. We trusted in Him. Let us rejoice and be glad in His salvation. Is the mountain's name Golgotha?