https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=iWiC4Ob5lI4

 Hi, this is Paul. I'm going to continue talking about the decline of the Protestant establishment and what that has meant for Christianity in America and the rise of, I call it progressive liberationism, some people call it successor religion or ideology. It's sort of the religion that is under so much of American culture right now. It's nearly become the assumptions of morality and for me the interesting question of, let's say, someone who wants to document what has become dread Christian nationalism in America today isn't so much that people have their politics and religion sort of mixed up. That's nearly expected if you look at the span of human civilization. The bigger questions are what have been the transformations and the migrations in this sphere and in many ways the transformations and migrations really do involve the continued evolution of mainline Protestantism in America that has sort of morphed into a non-sectarian progressivism. And so I'm just dropping a whole bunch of breadcrumbs along the path here and one of when I was talking about this in some other podcast somebody mentioned to me Aaron Wren. I first discovered Aaron Wren along with a lot of other people when he started his masculinist newsletter. It's sort of a listserv and every so often he would post not a terribly long email with some thoughts that he had about Christianity in the culture. Now this gets into a lot of wonkiness in a particular corner of Protestantism that I'm quite familiar with because in some ways I grew up next to it. If we take church history back to the modernist fundamentalist split that carved up a lot of American Christianity the main line were these massive Christian denominations that in fact are are all over America. Ready to harvest is a YouTube channel that I've mentioned. If you're curious about Christian denominations it's a it's a really fun channel because unlike me he doesn't ramble and he gets to the point. And he has really a fine video on sort of the denominational breakup of breakdown of America and he has this little metric and he tries to figure out he basically takes these these six cities and looks for what churches are in them and what denominations from different traditions are in them and sort of tries to get a sense of who are the big players on the American stage. And one of the things that you very quickly see is that a church like the PC USA the Presbyterian Church of the United States. Well you can find a church in all of those places. You can find an RCA this reformed church of America that's the older denomination out of which my denomination broke out of in the 19th century the Christian reformed church. You can find a you can find one RCA in those towns. You can find one Cumberland Presbyterian Church. So basically what this shows what his his surveys showed is that the main line continues to have massive representation all over the United States and you know Episcopalians tons of them around Anglican Church of America not nearly so much. And so the main line churches continue to be a massive presence but they're a very very much in many respects an emaciated presence. They have gone away and they've gone away for a whole number of reasons. Evangelicals have in many ways sort of supplanted a lot of the main line but a lot of the unchurched America who has become spiritual but not religious the nuns some of the duns have have really left the main line. And now Aaron Wren is an interesting critter because he is both conservative but he's very much an establishment thinker. He's an institutional thinker and there are there is a tribe of of evangelicals like him that tend to get in the newspaper. Tim Keller very much a part of that. In the 70s when there was a lot of white flight from the cities where suburbanization had really already taken hold there was sort of a conservative reformed presence in the city and in many ways my upbringing was a part of that. My father didn't my father's church wasn't there because of that movement. My father's church was there because when the the Dutch the second third generation Dutch immigrants were leaving industrial Patterson for the developing suburbs around Patterson and North Haldane and Haldane in Wyckoff in Midland Park. Some of those had been farming communities that were now being transformed into suburbs and some of the Dutchmen had had dairy farms in those communities and as is the case let's say in southern California around Bellflower and then Chino. The farmers sold their land to developers as these world-class cities continued to move out. Some of the very mission-minded kind-hearted members of the churches which at least in the Christian Reformed Church the church left last in terms of the neighborhood and so they very much saw their homes and their jobs replaced because by African Americans moving up from the Jim Crow South you can read about that in Isabel Wilkerson's book The Warmth of Other Suns. There wasn't much immigration from Europe after the First World War at least until after the Second World War and so a lot of the industrial needs in the American North were met by labor coming from labor coming from the Jim Crow South. African Americans you know were looking for opportunity in the north and so they took jobs that previous generations of European immigrants in North Jersey, the Dutch, the Italians, they took a lot of these jobs and there was a lot of poverty, a lot of struggle in those communities and so what happened my father's church was planted because people saw that there was need and so they wanted to help and so in the Christian Reformed Church way they planted chapels which was sort of a ministry to a community let's say and so most of the people in the church that I grew up in in my father's congregation were African American so that was the context in which I grew up but in the 80s this evolved into a much more self-conscious ministry to the city and if you follow I gotta listen to see if the coffee break ladies need me for something so what you would find is that in the in the 80s there was much more of a self-conscious conservative Protestant and Reformed ministry to the city movement that eventually gave birth to Tim Keller's church in New York City Redeemer Presbyterian which sort of stumbled along as a fairly successful church plant in New York City until 9-11 when it sort of exploded but it also it also was nicely positioned to take advantage of the transformations of the city that happened in the 80s I mentioned before when I was growing up in the 60s and 70s outside of New York City when I saw the movie The Joker it looked a lot like New York City when I was growing up when I visited New York City later after TV hits such as Sex and the City and Friends and Seinfeld cities once again became cool places for young urban hipsters to move to and to find jobs and success etc etc Times Square was cleaned up Rudy Giuliani had his broken windows policy and when I visited New York City in 2006 not having been there for maybe 10 or 15 years I was shocked to find just how many young pretty white people there were all over New York City and of course property values just continued to skyrocket in New York City that flooded out into the suburbs many of the people that I went to school with in northern New Jersey moved out to upstate New York or Michigan or other places just because if you if you didn't own a house in in Bergen County it was increasingly difficult to find a house in Bergen County anyway Aaron Wren is part of this cadre of people who is not allergic to the idea of an elite and a lot of this came into conversation with the work of James Davidson Hunter he wrote a lot of books about how to change a culture and so if you followed urban ministry like Tim Keller he was really a he was really sort of the flagship for conservative reformed in the city of course Driscoll was sort of the the later generation he was a an emergent young restless and reformed motto at least in that phase of his ministry but the PCA the Protestant Church Protestant Church or Presbyterian Church of America which is a conservative reform denomination part of them that they grew out of the south part of them became really leaders in urban ministry in the United States in the rejuvenating cities after this the cultural wave of friends and Seinfeld and sex in the city when it became once again cool and chic for young people to live in the city rather than in the suburbs so Wren is an interesting guy because he does a lot of good commentary on these but his position is very different from evangelicals and he's got a critique of evangelicals and so when I was starting this vein of inquiry he began to some some people began mentioning his name and so I had already subscribed to his podcast but I wasn't following it very carefully and so I've started now and there's some good stuff in it so I want to play some of it and dive into some of that. Well this is Aaron and welcome back to the podcast. This is something of an experiment. I'm doing something a little bit different today and that in addition to the audio recording that I normally do I'm actually recording the video along with this. I'm going to put it up on YouTube. I always YouTube the audio so people can listen to audio only on YouTube which a lot of people like that believe it or not but today I'm actually going to be doing some video with it so if you want to see what it's like click over to the YouTube channel and check it out and if not you're not going to be missing anything. So I'm in the middle of a three-part series actually coming to the end of a three-part series where I'm looking at various little positive aspects of different religious movements. I talked about New Calvinism first then I talked about two virtues of fundamentalism and today I want to talk about kind of the price that we paid for the decline of mainline Protestantism in the United States and so when I say mainline Protestantism what is it that I'm talking about? What I'm really talking about is the major historic Protestant denominations in the United States. Specifically I'm talking about the Episcopal Church, the Presbyterian Church USA, the Evangelical Lutheran Church in America, the American Baptist Church, formerly the Northern Baptist Church, the United Methodist Church, the United Churches of Christ, and the Disciples of Christ Church. There are other various ones that are like the Quakers that are often considered a mainline denomination but those are really the main ones and the term mainline today is sometimes used as a stand-in for liberal Protestantism so you'll see any kind of a liberal denomination thrown in as mainline and so in a sense it's thus used in opposition to evangelical. This is not always accurate by the way but I think this idea of the historic denominations is more accurate to look at it. And most of these when he says historic he's right because most of these are before the American Civil War. The American Civil War is a watershed in American history for many many different reasons. Now again if you go back to this video by I forget the dude's name but the the ready to harvest guy these are the churches he tracks and again the point is that because these denominations were so massive and so old they have they have and continue to have although a receding massive footprint all over America. You can find often tiny little struggling dying churches all over America from these great mainline churches that have been in decline for a very long time. So where does the term mainline come from? It's not totally definitive what the origin is but the most likely source is the mainline suburbs of Philadelphia. So the mainline suburbs are the most exclusive suburbs of Philadelphia that were laid out along the main line of the Pennsylvania railroad and this is where the elite of Philadelphia moved when they left the city when they left Retton House Square and then Chestnut Hill and places like that suburbanized they went out to the mainline suburbs. They remain some of the most exclusive suburbs in America today similar to you know the North Shore of Chicago or something like that. So the term mainline sort of has something of an elite connotation. That's not true of all of these but it's certainly true of what I would say are the two most important denominations we're talking about when we talk about the mainline which is the Episcopal Church which is where the upper class mostly went and then also the the Presbyterian Church which you might think of as the upper middle class church. American Protestantism has really been very kind of ethnically and socioeconomically stratified and so as you moved up through the social ranks of society you might graduate from one church to another. You might start off as a Baptist then become a Presbyterian. If you really made it to the top you might be an Episcopalian and so really it was the Episcopalians and the Presbyterians that were the most influential in America. The others less so. For example there has never been a Lutheran president of the United States. Now he corrects this later there have been Lutheran presidents. In fact I'm told somebody told me there's never been a Lutheran governor or senator either which seems incredible. I don't know if there's been a Lutheran president but he was corrected on this that there have been Lutheran governors. I mean especially you would imagine a place like Minnesota or Wisconsin you can have a lot of Lutheran governors. These guys tend to ignore the mainline churches maybe other than the Methodists a little bit. I think just assume that these churches and the people who are in them are just apostate and you know I think that's really not totally true and accurate. There are some crazies in these churches but I can tell you I know that there are faithful Episcopal congregations still out there in America for example and even within some of the more moderate or liberal denominations there may be many many people sitting in the pews some of these older people sitting in the pews who still sort of believe in you know the traditional doctrines of Christianity so don't necessarily throw all these guys in the trash can. And when I moved to New York City I was looking for a place to go to church and it sort of morphed into a sort of a tour of churches of New York City. I think maybe I went to 17 different churches. I can't remember how many different ones I went to and I really realized things like hey you know what I've never been to a Lutheran service maybe I should check out a Lutheran service so I went to a couple Lutheran services I went to some Episcopal services Methodist churches. I even went to an Eastern Orthodox service which was amazing and what I really discovered is that I found something of value in every one of the churches that I attended. I'm like there are elements of them that I'm like wow this is great I wish I could have kept this. For example I think the Episcopal liturgies in some of these churches are the best Western liturgies I've ever seen. You know what I'm always impressed when I go to a lot of these Episcopal churches I'm like wow this was just a great mass. I mean I've never I hate to say it I've never been to a Roman Catholic mass where I did not think the priest basically was sort of mailing it in. It just feels like you're going through the motions but you know the Episcopal church some not all of them but some of these churches are very serious about their liturgy and they have some amazing music and so you know if you appreciate that that could be something to appreciate about the church. And so when I talk about the decline of the mainline denominations what am I talking about? I think you can talk about it in essentially two senses. One and the most important one is their loss of membership and their closure of churches. So these denominations have by and large seen very large scale losses in membership. The Episcopal church went from 2.6 million members in 1980 to 1.6 million in 2019. That's a million people lost over that time frame and that was a loss of you know close to 40 percent. So Rod Dreher wrote a blog post not too long ago that if you if you look at the trajectory of these churches basically he said the last Episcopalian has already been born. That might not be technically true but you get a sense of the massive loss of membership by these churches over the last 50 years. Many of them sort of reached their peak in the 1950s early 1960s. It wasn't a catastrophic overnight collapse but there's sort of been a slow steady decline year after year after year in these churches and actually I think the decline is probably worse than the numbers would suggest. I don't know exactly how these numbers were calculated but in a say an evangelical church typically there are more people who attend on Sunday than there are actually members of the church. A lot of people come that never formally join the church. At least that's sort of been my experience. In these mainline denominations it's the opposite. They tend to have many more members than they actually have regular attendees. So the number of people actually showing up in the pews on Sunday may be much lower than the membership. And then the membership is as a... In terms of the African-American church their their dynamics are quite different. I was looking at Putnam did a book on religion in America and a lot of people who check the demographics of churches in America track African-American churches differently because some of these dynamics are also true of African-American churches in communities that I've worked in all my life. Many people are members of churches that they don't necessarily attend very often. Aging as well these churches tend to have a membership that skews very old. The median age is often a senior citizen for example and so there hasn't been a next generation The second sense in which people talk about decline is theological decline. And that these churches many of them have abandoned sort of many traditional Christian doctrines. And again I could go... You could do a whole podcast on this about the fundamentalist modernist controversies and all these things. I'm not going to do that today. I will just say there has been significant theological drift in these denominations. But as I said do not assume that every congregation and every person that goes there is a lunatic. There are many faithful people in these churches. So I think the stereotype of them is not entirely fair. Although in some cases you know there's some truth to it. So what did we lose or what have we lost or are we losing with the decline of these denominations? And I would say well America as a Christian nation as a starter. And by Christian I mean America as a Protestant nation. And when America ceased to be a Protestant nation it wasn't long after that that it ceased to become a Christian nation. Now this label of a country as a Christian nation is is always a tremendously slippery one because you've sort of got your Tom Holland definition of Christianity or your Jordan Peterson definition of religious or even Christian that that sort of includes everyone. It would much more be a sense of a sense of practice, a sense of behavior, and a sense of self-identification. It's again it's tremendously slippery to get a handle on this question of a a Christian nation on paper. Nations like the United Kingdom would be would technically be a Christian nation. They have a state church. They have Christian elements written into their constitution. The queen is the defender of the faith etc etc. Even though church attendance numbers in the UK are a lot less than church attendance numbers in many nations around the world that have nothing in their constitutions or legal documentations connecting them to Christianity or Christ or anything else. So it's a tremendously slippery and difficult thing to talk about as well. And so you know I'm going to illustrate this with something that may or may not resonate with you. I wish I had Philip Best the Notre Dame architect to really lay this out for you because he does a great job of talking about this but I don't do it any I would do it myself anyway and that is the design of cities often reflects sacred order or the social order of the city. Now this will come as absolutely zero surprise to anyone in the Peugeot camp and a little bit later he's going to make a comment about evangelicals and symbolism. So you can think about for example in an ancient city this gigantic temple in a prominent and central place. The place. Think about Jerusalem with the temple both the the first temple of Solomon and the second temple. It's where the heavens meets the earth is an example of sort of sacred order and urban planning order architectural order meeting or you can think about a year. Now Wren is is an I believe he's an urban planner by vocation. European town where the largest and most prominent building the tallest building on the square is the church right that says something about the sacred order of the universe it says it's a metaphysical statement and it's also a statement about the community and its values. Now Kanye West I believe in this town he wants to build in Wyoming I don't know what that has happened in terms of his marriage and everything else in his life but again he was going to have a church at the center of his little town and when Jordan Peterson I think implies I use I'm the one who uses the language about the whole in the center of the culture where the church used to be physically the building that symbolically represented the community of the church was in the center of the town. The the cathedral spire was at some point the landmark by which you could orient yourself with respect to the community physically. And so if you if you look at a city like where I live Indianapolis the sort of sacred center of the city the the focal point of the city is a large circular plaza called Monument Circle right in the smack dab in the middle of downtown that sits at the intersection of Market and Meridian Street so markets east west meridians north south there's a beautiful monument there you know the soldiers and sailors monument you should google it if I thought about it I would have pulled up some stills and put them on this video that I'm recording right now but I didn't do that and what you see is that two blocks to the west on Market Street is the state capital two blocks to the east on Market Street is City Hall so you see there represented the government the civil government of the people represented on this this sacred axis east and west we also now now governments represent themselves with buildings and they do so intentionally if you come if you drive into Sacramento the whole architecture of downtown has been created so that you can't miss the state capital when San Francisco was rebuilt after the earthquake and fire at the beginning of the 20th century they intentionally built such an impressively domed city hall so that everyone would basically say San Francisco is here to stay buildings make a statement and institutions make statements by their buildings so see the city market on two blocks east on Market and we see many many office buildings representing commerce in the city so commerce is represented on the sacred axis of the city there's also the premier old city gentleman's club the Columbia club is right there on the circle it represents civil society is present on the circle and then there's the now even the name of that club the Columbia club if if you're at all attuned to American history you know that there were periods in American history where you would name your club the Columbia club this would be probably you know this would definitely be pre-cultural revolution in the 1960s because Columbus was of course a hero which is why you find statues of Columbus in Columbus square in New York City you find Columbus as as a hero of the culture and so you would name your club after Columbus you would name a river the Columbia River you would name a state Washington state all of these things very much locate the genesis of your group within the cultural timeline of the United States and again all of these institutions are older and therefore have precious prime real estate in the center of your city and they embody something in the center of the city the old circle theater which was originally a a movie palace but is now home to the Indianapolis symphony orchestra and so we see that culture is represented on the sacred axis of the city and on monument circle at the northeast corner of meridian and market is a church it's Christchurch cathedral and it is the episcopal cathedral of the city it's also the oldest church in the city of Indianapolis was built in 1857 so it's not like a grand European style cathedral but it is it's smaller but it is a quite attractive building and so on sort of the main sacred axis sacred heart of the city the main urban urban axis to the east west we have we have what Christianity is represented and who represents it the episcopal church so just just to make his point this is Indianapolis and if you zoom in and if you say select ask google maps to show churches you have mount you here you have this monument square right at the center of the city you have Christchurch cathedral episcopalian church cornerstone church there probably some uh yeah they're a storefront Christian church disciples of christ and he's going to you've got war memorials i mean you've got parks this is basically what cities have done right the episcopal cathedral is present at the sacred heart of the city and really it's meridian street for many miles north of the city that is the main civic access today so many key institutions are located on meridian street there's the war memorial mall all the tv stations are there the library is there many of the non-profits are there and there are also a large number of important and prominent churches and religious institutions along north meridian street indianapolis there are actually three episcopal churches on that corridor going north from the city there's also at 7700 north meridian second presbyterian church which is the establishment church in the city of indianapolis it was the founding pastor was henry ward beecher became the famous abolitionist preacher and this is actually one of the 10 largest pc usa congregations in the country there are three united methodist churches north united methodist at 38th and meridian is really another it's a very progressive church but you know and my wife would describe it it's an institution right a lot of people go there it's a big one meridian street north meridian united methodist church and in st luke's united methodist which is not directly on meridian at 86 it's like a half a block to the west but basically on that axis which is one of the 10 largest united methodist congregations in the country and so there's these big mainline congregations there the roman catholic cathedral is also on meridian street there's also a very prominent synagogue that was built there and the mormon temple that's pretty new is actually built it's in caramel it's actually in the first suburb north of the city and it's just you know essentially a block west of meridian street that the meridian street itself is a freeway in an office corridor but right off that freeway is the mormon temple and so what we see here is that all of these religions and all of these prominent congregations wanted to have a site on this north south civic axis of the city a sort of a sacred axis of the city and guess what you'll note there is not a single evangelical congregation anywhere on that axis which i think is really incredible to think about it and i think it shows that there is some sort of a missing gene in evangelicalism it totally does not comprehend the symbolic dimension of human existence but i think that this now this in and of itself could easily be a very long conversation culturally see evangelicals basically come out of the fundamentalist modernist they tend to come from lower reaches of the social stratus social classes so it's a it's a huge subject but his his comment about symbolism i thought was was quite quite interesting physical representation of christianity sense but i think that this physical representation of christianity in indianapolis on these civic axes being represented by the mainline protestant denominations shows that essentially christianity and society were fundamentally joined via these congregations now it's very interesting of course redeemer press in new york city reached its height before keller's retirement keller obviously has continued to be active i think he's been fighting pancreatic cancer which is a a very deadly form of cancer but i remember when redeemer press used to be in various very evangelical in the sense they'd meet in various different locations hunter college other rented facilities and i believe and and they would sort of keep it a secret where exactly tim was going to be preaching as opposed to the other preachers on any given sunday morning it's interesting that the church did not try to become a cathedral church now i i wonder with tim keller's reach because he he had significant reach especially before his retirement i mean it would i mean tim keller would be on major media outlets offering christian perspective you can go to google and talks at google i think tim keller gave one or two talks keller gave one or two talks at google i don't know if google would have a i don't know if google would have a a pca pastor talking at google again but i mean tim keller had that kind of reach in the culture in that the church was four or five thousand people and they never decided to leverage both the numbers and the cultural reach to let's say try to build a and in new york city it would have to be indeed you know i don't know how many millions it would require in new york city to actually become a cathedral church maybe that it's quite likely that was beyond the reach of redeemer presbyterian but when keller retired i haven't followed it since then but i know the plan was basically to split up into multiple smaller congregations and again symbolically that's classically evangelical and it's exactly the opposite of what erin wren is talking about here right christianity had a key place in society and you could actually even see that physically in these cities in these churches and in the design of our cities and so the way right and so the evangelical the fundamentalist or kind of low church whatever to call it these other denominations in churches no matter how many people attend them have never played the same role in society that these mainline denominations played and so in a lot of these mainline churches right the elite the upper class the movers and the shakers they attended these congregations and frankly in some cases they still do today i think it's probably probably to the extent that the upper crust of your city is going to church a lot of them are going to these churches and the pastors and the religious leaders of these things had a major impact on their community and on american society right i i read some of high on god with james james wellman's book about this about how before the second world war these churches had tremendous political power in the cities that mayors would need to talk to the pastors of these churches if they wanted to have things happen now their decline after the second world war they'd sort of reached their peak in the 50s but notice that in some ways evangelical leadership displaced them remember that rick warren rick warren gave the prayer at barack obama's first inaugural billy graham was spiritual advisor to a variety of presidents bill hybels was spiritual advisor to bill clinton and so evangelicals by virtue of their numbers and then when carl roe for example political advisor to george w bush wanted to map out a path to the white house it ran straight through evangelicals and and to a certain degree trump followed the same map now the road map isn't identical in 2016 as it was let's say in in 96 but there's there's a lot going on here there was not necessarily as i would say full separation of the civil and the ecclesiastical realm in the episcopal church for example a number of the prominent episcopal priests and bishops over the year were people who themselves came from upper class families so they came they were members of the elite now playing their role in society as bishops of the episcopal church and these mainline leaders and again predominantly i would say episcopal and presbyterian but you know others participated had a big influence on our society and on policy in the country if you go back to the 30s and the 40s and look at the federal council of churches which was the precursor of the national council of churches which is the main ecumenical group of the mainline denominations they were a huge backer of essentially globalism right if you want to know who the kind of the kind of the globalists were the internationalist was the mainline churches now here's where you begin to see the dna gets transferred into blue church into the blob they supported open borders immigration they supported free trade they supported decolonization decolonization for example they were big and influential in the creation and in the form of the united nations for example they played a role in that the later now now i should check this before i say it oh my what google can bring up i had no idea so juicy ecumenicity is a blog that has to do sort of from the conservative end of things has to do with the ongoing distress of the united methodists but here is a piece with none other than james brat who he wasn't teaching yet when when i was a student at calvin in the history department but he became one of the major lights of the calvin history department um brat and i discuss fdr's lifelong episcopalianism a sense his sense of providence how christianity shaped the new deal views and his resistance against nazism so this is very much a video i'm gonna have to check out if you recall the last video where we where i had the last video on this topic where i was dealing with the andrew preston interview with um the rest is history talked about the fact that fdr brought more non-wasps into his cabinet probably more than cumulative every other president before him but what was fdr's when fdr went to church and he did now again if you watch curse of oak island you also know that fdr was a mason which is another thing with respect to american history but um fdr did go to church let's say well as i mentioned most people don't appreciate that fdr was religious the exception seems to have been winston churchill who organized that magnificent anglican church service on the deck of the battleship when they first met in the north atlantic knowing that would appeal to fdr but why is there so little widespread knowledge about fdr's religiosity well he didn't observe a lot of the conventional customs of it um he he loved to go to church on particularly ceremonial occasions high points christmas and easter but also every anniversary of his inauguration and other high points national days of prayer but he was not an every sunday in church in the pew kind of guy um he wasn't much of a theologian although as one chapter in this book shows um he did have kind of a an odd night with um a dinner and a long discussion with the foremost american authority on soran kirkugor and kirkugor really struck deeply into roosevelt's consciousness that night um he um for for roles he did read his prayer book um um nightly before he went to bed he read his prayers that was his ritual um and he um but but for him christianity was in the doing christianity was in the doing and um it was it was in the heart creating a heart of compassion for ordinary people he thought that he thought that that's what jesus was about and um this understanding came to him in terms that we would label the social gospel of the um early uh late 19th early 20th century his wife elinor was steeped in that one of the most important cabinet officers francis perkins she was the first female cabinet member and secretary of labor and really the architect of some of the most important new deal legislation such as social security francis perkins was deeply devoted to the social gospel and very much um a weekly participant in um anglo-catholic liturgy she would go while a cabinet officer she would go once a month to a nearby convent in maryland an anglo-catholic convent and do a weekend um retreat um and so these are the kind of people uh elinor francis perkins and also his headmaster at groton um roosevelt's headmaster at groton kind of a replacement father for him um endicott peabody who was um deeply devoted to christian responsibility and tried to cultivate that into the rising american ruling class of the gilded age so these these people were very instrumental in and fashioning roosevelt's outlook and um for him new deal legislation was turning christian injunction into a social political policy that would help the ordinary lives of ordinary people and you can see right there very much the establishment because there's fdr hide park new york this is this is american aristocracy but sort of social gospel becomes the new deal and but but at this point with fdr didn't go to church much but when he went to church it would be episcopalian of course george hw bush the senior episcopalian now george w bush sort of splits it so comes from episcopalian but also tracks along with the born again movement i've talked quite a bit about chuck colson jimmy carter in the 1970s of course you have this born again movement where i've paraphrased it often you know chuck colson comes home and tells his wife i'm you know i've become a christian and i thought we were episcopalian that that's sort of the transformation that happens with this born again movement in the 1970s but of course fdr quite a bit earlier this this is christian nationalism it really is and it was the default position of the country i'm gonna have to pause here and pick this up a little bit later i don't know why i say that it won't be later for you all but i have to go i have to go be pastor so i had to go out and help somebody do something and got a chance in the drive there to listen a little bit more of this conversation with james brad about fdr i'm gonna have to see what else brad has done with this to to roosevelt it wasn't just a bad oppressive political system but a nazism represented a real negation of human dignity of the we would say the image of god that was planted in all human beings christian or not this was a negation of everything and every possibility of good and mutual respect and and the development of of the human soul and boy he he just instinctively bridled at this and worked his political magic to by hook and crook and by a very spare measure sometime get the united states ready to combat this one of the things that going back to your previous question one of the things that doesn't that makes again one of the one of the um one of the themes that we're working on following mere shiners this this idea of liberal hygienic hygenia me hegemony and this again now this is this is it's a valid conversation to have with respect to how should america get into wars under what criteria but this is this is part of the package of of american identity understanding what it means to be a christian nation one's duty in the world and you know that will then lead to implications roosevelt not seem a real pious guy is that he was a wily politician right he really knew how to play the game and you know you might you might think about you might think about evangelicals and trump in that matter so pietism is is again another element of this conversation too and the way that politician rings in the american ear today it's everything conniving inauthentic deceptive manipulative and so you can't be a good politician and a good consistent christian and for roosevelt no you um without being dishonest or um underhanded you use the rules you follow the rules and the devices of this game to aim for um a really good common end in an elevated end so um ryan old nebor didn't like him much roosevelt but came to appreciate him particularly when the move from um domestic to foreign policy and so um roosevelt is kind of a a walking textbook of neburean political ethics is there any evidence fdr knew who nebur was or was it anyway influenced by him nope we um we don't have much evidence of that um nebur ran in different circles um church-wise than than roosevelt did so we do have this really weird confrontation with uh kirkegaard but um the people that that roosevelt responded to were more um the lions of social and political thinking in the episcopal church he was he was very much as um that church called itself he was very much a churchman okay um he was very ecumenical in his outlook he thought that um you know there were you know every denomination had um had its own take and these were all good and we should we shouldn't certainly not um spur antagonism over denominational barriers but um capacious as he was in terms of his own uh practical um thinking and uh relationships he was very much an episcopalian now again here so there's this breadth and you know some on the mere christianity side might see that breadth others others might see it in a different way so so pay attention to when in the you know it seems like it's roosevelt that really is part of this transformation into a judaio-christian vision of all of this together as opposed to see piety will tend to be a little bit more particularist pietisms or they might focus on the devotion faithfulness in church observance etc etc so i'm gonna have to finish listening to this whole interview at some point but i have listened to to aaron so let's continue with him they're the national council of churches and it's uh played a creation and in the form of the united nations for example they played a role in that the later the national council of churches and its first lay leader j. erwin miller played a key role in marshaling support for for the civil rights act so these were prominent uh civic players uh in america and again many upper class people were very heavily involved in these denominations either as ministers or as lay leaders so in j. p. morgan was you know the premier lay leader of the episcopal church in america at the time he was running his his banking empire so so you see fdr j. p. morgan these were the leaders of the nation and they self-consciously identified not necessarily as episcopalian that was sort of the you know the cadillac or the lincoln of the churches i mean if you were middle to upper class maybe you're presbyterians as he says baptist for the for the lower classes but these these were the captains of industry they were the captains of the nation and this held all the way into until really you get to the the counterculture in the 1960s where where this will begin to come undone and then you'll push back against the man and and this sort of this sort of coalition of power and status will will be seen as corrupt and of course that's going to have a lot to do when vietnam watergate when all of this comes through so remember nixon nixon is a quaker and and as as as ren notes quaker's sort of part of the main line and all the way back to andrew preston sort of the pacifist main line anabaptists they would be much more down down register with other evangelicals and fundamentalists and you would see this reflected down at the lower levels of society as well so here in indianapolis i mentioned second presbyterian church founded a founding pastor was henry ward beecher who later became much more prominent in in new york city if you recognize i talked about uncle tom's carrion cabin harriet beecher stowe i mean these are all part of the same family coming out of sort of new england brahmans and and so this these these roots go back a long ways and are deeply tied with this transformation that happens in the civil war where where suddenly christianity that that's really the birth of christian nationalism and and it sort of forks in time between christian imperialism like you will see with this globalism free trade open borders and and that there's some deep continuity with christianity there because there's very much sort of a universalism not in terms of having to do with conversations of hell but a universalism in terms of we recognize human rights so in the united in the united nation you'll get this statement about the united nation is very much an institution that is built on this idea of of human rights internationally at plimoth church of the pilgrims and um but you know the role of second presbyterian church has been enormous in this city so why do we have a library system in indianapolis well one reason is second presbyterian church in 1868 uh their their best pastor reverend hannford now notice the timing 1865 is the end of the civil war and so after the civil war in the north you're going to have the beginning of what is called progressivism and you're going to have child labor laws and women's suffrage and the temperance movement and there are all these other social movements that come along with it and the christian you know these are christian organizations but in eventually this ecumenicity as it's imagined or let's say this non-sectarian spirit that comes about through fdr and then after the second world war the people of every faith but now there are parameters around the assumptions of what do you mean of every faith and there's a great deal of protestantism that's simply built into this edson in a sermon said we need a library system as quote was the deficiency that is really fatal to the city's character is the want of a public library unquote boom you know the next year it's like there's a library committee the city has a library you know fast forward about a century in 1972 the senior pastor of second presbyterian church uh bill hudnett the third the son and grandson of prominent presbyterian ministers resigned why to become a congressman so he now that's not incidental and within this movement and i've seen this in my lifetime within this movement you'll have people starting out in churches but heading for politics because the political sphere becomes the main venue of the kingdom of god now in my tradition of dutch calvinism they have this idea of of sphere sovereignty even though abraham kiper was both a church leader theologian eventually became prime minister of the netherlands you you almost have this idea that that church is subservient to state so maybe you'll start out as a pastor but then you know the the reverend jesse jackson runs for president of the united states and as i said before the the african-american churches are are a little bit interesting because often you'll find african-american churches tend to run the gamut of religious liberalism and conservatism but they will often be an institution by which especially during jim crow when access was denied other institutions to african-americans african americans could then progress from within the church and of course dr martin luther king jr became a prominent national leader if he had lived would he have been who would he have been become a congressman or a senator could very well have happened recently we had a black pastor become senator from the state of georgia and you'll find a variety of individuals from the civil rights movement eventually getting into political office and this is seen as in some ways a rung up from leadership within the church in fundamentalist circles by virtue of the of the of the theological framework that won't be so because which is of greater value saving souls or passing legislation in a cause for justice and of course depending on a lot of how you imagine justice to be pursued by particular legislation became a congressman and later became the four term mayor of the city now let's just say some of his behavior in the personal life did not line up or be fit a minister of the gospel but now again when you look at these issues this is part of why trump was so interesting with respect to evangelicals because evangelicals tend to be much more pietistic do you pray do you study the bible do you turn to the lord do you is your life a testimony in terms of um your personal piety your morality all of these things but we just heard about fdr well you know cutthroat politician hey the um the ends justify the means we're going to get what we get to because the vision of the the social gospel demands let's say new deal legislation but again this is all christian nationalism it shows the influence flowing between the pulpit and the the civic realm if you if you look and so if you look at if you look at mainline churches today you will often get a lot of sermons that seem fundamentally political now you'll get that in some fundamentalist and evangelical churches too some of those churches however they will tend to be more pulled by bible teaching bible soul saving that tends to be the focus of the evangelical fundamentalist churches as opposed to say the mainline but again for a lot of people why go to church when you can vote at kind of the history kind of the official history of second presbyterian church they have this line on their on their website from this era that says the business you know during the coffee hour at second presbyterian church the business of the city often gets done in quiet and caring ways so what notice quiet and caring they didn't say prayerful or biblical now you're beginning to tease out some of the nuances of what happens to the mainline versus let's say the evangelical fundamentalist track what happened to these denominations that they went into decline that's very uh heavily studied um a topic i can't really do justice to it i'm not an expert in it myself but the proximate cause seems to be threefold one is that the flow of inbound converts uh dried up i mentioned sort of that as you sort of moved on up socioeconomically in society now he mentions that the flow of inbound converts dries up but is it to the point that the church itself has no reason for being and again go back to my conversation with james wellman about maybe i'll just play the clip when james wellman started on this it really struck me because he he really nailed well what happened to the mainline well this is what happened to the mainline and again you listen to james wellman and he's you know he's in many ways continues to have sort of the heart of the mainline but what about the institution well i think i got out of the church trip because it was too depressing and i just felt like it had lost its way and it all it was doing was mimicking what you hear in liberal culture and not doing much more than that and it was it was uninteresting therefore you know obviously i believe in an i'm inclusive you know i i follow most of the inclusive ways that we talk about what i what i would say however is that what what does it mean to be human you know sort of the jordan fitterson thing you know sort of the jordan fitterson thing what does it mean to be human it is to to structure a life that is giving away more than it is consuming that is sacrificing for the sake of those they love that is has a higher vision of the world than simply finding how much you can consume is that housing this stern purpose of justice peace love forgive what he's doing there is he's this is the heart of the mainline right there yes and all that so but you know what institution is holding up that vision it's mostly in my head um so you know where do i go for it i don't know i really don't know i i think you there's no perfect church for me when i go to church it's usually kind of a mediocre sermon um i kind of wonder like why what am i doing you know what what it was why are we here um so so you're interested in goodness and justice and setting the world right and well i don't necessarily need the bible to tell me what that looks like that's key because it's well listen to sam harris well it's obvious what's right well the the obviousness of what's right is inherited from the mainline tradition even for sam harris what are these songs about is this weird it's just all weird it's to be honest um uh it's just and i just kind of go home and i go okay i'm going to go study my books because i'm a monk and i'm a monk for for a stern moral life that has a spirit that has spiritual um vitality in it and that's i find it in my books which is kind of it's just there's what institution can i follow i can't trust the president you can't trust it now here's part of the change this is years now after watergate vietnam best you churches who do you trust i don't whoa i don't know i'm probably not really helping you guys no no i think i mean no no no it's not i was not i was i mean let me just just end by saying i want to be a moral hero at least for myself and my family for god's sake a spiritual moral hero for them and maybe for a few of my students at school i don't you know that's all i got that's all i got i know i know i think you're i think you're voicing something that actually is gonna i think you're voicing something jim that's gonna really resonate with a lot of paul's audience that what's going on on his discord and his youtube channel and those kind of things is people who are kind of stuck there they're like they feel like monks right so they're reading their books they're watching these videos they're doing these kind of things but like this extra step sometimes is difficult for them of like why am i going to church which church do i go to like what like what actually does that participation in you know in the crystal knife maybe or just life in general like how does that go i mean paul jump in but like i feel like that's a lot of the people i talk to oh yeah yeah and and i think you know mars hill basically presented itself we're the army you've been looking for yep and the rise and fall of and this is part of the reason evangelical and fundamentalist churches have done well there's a lot of elements to this there's the mythos you get the mythos you get the narrative you get the participation now you can get some of that in a political activist movement but why have the church when you can start a not-for-profit that's particularly targeted to the cause that you are passionate about and so you know you go back to the jordan peterson video with and so one of the struggles right now is that religion is on the decline and it has been for a number of decades and you refer to nichet in the book about god being dead and his observation about the rise of totalitarian ideologies coming with the decline in religion and the various problems that come with that and right now particularly among young people and older people as well we're seeing politics replace religion we're seeing people now see that's been happening for a long time place spiritual metanarratives with ideological metanarratives so so how do we how do we figure that out how do we perhaps we're seeing that you know that's one hypothesis and it's one i favor um i did see polling data at one point for example from the gallup corporation indicating that lapsed catholics were something some multiple of times more likely to be separatists during the heyday of the quebec separatist movement and now a number of comments have gone with the catholics and maybe i'll have to have kale on because i know kale is following this conversation closely because a number of you have been basically mentioning well yeah the catholics have the truth is that catholics have sort of becoming mainline protestants and going exactly where the mainline protestants go which is not to church and and so again what you see is the sweeping movement of religion in the culture where it's not it's not seen as a religion it's just justice and morality and right and wrong and and to a certain degree the lower it is on the stack this is just justice it is it is the definition of it well the more of a believer you are the you might switch your church membership say from a baptist church to be dried up i mentioned sort of uh seems to be threefold one is that the flow of inbound converts uh dried up i mentioned sort of that as you sort of moved on up socioeconomically in society you might switch your church membership say from a baptist church to a presbyterian church and you know if you if you read a biography of john d rockefeller senior for example one of the things that distinguished him is that he stayed a baptist he did not join the episcopal church or or go do a social climate but you know go to new york city and visit when when i was a kid one of our favorite new york trips was to go to riverside church now i didn't know it was john d rockefeller i didn't even know who john d rockefeller was when i was a kid but you could go up into the bell tower and you could have these beautiful vistas over new york it's right there in new york john d rockefeller built that baptist church right there in new york and i got stories about that church action religiously he stayed true to his baptist roots but a lot was not uncommon for people to kind of move into these denominations from elsewhere over time that sort of dried up secondly they were the members of these churches proved to be very eager as adopters of family planning so certainly compared to more evangelical churches they had a significant and the catholics catholics practicing family planning meaning contraception when the church said not to it's like i mean this has been a big issue in american catholicism for a long time only fewer children just physically had fewer children and then the children did not necessarily follow in the faith it's basically there was not a lot of outbound conversion to these churches and i would say many of them have been characterized by enormous loyalty by their you know now many of them now elderly kind of congregates but so they didn't it wasn't like everybody fled these churches but it was sort of kind of a dry up of the inflow and that's key because well what's the church for well we'll teach people how to be you know how to give back but this is all in the culture you could watch it on so again about the only tv i'm watching right now is survivor but just about every season while they're in some poor country that has beautiful beaches and well one of the one of the reward challenges is well we're going to go and buy a bunch of baseball equipment or school equipment so we can give back to the poor children of the philippines or nicodagua or some place like this although this hasn't this is no longer a christian activity connected with a christian activity in the culture this is just the definition of morality and this again is sort of the the the the liberal protestant faith has subsumed the culture it's taken over the culture and you know sam harris would say well that's not christian that's just fair enough other certainly jews and and muslims and buddhists are have concern for the poor yada yada yada so but but it's not even religion it's just the definition of good and so they'll teach you this in school but it won't be connected with jesus or jesus to die and save you for your sins we can get into the modernist fundamentalist fight and i wrote a study if i find a link to this i'll throw it in the i'll throw it in the show notes i can't remember the name of it off off top my habits but did a study and basically show basically the argument was that essentially multiculturalism in globalism was ultimately the undoing of these denominations and i think you know i think there's something of an irony today when you hear the term christian nationalism you think is something like the jericho march but really the main lines were the original christian uh nationalist and if you think you know i've often used this positive neutral negative world framework where you're really talking about now he this is one of his more interesting analyses of tim keller because the positive framework this is this is where it's what i've been talking about for a number of years in the 1950s before the counterculture to be a moral american meant going to church that gets undone by the counterculture and so basically from the middle of the 60s depending on the group it would it would continue to be true in certain places in america today to be a moral upstanding prominent member of the community meant to be a church going person well then it then it sort of lost its valence became neutral and now of course with with the sexual revolution it's become it's become an immoral thing to go to a bible believing church and to have a traditional christian sexual ethic well now you are a bigot it's like oh wow things changed and part of what what ren's thesis about tim keller was was that tim keller really thrived in sort of a neutral valence but once it flipped to negative well now suddenly and and you see this on twitter all the time tim keller is he's he's too woke for the conservatives and he's he's too bigoted for the progressives he's he's caught in the mushy middle and he's in real trouble the um you know the positive world was when christianity was seen as a social positive in a society and to be a known as a church going uh man was sort of a you know was like adds to your social credit score like christianity was sort of a normative uh in society and it was really i think in the 50s the 1950s which was the all-time peak of church membership in the united states as a share of the population and where the main lines really reached their peak uh that that was really that was the ultimate um sort of period of um of um you know call it the positive world and so in other words and this stands to reason if you gained status by going to church more people went to church and in fact there was a status hierarchy within churches and so you know presidents of the united states generally speaking were episcopalian often not always often because as he mentioned before you climb the church ladder well now i'll see if i can get into the episcopalian church you know i'm gonna have to give more money and i'm gonna have to show up and i'm gonna you know give enough money so that there are stained glass windows and and arms of the building that are named after me and we're going to put down serious cash so that we can get a a plot of land in the center of town and we're going to build a prominent structure so that this gains status now especially you you really see a lot of this movement with the counter culture and then you look at the jesus people and you look at jesus music and all of this stuff changes then in the united states now it doesn't just go away like this but slowly erodes and so now you know again for barack obama's first inaugural he had rick warren pray for his second inaugural giglio was going to pray but giglio wasn't affirming of same-sex marriage and it hadn't yet come but again first term for obama's presidency he was against same-sex marriage and he was for if some of you might remember this civil unions by the second term he was pro same-sex marriage and so suddenly you lose status if you're a christian with a traditional sexual ethic within the blob it was in a sense christian nationalism in the sense that part of being a you know god-fearing patriotic upstanding citizen america was you were a member of a church and it was often one of one of these churches and so the or member of a synagogue maybe a catholic in certain parts of the country but you have to remember catholics were on the out all the way up until the 1960s with with kennedy and even you know even then people had concerns but catholics were on the out remember the kkk didn't just tell hate black folks they also hated jews and catholics leadership the elite of these denominations were taking and again very common what we see today they had a much more progressive point of view they wanted to be very multicultural and not just in a in a kind of racial or ethnic sense but also in the sense that we want to bring in the catholics you know we want to bring in jews we want to bring in all the foreign countries we want to bring in the secular we want to have you know a a you know we don't want this to just be a christian american protest and now that's gonna and then really the the big switch was it well let's bring in well there's other minorities there's sexual minorities let's bring in the gays let's bring in the trans it's this it's a progressive liberationism and we're going to talk more about the the psychology of that liberation as we as we continue on in this series we want this to be an everybody thing at at the table but you know the america the average layman wasn't necessarily buying this and in fact by essentially embracing americanism the evangelicals were able to you know do quite well for themselves but in essence and what he said right there is really key so all of the all of the moral panic about christian nationalism it's kind of set up by this christian multiculturalism imperialism and its way well you give someone a chance to gain market status by hitting something hard and they'll do it right christian nationalism you know might have might have been one way to describe some of these churches in the 50s you know i'm thinking of dwight d eisenhower's famous quip where he said something like america makes no sense without a deeply held faith in god and i don't care what faith it is right and so he himself really wasn't a religious man but when he was president he was baptized and as a presbyterian and attended national presbyterian church and so that was a sense in which you know being a good citizen and being going to church were sort of synonymous it was also a christian nationalist and that the elite you know the protestant establishment these wasps they were very tightly connected to these churches so the movers and shakers of society and governments and these churches they were very connected with each other and i think you can think about these churches i think an evangelical will look back at them and say this was a very squishy faith it was a nominal faith you know it was sort of just like a civil religion you're going to church because that's what you do but you know it wasn't now now again pietism well you know go to church and you have this to a degree in the catholic church as well you have you know famously and at least in movies you have mobsters who are faithful and loyal catholics it's like wait a minute the faith wasn't necessarily the animating principle of of their life and i think there's probably something to that but i wouldn't call it an entirely fake faith either i think there are also many people serious about their faith these these churches and denominations they valued a moderation you know theological and religious moderation sort of religious enthusiasms you might say were not really welcome in this world and there's something to that and you know i can't really say to tell you the truth that this sort of this sort of christianity was really that different from say the average suburban megachurch where it's sort of like a it's sort of like a social hub for people with kids at the same ages and you go there and you hear a sermon that's in some places of the country light on scripture but very heavy on how to manage your facebook use and you know or some pop psychology so i don't think they had and maybe any um any monopoly on on kind of a uh call it a you know kind of nominal faith but there was there was something to the case that there probably was some a lot of people just going to church because that's what you did uh will herberg the the jewish writer who wrote the book uh protestant catholic jew and talked about this sort of mid-century concept of the triple melting pot um he you know he was sort of bemoaning that people didn't take their their religion seriously um but i do think there's a sense in in which what happened was you know we sort of maybe de-infiltrated and you have the sense that well whatever religion you have not really whatever but if you're a jew or a catholic or a protestant take that religion seriously and by seriously what we mean is well have that religion have you tell the truth have you be good to your neighbor and so all of this sort of creates a non-sectarian morality that is just pervasive in the culture besides religion a little bit it becomes a more pluralistic society you know the catholics are now welcome it's just not a protestant nation anymore um i think what ended up happening and what this this paper if i can find it sort of ends up happening is at some point when you're arguing about globalism and everybody's welcome at the table whether you're christian or not or religious or not then why do you need christianity to be there you can easily eject the christianity and just have a purely secular movement a fairly secular movement of diverse people coming together and essentially that's what happened there was you know there was something of a loss of the of the distinctive character and so what ultimately happened again just to summarize you know what are some of the consequences of this i think christianity went from the cultural center of america to the cultural margins of america with the loss of the mainline denominations and again i think you know you think about james davison hunter what it means to be at the center the loss of the center ground the cultural high ground of society was a very big loss indeed for the faith i would say intellectualism and to some extent aesthetics it really has all but disappeared from kind of the american church with the rise of evangelicalism and the decline of these denominations i mean i've just railed against the protestant church architecture which is the evangelical church architecture which is so bad and you know the you know was in a mark knoll wrote the book the scandal the evangelical mind you go back to mid-century you know and uh you know reinhold neiber and people like they had some like really smart people uh intellectual people engaged right in the public debate in a way that's been much less the case today with um with evangelicalism and again you see what you often see sort of in this you know politically conservative world with a lot of the religious right is really all the thinking has been outsourced to catholics you know the intellectual elite of sort of conservative christianity in america now are catholics uh and so you know there's tremendous loss within protestantism and i think there's also been again this tremendous loss of strategic real estate and sacred space you know as there's there's sort of a mismatch between the buildings and the vibrant congregations and again there's there's something i i think that layout of indianapolis that i spent you probably think too long telling you about it says something profound about non-mainline christianity that they do not have any concept of the symbolic realm of the importance of having a place on the main civic axis of the city you know because guess what the catholics and the jews and the mormons understood that it was important to plant their flag on meridian street to show we belong here we are part of this community you know we have a place here and this this loss of like you probably probably thinking well arren what are you talking about it just doesn't even compute and again if you want to know more about this look up the work of philip best architect at the noter dame architecture school he's fantastic and so i guess i would just um if you want to know why america is no longer a christian nation which again in an american context to say it is a christian nation is no longer a protestant nation i think that's important to acknowledge you have to look to the decline of these churches so thanks thanks for listening and i'm probably going to continue talking about mainline protestantism and especially the uh the old white anglo-saxon protestant establishment because i did a big research project on that last year and i i i did some writing on it and i'm going to share some of the findings from that uh and some of the articles that i've that i've written on the topic so again so we'll keep uh working on this stream we'll keep digging in this vein george marsden's the twilight of the american enlightenment is helpful in this because again in in some ways the transformation in america from a self-consciously christian nation into an implicitly christian uh at least a sort of a moral and implicit christian morality that then once it's so you might say well well isn't it success to have it sort of drop the drop the label yeah you could see it as a success in some ways but once you start to get disconnected from the roots of the religion this is the big anxiety that i hear coming out of douglas murray and tom holland over in the uk once once you're disconnected from the roots what impulses then sort of continue to guide the trajectory of the religion see how much time i have i'll i'll just give a little um little preview of something one of you sent me this video from a channel called kidology how psychology took over the modern world or an analysis of jordan b peterson and i thought it was quite a good video and it was it was helpful in terms of of how in a lot of ways well-being very much got reframed psychologically and that has a lot to do with this progressive liberationism and this quote towards the end of the video really captured it it is not jordan's insights alone which have propelled him to fame rather it is the modern historical process of what ava illus calls making the self into an emotional and public matter that has found its most expressive effective expression in the internet and in the contemporary economy so making the self into an emotional and public matter and and so you begin to see the the transformation from from let's say soup kitchen christianity now into me christianity how can i feel good about myself i also noted that carl r truman it's a book that many of you regularly um suggest to me and it's just now out in audiobook which is which is really handy for me i listened to a couple of hours of it this morning the rise and triumph of the modern self cultural amnesia expressive individualism the road to sexual revolution i mean he he tracks some of this as well and and so it's not just sort of the the the triumph of progressive progressivism through establishment protestantism that also continues to continues to morph as again i think it's it's disconnected from its roots as you go from christianity in a positive valence to a neutral valence now to a negative valence now we're going to continue to see the kinds of fights that we are seeing in the culture so i want to see if um if if erin ren did in fact put that link in his show notes yeah so here's here's this paper the link in the notes on from erin ren led to um something that you need access to but i did find the paper on pdf out on the on the internet after cloven tongues of fire ecumenical protestantism and the modern american encounter with diversity and and this is going to be helpful for me because i do think that the challenge of pluralism is behind sort of losing the christian tag and making it it's just simply good and evil then and good then anybody can can participate in this good and evil so i hope this was interesting you know this isn't this isn't the jordan peterson stuff and this isn't some of the other more popular stuff but i think this is foundational to a lot of it's certainly foundational to me because the it's just abundantly clear to me that there is a religious spirit in the nation that works religiously in people and again i try to find language for it because in some ways if you can name the agregore you can you can begin to you can begin to deal with it so yeah leave a message let me know what you think