https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=sOT6cP9tEnQ

 Well Esther, I'm really glad that you can join me today and we can have this conversation and I don't have a full hour left but we'll see where it goes and we can always talk another time. Why don't you introduce yourself a little bit? I know a number of people are familiar with you because of your writing and some of your activity on Twitter and on Facebook. Why don't you let us know what you want to let us know about you? Yeah, sure. Thanks Paul. This is a thrilling opportunity for me to be with the great Paul of Andrew Clay. He also knows the pastor of the IDW. I got a really… That's my congregation boy. I sure got my work cut out for me. Oh you sure do. So okay, about me. So I was raised in a Christian home by two wonderful parents who not only brought me the faith but also encouraged me in critical thinking. The house was full of books. I was encouraged to read a lot from a very early age and I always had a very philosophical turn of mind and so we would often have conversations around the dinner table about faith and religion and culture and politics and all kinds of things. So I grew up observing culture very keenly and observing human nature very keenly. I always had a great love of literature and history. So the life of the mind I would say was cultivated very lovingly in my home. So faith and reason were kind of intertwined for me from the beginning. They were never seen as things that were separate. So I was homeschooled all the way up through high school in fact. Wow. Yeah, so people often ask me, oh what was that like? People are weird about homeschooling because they're not sure what it means. They get connotations in their mind of who knows what but for me it meant stuff like learning Latin and reading Sir Walter Scott novels and watching Golden Age musicals and playing competitive chess and writing research papers about military history and listening to Handel and you know neat stuff like that. I'm not sure what everyone else was doing at those ages but that's what I was doing. We homeschooled our kids. Oh yeah? Yeah. Fantastic. And so for a while my wife was teaching in a public school so I was homeschooling them during the day and kind of swing shifting a lot of my ministry and I think it's a terrific way. If it's a good fit between the parents and children. I've seen people, I've seen it not be a good fit but when it's done well it's really impressive. Yeah and you know I do want to be sensitive. I realize for some parents they just don't have that option because they need the money or because the single mom or that kind of circumstance but if at all possible I really think it's a good fit. And it's interesting because I'm part of a ladies who support Jordan Peterson group on Facebook and I see a lot of moms in that group who one thing they appreciate about Peterson is that he talks often and vocally about indoctrination in public schools and they say man he's so right and my kids are learning all this crap you know hey ladies any good book recommendations for things I can give to my kids when they come home and I always go you could always homeschool you know it's like just something to think about. But so that kind of leads into one big reason why I was attracted early on to Peterson is because he comes from the university and I care a lot about the academy and the university. I'm a grad student right now. I'm a grad student in mathematics in fact and I picked mathematics because it was a very safe discipline. So even though humanities and literature and all those things are really I would consider my first love I made this sort of hard left into STEM because I knew that I would be safe. I knew that I wouldn't have to salute the flag of postmodernist nonsense and you know speak words that I didn't mean you know because nobody gets offended if you're arguing over a mathematical theorem or proof or something. They're all just you know very sensible level headed folks except math ed. I do have I have had a couple I have had a couple of run ins with math ed people but that's another story. Anything that ends with the word education I just. But how did you how did you get in on Jordan Peterson? I mean how did you when did you discover him? Why did he grab your interest and he's obviously he obviously has grabbed your interest because a lot of the writing that you've been doing has been about him. Yeah so I actually came late to the party. I first discovered him through the Newman interview in pretty soon after it aired in February people were sharing it all over and so never heard of the guy before. Had never heard of the Bill C-16 stuff and so I watched that and that was a lot of fun. So then you know that was my first low resolution snapshot of Peterson and then I think the second thing of his that I saw was his discussion with William Wayne Craig and Rebecca Goldstein because I knew I knew William Wayne Craig pretty well. He was better known in the kinds of circles where I run and so I was like oh wow that's interesting and I thought Craig won the argument but I was really intrigued with some of the things that Peterson was saying as well. I thought he was kind of you know looking around for the answers that he needed to ground his some of his really good ideas but he wasn't quite sure where to put them all and I was especially struck when he was talking about pain and suffering in that conversation he says well suppose you have a sick child. There's great meaning in being present with your sick child in his suffering and so you know and if you don't think that's meaningful because oh well in a billion years what difference will it make then man there's something wrong with your soul you know and I thought well that's got to find out more about it and then actually I was scrolling down in the comments and someone said oh man he must have been thinking about his daughter and I was like his daughter? What's that all about? So I go searching some more and then I found a little clip from a logger lecture introducing the book where he was talking about Michaela's illness and he was talking about the last rule of petting a cat and looking for the gleaming bit of crystal in the middle of life's darkest times and man that sold me that really got me choked up and then one or two other key clips there's the one Jordan Peterson's finest moment clip that's actually a good friend of mine posted that and it went viral and I think that's the one where at the end he goes well so that's it and you know people burst out in applause and so that I got I hit on several really good short clips early on that gave me a look at all facets of Peterson I think. Okay. And so then from then on I was like okay I got to find I got to read the book I got to find out his lectures and then I'm still here I'm still kind of analyzing. Why now you're in terms of the Peterson blogosphere you're you have very solid evangelical credentials and you're a hardcore evangelical apologist at one point I was like yeah I'll take that. That's kind of how I see you posturing yourself now there are there are there are a lot of evangelicals who who they might conservative evangelicals instead of let's differentiate them from what's called the progressive evangelicals that has been this wave over the last 10 years or so that have that have been moving in a different direction you're definitely not part of that camp. No. But but even the a lot so a lot of the progressive evangelicals they they're kind of on the left with they get they get Peter Soni and Rash I mean they. Oh for sure. And so they're not going to pay any attention to him there he gets a he gets better treatment amongst conservative evangelicals partly because he is right rightly or wrongly read to be you know perhaps more in a line with some of their social values but but I don't see you engaging that aspect of him as much. So what about him has kept your imagination has kept your interest. What's your motivation here Esther. What's what's my what's my motivation what's my angle. Come on. What's your angle. I think my angle is that I'm a student of human nature. OK. And Jordan Peterson is a student of human nature. And so I think I look at him and I see a kindred spirit in in many ways and and I see an honest guy who's really wrestling with the deepest possible questions of life and doing so in a in a completely forthright way. I would also say that I also am concerned about the encroachment of of postmodernism and liberalism at the universities. And so I share a lot of the same sort of culture war type fears that Peterson has. And so it's some of those respect that respects I don't think conservative evangelicals are wrong to to see a kind of ally. So for example I think he would be very friendly to the conservative baker who doesn't want to bake a gay wedding cake for instance. So I see people like Nancy Piercy for example who's a evangelical culture watcher. She's been retweeting Peterson quite a bit and following him. And so but I think you're right that he is a classical liberal as opposed to a a true blue conservative. And so when it comes to issues like abortion for example he's really not going to have much to say. And in fact he kind of really doesn't talk about that much at all. And the one time he was asked he sort of fudged it. And I gave marriage he's sort of like well maybe maybe not. So yeah. So in that sense I see what you mean that he's not strictly aligned along the same lines. And so I think I'm of one mind with him though in fact on all the cultural things. And so it's not that I disagree with that. But I think my primary interest in him is him as a as a humanist at a lever of mankind and at somebody who who's reaching. Well I would say he's reaching for God. But that really fascinates me. That's really captured me. And the way that he deals with suffering I would say is a part of all that and is a big thing that has really moved me deeply. And just to see how much he loves people and listening to his stories of patience that he's worked with is just often very heartbreaking but also humanizing I think and necessary. It's good for people to feed on. And so Louis C.S. Lewis talks about creating men with chests in the abolition of man. I think we needed in our culture we needed somebody like Peterson to come along and create men with chests. We were really starved for that for that kind of a teacher. Yeah. No I think that's a well I've been you know obviously doing my series on the abolition of man. I know it's good stuff. And and but that is I think that's very much the role that Peterson has played because he he does he is a man with a chest. He doesn't just his head doesn't look so big because his chest is so small which is obviously what Louis sees. No he Peterson part of what I think Peter's people connected with Peterson was that he was he gives he I agree with you and that I don't think he's duplicitous any more than any other any of us are we're all duplicitous to one degree but he isn't he isn't being duplicitous. I think we are getting the genuine article when he's out there speaking his mind he's got his heart on his sleeve. He's yeah maybe he should have a Twitter governor but as he I think that would be Julian. Yeah. He should probably use a Twitter governor but but so so you're able to you're able to live with the live as if and the the associations with young and the intense embrace of Charles Darwin. You're you're able to. With Peterson. Yeah I mean I've been reading critically thinking critically since I was a little kid so you know to counter someone with different ideas for me is just I mean it's no problem. He's he's an interesting person. I just engage him that way. And so I don't just sort of break into hives because he has a different paradigm than I do part part of what the conservative evangelical Peterson fan base continues to long for is the is the closing of the deal on Jordan Peterson. Now I don't know if he was baptized early on in the Church of Canada or not because if he was then you know when he joins the Christian Reformed Church we wouldn't baptize him. Well it's interesting because there's this new interview with a guy named Patrick that David it was a really fun interview. The guy really tried to go some new places with Peterson and they taught some about Peterson's upbringing and the guy asked him so was your family like a really religious family like did you talk a lot about religion politics stuff. It appears most like no no no no not not at all which is interesting because he talks about going to church as a kid. And so well I think that tells you all you need to know about the United Church of Canada. I mean yeah I got opinions. You have opinions. I know. I'm shocked Esther. I'm just shocked. But you know so it's you know part of the fun of the movement has been the you know we could we could do a little Wheel of Fortune and you know what will I the whole Jordan Peterson thing in some ways is like a giant Truman show and we're watching him and we want to know how will it end. What I know of Jordan will he will he be wasted on daytime television as the as the new doc. Oh dear God. Will he will he go on daytime television only to be hauled off like Megyn Kelly. Will he will he. Well he announced on Twitter that he's converted to Eastern orthodoxy as of tomorrow. But yeah well if he here's the thing though the Eastern Orthodox Church I mean some evangelical church might roll out the red carpet to Jordan Peterson if he makes the right noises but the Orthodox are going to be so fast. Well this is the funny thing the evangelical response as I've seen it a good friend of mine observed this and I think he's right. It seems to kind of split it to either the evangelicals who are a little too fond of Jordan Peterson's they're like oh the I mean the man is a is a Christian he should be preaching in our pulpits on a Sunday morning. As far as I'm concerned he's going to heaven already. It's like like the Babylonian article about appointing Peterson an honorary Christian. He's like stop stop saying that man. Putting words in my mouth. I didn't I didn't say that. I'm not. Yeah right. So there's that there's that kind of evangelical Christian response. And then there's the this man is not of God. He's talking about young and Darwin. I think we should we should shun him. We should avoid. And Joe Carter wrote this really disappointing piece for the gospel coalition where he was saying that Peterson was dangerous. I think he said I'm like I read that one. Yeah it's an old one. It was back in the summer. I'll send it to you. But I was I was frustrated by that because I'm thinking dude you know kids are listening to who's out there in the culture and you would far rather they were listening to Jordan Peterson than a lot of the other people out there. Now Bell. Yes actually I would say because at least at least Peterson doesn't pretend to be a Christian. Oh wait. Bell isn't pretending to be a Christian. Yeah. Yeah. Bell did finally drop the act. So thank God for that. Maybe when Jordan finally appeared Oprah you know when Jordan finally appears on the Oprah Winfrey Network. Oh God. Bell. Oh no no no. You know here's here's the thing with here's the thing with Jordan and I you know we can get into some a little bit of my writing on this. I think he you know he can be a little unnecessarily prickly when people ask him do you believe in God or do you believe in the resurrection. And he'll go oh well that's such a how dare you ask me that. That's an incredibly private personal question. And on the one hand I understand that but on the other hand I want to say dude you're you're making hour long hours long lectures about the Bible and God and life the universe and everything. Cookie for everyone who caught that. But suddenly someone asks oh hey so by the way I mean do you think there's a God out there. What kind of a question is that. It's like it's a little bit you know and I think too that he assumes that the people asking his guard always goes up when people ask that question because he assumes they're asking it with an agenda. They are. There's a huge agenda. Well but but I'm going somewhere with this so it could be an agenda and certainly many atheists would ask it as a way of testing him sort of the way that Harris will mock him by saying oh come on come on. Does it do you believe in the resurrection. Here basic modernist test number one did Jesus rise from the dead. So there's the atheist agenda and then there could be you know a Christian who was suspicious of him who was ready to sort of shoo him out as soon as he gave a definitive no answer. But I think there's probably not. Well yeah I think there's a I think there's a large contingent of of Christians though who would sincerely like to know his answer not so that they can either claim him for their team or boot him out of the club but just because they're sincerely interested in the guy and you know a little concerned for his soul maybe. And so they're just like man I mean I I really love this guy. I'd love for him to to encounter Christ you know and man wouldn't wouldn't it be great if he finally understood. You know it's sort of like there's this line of the last battle where the the cowardly warrior and this is introduced and he's very much from the opposite team. So they see him walking across the grass and jewel the unicorn a talking unicorn for those who haven't read the story. He. Yeah yeah the best guide exactly. He whispers to the main character because this this young guy Emmet just looks very sort of noble and and forthright and honest he just has this kind of look about him. And the unicorn whispers by the lion's mane that's sort of their expression and Narnia by the lion's mane. I almost love this young warrior. He is worthy of a better God than Tash. Natasha is the false god of the coward meets. And so I think a lot of people Christians feel that way with Peterson are like he's worthy of a better God than young you know. There are going to be some comments on that boy. Yeah but but so but it's a very it's a very it comes from a very earnest and passionate place I think for many of us as we want we want him to to meet the Christ because we think that Christ is is is the way the truth of the life. And Peterson is fumbling for for the law for the key at the door is fumbling for the handle whatever analogy you want to use. And we just want him to walk through the door for for his sake you know not because not because we want to kind of milk him for something or get something out of it. Well how do we know he hasn't or how or how would we know when he would would he because I think when he says he gives his answer about belief I think that is his answer. He's been given that answer for a long time and that's saying it won't change. But tell me why it's insufficient. Because I think well I think you've been getting to to unpack a lot of this. I think one reason is that he still I think stands in a ultimately hopeless place because he doesn't have the hope of the resurrection. And this is my latest piece. I wrote this for unbelievable and it's called What's Stopping Jordan Peterson from Rejecting Jesus Resurrection. And it's about how he he's not willing to leave it the realm of the merely metaphorical. And I think the reason why he leaves that door open a crack is because he still he he senses like he said in the Tim Lott clip I refuse to rule out the possibility of life after death of a final victory of good over evil of you know of judgment and all those things. And so so I think he lacks the hope that's found in Christ in Christ's bodily resurrection and the resurrection hope. And I also think that he lacks a mechanism for atonement because it was interesting I found an old clip from a Q&A where someone was asking him what about guilty secrets. You know so say I cheat on my wife once that I vow never to do it again should I take that to the grave or what should I do. And how do I forgive myself. And Peterson said well in some sense you never forgive yourself. Right. You're you're never forgiven. And I thought yeah I think that right there is another another big thing that that is unmet I think by his model and by his project. And so you know Peterson himself will say that he has a great capacity for evil and that he is always seeing himself as the Nazi prison guard. So there there are bad things that he's done in his life even though overall I wouldn't shy from saying he's a good guy. Now some Calvinists might say no no man is good but God they've wrapped me up in knuckles for that. And I know you're not one of those Calvinists. Throwing Calvin a shade. Ha not you though. You're cool man. You're cool. But oh dude I got some hardcore Calvinist friends who'd be like no no no man is good. I'm like shut up. Peterson is a good guy. I think we could all agree on that. This is a solid dude. But he's like all of us a good guy who's done bad stuff. And so he he you know he has to recognize that that Jesus is more than the archetype more than the perfect man more than the exemplar of the suffering individual. Christ is the atoner. Christ is the one who bears the sins of the world on his shoulders because it's something that we cannot pay for ourselves. You know so that's how the guy who was asking Peterson that question that's the answer that guy needs. You know it's not something Peterson can give currently. It's it's Christ actually carries us up the hill. Exactly. You know us the cross the the weight of the world he takes the whole thing. Although well I I kind of like that analogy but I am an Arminian. So you know so so so here's the thing that dude I don't get how can you be such a huge Lewis fan at CS Lewis was was so Arminian. I mean the great divorce that's such an Arminian book man. And here you are this hardcore Calvinist recommending it. I'm like well I like the great divorce. I'm not sure why you. Lewis is Lewis is tricky with this stuff. I think he I think he understood the the complexities of the question of I mean because the question is really about agency and figuring out God's agency and our agency and how those two work. I mean what I what Lewis says about that and in mere Christianity is also very interesting. So yeah well I think if Peterson did embrace Christianity I would imagine he would embrace a pretty Arminian form thereof because because he's so strong on the free on free will and on the action of the individual individual choices. You know there's a famous quote in TS Eliot's poem Little Gidding. Every how does this go. Every step that we take is a step to the block or or down the sea's throat or to an illegible stone. And that is where we start. So that every single choice we make is fraught with significance. That was one of the very first things that struck me about Peterson is when he said everything you do matters every single thing you do matters. And so well Calvinists disagree with that. OK well I mean that's that's good but I'm just not exactly sure how to make that meaningful. We will we will we won't we won't we won't try to fix. We won't try it. Controversy 25 minutes for sure. So where do you want to go with your writing with Peterson. What are you thinking about. What am I thinking about with Peterson. Well I I might have a book. Yeah. So I mean I kind of have it's like all the hot takes nobody wanted at the time. But I'm sort of shaping something and it'll probably use some preexisting material. So some of what I wrote in my debate analysis some of what I wrote in this new piece for for Premier Christian Radio. And so I think if I gave it a title it would be something something a little bit dramatic. I don't know. Maybe I like five minutes to midnight. And actually that phrase came from that semi hit piece that his former colleague did where he was talking about this dream that Peterson's wife had that she said she dreamed it was five minutes to midnight which of course has all kinds of connotations that the subtitle would be I don't know what I saw at the Jordan Peterson revolution serve a Peggy Noonan type callback because she had a famous book about Ronald Reagan called What I Saw at the Revolution. So I could sort of be the Peggy Noonan to Peterson's Reagan I guess that might be fun. Interesting. Yeah. Oh now you're doing you're thinking about all the. I'm old enough to remember Reagan. So sure. Yeah. Well my folks came of age in the Reagan era and so I was very much raised in a sort of Reagan conservative tradition. You know I read Thomas Sowell for civics in high school and all that kind of stuff. So yeah. One thing I would like to still write and I might send this to the public discourse as a Catholic online publication is I want to write something about Jordan Peterson and the culture of death because I taught with this young guy that Peterson taught that of suicide back in the summer. Pretty famously now the recordings all over YouTube and a lot of people really connected with that story. And when I listened to that recording I was just so struck by the things the arguments that Peterson was giving against suicide and where he was not only saying well you know your family would be would miss you at that sort of thing. He was saying it's actually wrong to kill yourself. And I thought that is so interesting because here's a guy who you know is not a Christian. Nobody can accuse him of being a fun to jellicle Bible something whatever whatever you know. Like oh you're just saying that because the Bible says so it's like no he's actually saying no it's actually objectively wrong to kill yourself. And that's a controversial thing to say today's cultural milieu. So you know I would say dude it's it's there's so much like the Catholic natural law theorists are nodding their heads like yeah you know there's a way to go. And I also found an old debate that he did with a guy named David Benatar who's an anti-natalist guy. So Peterson took the pro-natal position. So that's Peterson. He's pro-natal. He once said I'm pro-people man you know. You know. Yeah. And even though he sort of shies from the pro-life issue in like specifically as pertains to abortion I would say that his ethic is very pro-life in a broad sense. And so in that sense I think that he's an ally against the sort of dehumanizing effect that the culture of death has had. And I think Douglas Murray is another interesting writer at this respect as well. I think I think he also sees the onset of euthanasia. He was saying at this recent Rebel Wisdom interview that he's sort of obsessed by question of sanctity of life because he sees it slipping at the margins was his phrase is slipping at the edges. And so I think that's something that haunts Peterson and Murray and Eric Weinstein as well. I would kind of throw at this category. I think these are guys who are sort of haunted by what the Darwinian paradigm would mean if they followed it all the way out to its perfectly logical rational conclusions. And they don't want to go there. And so that's why in Peterson's case this takes the form of two kinds of truth. You know sort of two stories as Francis Schaeffer might put it like well okay so you got your literal empirical scientific facts over here. But then you've got metaphorical and literary truths over there. And those are the truths that actually govern us. And that those are the things that are more true than the literal in some sense. And so he feels like he has to do that because otherwise if he just stays at the lower story and uses machine logic to work out what a Darwinist way of looking at things would actually mean if you cashed it out it doesn't lead anywhere good. So he says well we need to sort of escape to the higher ground of metaphorical truth that that's where we can be humane you know and buck off our programming so to speak. And so then what I would like to come along and say as a Christian is there's actually only one truth. And it brings together all the different facets it brings together stories. But it also brings that together with science and with history and with instinct intuition. And all these things actually converge. But I don't know if Peterson will ever get to that place as long as he's wedded to the Jungian paradigm and the Darwinian paradigm. How do you think Jung jeopardizes that journey for Peterson? I think Jung jeopardizes the journey because Jung just sort of throws he throws the Christian story well if I could put it this way here's a nice sort of pithy way to put it. Jung sees history as the story of man's search for God. Whereas the Christian sees history as the story of God's search for man. So in Jung's framework the idea this thing we call God quote unquote is kind of thrown up from the collective unconscious. Just like morality is sort of thrown up over this evolutionary process where we and then with you bring in Jean Piaget and the game playing and iterative games and imitation of that sort of thing. These are man-made creations. God is an idea the mind of man. So then Christianity is just one more little branch or one more little manifestation of the God thought the God idea. But what's missing in all of this is your God number two. The God who's actually outside time and space. The actor. Yeah exactly the actor. And so that's why Peterson also has just like you say he has a bottom-up view he has a bottom-up view of Jesus at Jesus' resurrection. And so he goes well I mean I guess maybe if you were just like a superman who got the balance between life and death just right you know you could be like one of those Easter gurus who says yes bury me at the crowd for three days and I shall know something something I shall be one with the oneness or you know like what have you. But he's still thinking of all this in bottom-up turns he still hasn't made the connection with no no no Christ this actually is an invasion from outer space if you will they're not literally outer space but this really is God stepping down into the story from outside time and space. So where's Peterson so what's your take on so we've had this lull with Peterson and he's you know he's flirting with daytime television and still running. It was actually not a bad interview though. A great interview. Yeah that's so funny about it yeah. It was I thought the best packaging of Peterson for a daytime popular audience. Yeah. But I think a lot of hardcore Petersonian nerds just kind of you know watch their heart thinking oh will he be you know oh and Benjamin certainly went off the deep end. Oh it's a nutcase man. I have to see what Node has to say about that. Node loves Owen. I mean he's he's got a big heart but man he's he's gotten mixed up with all the wrong people. Anyway go on. So and so you know he's still doing his evangelistic crusade this guy says a book tour you know all over the world but that'll come to an end and then he says he'll he'll get back into the study. First of all will he ever go back into the classroom? Can he ever go back into the classroom? I don't think he will. I think he wants to I think he wants to leave which I'm a little saddened by that personally and you know here talk about this online university and how it'll be very student driven. He talked a little bit in this one Q&A I could send it to you but how students will be sort of taking tests competing that they'll be able to network with each other and compare ideas and stuff but and then he said something about outsourcing the teaching of writing because I know he's passionate about teaching people to write but that's very time consuming and can't really be well done in an online format. So what seems like might be lost in this online system that he's envisaging is the sort of hands on teacher student relationship which it's just irreplaceable. It's so yeah I mean that's what bricks and mortar offers that the online university doesn't offer. So I as a teacher because I've taught as a grad student I love that about Peterson. I see I see him as a teacher and there's something there's something sad about the fact that he'll never be in a classroom with just 35 people in it again you know that people won't be able to get that close to him again physically and metaphorically. Some of my favorite stuff are you know his his classroom lectures. Me too mine too yeah yeah he is sitting at the desk yeah great truth yeah so but I don't think he will. I do think though I'm not sure that I would advise it that way but for variety of reasons not just for those kinds of reasons but also I don't know how long this bubble is going to last. I mean he's writing this sequel I'm thinking man we we didn't need a sequel you know I was really cool with this first one it's really fine but I there's multiple factors that work here. I'm sure his publishers have been on him you got to write a sequel okay I'll write a sequel and so I mean frankly I don't want him to write more stuff I wanted to read more stuff. I wanted to I wanted to go back and read it to you right I wanted to think about the resurrection. I want him to think about faith at works you know all all this I wanted to have conversations with intelligent Christians which he doesn't seem to have too many of in his life right now. I mean he's got Jonathan Pigeot he's got like one Catholic friend and I'm not thinking of too many more that he's mentioned anyway. So I don't man I don't need him to make more content I just I want him to think more because there's so much he still has to learn as he will say himself but that's something I admire hugely. I guess I'll mention here when I did have a chance to meet him at an event and I got a question in which was which was fantastic and it was probably a bit long but I really kind of wanted to pack a punch and so I essentially laid out for him I asked him how much hope do you think we can extract from a purely metaphorical read of the Christian narrative as opposed to it being literally true because it seems like all the stuff I was outlining earlier you lose that literal resurrection restoration judgment that kind of thing. I mean he basically said a similar answer some of it was quite similar to what he said to Patrick Coffin about the literal the metaphorical can't touch so yeah I'm like if that's how he wants to think about it sure you know I'm not sure if that's how I would phrase it but whatever helps him think this through and that basically he doesn't understand it and he said the reason I bracket is because I feel like I don't know what I'm talking about and I want to stay in my lane because I'm a psychologist so that's what I know but he said that he keeps saying that he would like to know more and man I respect that so much I respect a guy who knows what he does not know Plato of course talks about that you know and so people I know Christians who are really rigid as far as well you know if you get hit by a bus and you haven't said a prayer and accepted Jesus as your personal savior well you're going straight to hell which is really really awful soteriology I mean I'm a Calvinist God picks his friends haha well yeah it's a lot of a lot of people think that death death is like it man it's like no more chances after that but I in my in my ear whoa this is the big lead let's let's hear let's hear Esther O'Reilly allow a little CS Lewis purgatory well yeah I don't know if I would call it purgatory exactly but I would say it's it's the it's the it's the uh the the emeth play going back to emeth now this is this is the young the young cowerman who deserves a better guy the tash emeth is a guy who wants the good you know he wants the truth and he's thought that that was tash all his life but when he meets Aslan he immediately realizes he's made a terrible mistake yeah and so the first thing he does when he sees Aslan is to fall on his face and worship and so then that's when we get this very passage which is quite controversial in sub circles but we're Aslan is saying I received your worship myself and so I think Peterson is in that position because he's a guy who wants he's always talking about the good and all my little my little natural heart is warranted you know every time he talks about the good so he wants that and even though he isn't connecting everything up together he knows what he doesn't know he knows there's something significant about the resurrection and so I think he's the kind of guy who if he met Jesus would want Jesus and of course all of us are going to meet Jesus after we die and so I would definitely not say even though Peterson hasn't you know prayed the little prayer and even though I do think it's important that he come to accept Christ in this life I don't I don't rule out that once he does encounter Christ even if he died before he figured all this stuff out it could be entirely possible that he would meet Jesus and go oh now I get it okay now it makes sense you know and I leave that in God's hands whereas on the flip side there are a lot of people who would you know say that they have all the right beliefs but I look at them I go I'm not sure that person's right with God man you know the way he's acting I've not that goes back to what you what you do right versus what you say um so my head is flooding with titles for this video Esther yeah yeah they'll never they'll never let you on unbelievable again they'll have you on the other side of the table oh I don't know about that I think hey oh and speaking of unbelievable here's something that might or might not happen but listeners could be on the lookout just a case we we just now sent via David Fuller from rebel wisdom Justin and I have formally extended an invitation to Douglas Murray because Douglas and I have a lot in common he's my favorite atheist at the moment and we both have Church of England backgrounds and so we could speak the same language in that respect and so Justin's really keen to have me and Douglas clash swords in a friendly manner unbelievable at some future point so that is a bit of a long shot but it could happen it might happen we'll see fun yeah well we just got a few more minutes any any last takes or any last things you want to get in before we have to land this plane any questions for me do I have any questions for you oh my gosh um well I guess one question I might have is if you if you could interview Peterson again um what would you what would you want to uh to ask him now that you didn't get to ask him before part part of the challenge of those kind of talks are are you asking questions because you want information or are you uh trying to you know look for little cracks to to be a line pastor so you know it was I was really I was really thankful for Josh who gave me his this patreon slot and I enjoyed my conversation with him I I you know I I too you know we all have our our hopes for other people which is which is always a little slimy um well I think I mean I certainly I have my own ideas if uh you know if I had gotten the opportunity that that you did I think um I think I think one thing that I would say at this is what I would say to Murray as well it's what I would say to a number of these guys but what I would say to Peterson is just like I would I would tell the man who is a Jew that if he becomes a Christian he will be more fully Jewish than ever before so I would tell the man who is a humanist which Peterson is I think a true humanist of the old breed not the Peter Singer kind of humanist um the humanist who becomes a Christian is more fully humanist than ever before and so I think in Christianity Peterson could find the fulfillment of his humanism because he's a lover of mankind he believes that there's something unique about man there's something special about man and so in Christ and in Christianity that's where Imago Dei is grounded that's where sanctity of life is grounded um and so that's something that I I would love for him to to see and to come to realize it so I really hope he keeps following his his intuitions there because he knows that it would take him past Darwin but I think he's maybe a little afraid to go past Darwin because Darwin and Young are like these two pillars holding up his model and that was something else he said in his interview with that David and maybe this this will be a good way to wrap it up but uh Patrick asked him if he had a photograph at memory and Peterson said no that's not how I remember stuff the way I remember the way I remember information is when I get a new bit of information I find the place in my theory where it fits in and I say ah that goes there but what I would want to challenge Peterson with is what if you got a new piece of information that shattered your theory you know what what would you do with that you know and maybe it wouldn't shatter all of your theory I think some of Peterson's project would be more better better grounded and more fulfilled than ever before by Christianity but it would involve the burning away of some dead wood from the rest of his project in order for that to happen so I'd be really intrigued to get his answer to that question yeah yeah that'd be good that'd be good well well thank you Esther this was thank you joy and keep writing and I'll keep reading your work and it's it's always fun to to see you you've got a real gift and I I love I love how you approach these questions and how you how you set them up for us to look at them in a fresh way it's a that's a real gift you do your you do your homeschooling parents proud thank you I really appreciate that I'm so glad at the doors that uh that this has opened up and it's been it's been a great ride I know it'll end eventually maybe you like Peterson's ride will end eventually but I'm enjoying it while it lasts and and I'm really happy to have had this opportunity here with you so thank you for that oh wonderful I'm going to end the recording now and just keep you for a minute before my next talk all right