https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=QR_kwzF-9Ys

 Well, hi, this is Paul and this is my second talk with the very famous Esther O'Reilly, who's a blogger on Pathios Young Foggy. So Esther, we've only got an hour, so no sense with chitter chat here. No. Dive right in. Okay. A little bit of an update on what's new with my writing, Peterson-related, IDW-related. So I just sent my last edits to the Lexham Press editor who's working on this anthology, and I think you and Ron Dart are going to be doing another talk pretty soon. Yeah, we're talking this afternoon. Oh, fantastic. Yeah, so he and I have become quite tight in recent weeks and months. He's been an incredibly gracious and encouraging, sweet, sweet guy. So I'm excited for him to share a little bit more about this anthology. I've seen some of the other essays, some very, very nice work, and I'm really proud of my own contribution there. I had a funny thought as I was reading it back over. I think a lot of people are probably going to come away from it thinking that I'm a Catholic, because I'm looking at it over, and it's really pretty suffused with Catholic language and thought and references, because I'm sort of – it would fit very nicely in the sort of great tradition of high humanism or Catholic humanism. It's a debate where Catholics really have all their ducks pretty firmly in a row, and evangelicals are not quite as organized, let's say. So it's cool that the title will be The Image of Christ, Jordan Peterson as Humanist. So kind of trying to – kind of trying to steal back the idea of humanism and the idea of the word humanist is not something that Christians should go, oh, that's humanist, that's bad. Because that's not how I was raised at all, so I slowly had to realize that people thought humanism was a bad thing. It's like, oh, no, no, no, here, let's rethink this. But so part of that essay sort of ties into what I wanted to talk about today, because I wanted to talk some about literature and art, because there's a lot of callbacks to various literary things and artistic things and even bits of poetry in the essay that I wrote, because I've always needed art in my life as a kind of a sense-making mechanism and a way of framing and seeing the world. One of the very first clips I saw of Peterson may have been like the third or fourth clip, it was called Why You Need Art in Your Life. And funny enough, it was something that Kanye West was caught watching on his computer. Somebody took a screen cap of it, I'm like, well, me and Kanye West, I guess. You know, we both thought that clip compelling. And a snippet of it was going around recently in the wake of the Notre Dame Cathedral burning, because in the course of it, Peterson's talking about the beauty of cathedrals and how the architecture of it draws the eye upward and it creates awe and reverence. You've got to think, man. It's just so beautiful. And so that whole clip is just fantastic, because he's talking about how art is a way of apprehending the transcendent. And he came back to it in his talk with Roger Scrutin. And I was having trouble placing the clip, but he's talking about how it's like when you look at a picture and it's framing it, he says, it's like it's telling you, look, look, and he makes a frame with his hands. And it's like he can't even quite articulate what he's trying to get at, but it's just sort of coursing through him that he wants to get out what art does to you. And he used this phrase in the biblical lecture clip where he says that you're stumbling towards the kingdom of God when you experience it, engage with and interact with art. And he encourages the audience. He says, you need to just go get a piece of art and put it on your wall. Just do it. And I love what he says. And your friends might come by and have a look at it and kind of be like, oh, what is that? Is that person? No, that's not like very good art. And he goes, but it doesn't matter. And you might be like, oh, I think it's pretty. You're like, oh, brother. But he's like, don't pay attention to them. Just enjoy the art. Have the art. And he goes, you have no taste. You don't have any taste. It's true. But don't worry about that. Just go for it because we're all stumbling up the hill. We're all stumbling towards the kingdom of God. And I just loved the sort of anti-elitist spirit of that because some of the circles I run, I run with some kind of artsy Christian types who are, they're always ready to pick apart everyone's choices in artistic entertainment. And they're always ready to say, oh, well, you should be reading Flannery O'Connor instead or whatever. You know? Like, nah, nah, nah, nah. And there was one guy in particular, a name that I thought of, and may or may not ring a bell with you, but do you remember a painter named Thomas Kinkade? Oh, yeah. Yeah. OK. Yeah. I'm going to date myself a little bit here. But he was very, very big when I was a little kid. Yeah. But so for Christmas and birthdays, I would get these cute little mini jigsaw puzzles of the log cabins and the little castles and whatnot. And so me being a sweet, naive little kid, I had no idea that Thomas Kinkade was a shyster and a huckster who was trying to pass off Christian kitsch on the unwitting masses. You know, I learned about all that later when I read all the think pieces. But so it was very interesting to me how Kinkade sort of became the sort of archetypal whipping boy for everything wrong with Christian American art. You know, so like no discussion of evangelicalism and art or American Christianity and art was complete without a dig at Thomas Kinkade, you know. And that just always seemed a little odd to me. It was almost like people were weirdly obsessed with him, I guess, because I always just liked the log cabins. You know, I liked the way that he played with light. I have a memory of an image of a street in Christmas time with with lamplighted snow. I just liked it. I thought it was pretty, right? Like, yes. You can't really just shellac Thomas Kinkade and give Currier and Ives a pass, because in a sense they're doing the same thing. Exactly. But now here's the really sort of strange and sad to me fascinating thing. When Thomas Kinkade died, he died pretty young. And a lot of people weren't sort of for the first time, like all of the kind of nasty assorted details of his personal life, because it turned out that he was pretty messed up. He was an alcoholic. I didn't know any of that. No, yeah, he was an alcoholic. He was divorced. At one time he was walking around, like saying nonsense words and like publicly urinating or something because he was so drunk. So and then like after he died, his wife and girlfriend were fighting over his estate. And it was just this this really, really unsavory sorted mess. Alcohol, volume and smudges of green paint, says the Mercury News. Yeah. So that, you know, it's like the art was no longer the same because you saw it with a new perspective, right? You know. So that really got me to thinking like what did this mean? What did Thomas Kinkade's art mean with all of this in the background? And I suppose what it means is that we're all, we're stumbling towards the log cabin in the woods, you know. We're. But you get what I mean, you know. Yeah, I do get what you mean. Maybe drunkenly stumbling for some of us. And it was, you know, I see it now the way I think of it is that it was something like an escape for him. And a lot of people gave him a difficult time because they're like, oh, he doesn't grapple with darkness in his art. It's all just like happy, happy, happy all the time, all light and no shadows or darkness anywhere. It's such a kitschy, dishonest view of creation or view of the world. And I'm just like, well, I mean, it seems like he did know something about shadows, though, like in his own life. And the picture of the cabin, it symbolizes the moment when the tears will be dry and when there won't be any darkness. And so that is what waits at the top of the hill, so to speak. And that's it is that two words which we continue to stumble. And, you know, I think my grandparents have a kinkade on their wall, actually. And, you know, no doubt somebody might walk by and go, of course, they would have a Thomas Kinkade on the wall. They're that kind of, they're those kind of people, right, the kind of people who hang Thomas Kinkade on the wall because they think it's pretty. And so that was just kind of a thought I had about the role that art plays. So I have various recommendations and things kind of lined up here, like some of the art that I need in my own life. So there's a quote here by a guy named- Esther, why don't you start a podcast? I don't have time. I'm busy. I have to write a dissertation and I have to write an essay collection. Surely you could have time for a podcast. No, it's, you know, I don't want to make that kind of commitment because then I'll be expected to do something every week. And I don't know if I can keep that up. But yeah, actually, the same press, you know, like short interlude, the same press that's doing this Peterson anthology actually wants an essay collection from me, like on Life, the Universe and everything. And so, you know, I'm sort of going from old-timey, old-timey, old-timey, old-timey, old-timey, oh, wow, they want my essays too. Oh, shoot, they want my essays. So that means I have to write more because I don't have enough yet. Means I have to do some more research and gathering and thinking. And so that, you know, doesn't happen overnight. So why are you getting an advanced degree in math? Because it will give me a better chance of being able to work than a humanities degree. Interesting. Yeah, you know, because everyone wants to teach English, right? Everyone wants to teach writing and literature, that kind of thing. But way fewer people want to teach math. And so people are kind of desperate for math teachers. So you get a PhD in math to teach college math or something? Is that what you're thinking? Yeah. Okay. You can make much more in industry, of course, if you get a PhD in math, depending on, I imagine, what you focus on. Eh, I don't, that's not me. I like teaching. That's my, that's my thing. I would be, I would be- That is true. That is true. I would be unhappy in industry. No, but there's other practical aspects to it as well. I just, it really, it worked out really nicely as far as my practical situation at the moment. To do a PhD, there's a good program in my hometown. And so, you know, multiple factors that kind of went into it. Okay. I've also just gained a lot of valuable skills from it, you know, skills of being able to assimilate very, very difficult material, which are, those are going to stand me a good stead if I now want to branch out and learn more about, I don't know, more about science or anything, you know. It also, it also divested me of, of all the things that I've learned. All any, any cockiness, you know, because that, that the badics will, it will smack you down and you get it. They're like, oh, I'm pretty smart. Then look around, you see some of your grad students. Oh, okay. I'm not, I'm not really that smart. I didn't even get that far. It was, I was still in my undergrad thinking about a math major and I looked around the room and I thought I could do this, but these guys are doing this without trying. I'm in the wrong place. So right now. Well, you know, I, some, some students I see who they could do a PhD, but they don't, you know, they go, I'm going to go get a job. They just go out with their masters. Usually they have some other skill like coding or whatnot. So I haven't happened to develop that particular skill. I knew what I wanted to do. So I'm, you know, I'm, I'm content with this, but I, I'm sorry I interrupted you. Go ahead with your book recommendation. Oh, no, no problem. Yeah. So yeah, I'm about to launch into, it's funny because, you know, I have the degree to teach math, but, you know, I'm going to sort of sketch a, a literature class for you in a sense, like, you know, if, if I were teaching lit, here's, here's what I would, here's what I would line up for everyone. So first of all, here's an author that you may not know by name, but I'm sure you know one of the stories. Have you ever heard of a writer named Joseph Conrad? No. Okay. Do you know the story Heart of Darkness? Sounds familiar. They made a movie out of it. Yeah. Yeah. They, they made it into Apocalypse Now essentially. It was, it was kind of a remake of that story. But so the quote I'm actually going to read comes from the preface to a different story of his, much less well known. It's called, you know, you'll have to edit this one carefully Paul. It's called The Nigger of the Narcissus. There goes my YouTube channel. There goes your YouTube channel. Yeah. Yeah. But so the preface that Conrad wrote to this story is one of the best pieces of writing about writing that I've ever seen. And it really dovetails with the things that Peterson is saying. And so he's talking about the task of the artist, specifically the task of the writer. He writes, my task, which I'm trying to achieve is by the power of the written word to make you hear, to make you feel. It is before all to make you see that, that and no more. And it is everything. If I succeed, you shall find there, according to your desserts, encouragement, consolation, fear, charm, all you demand. And perhaps also that glimpse of truth for which you have forgotten to ask. So it's quite an indictment of the reader in some sense. Because his point is, I'm not here to offer the reader easy gratification. No, if the reader just comes and goes, hey, I want to punch some buttons and outcomes and emotion, outcomes of feeling, that's not my job. That's not what I'm here to give you. I'm here to shine a light on things which maybe you would rather not see, but the things that you should see. I think in so many ways, Peterson is much like a great novelist or a great fiction writer, even though he's never written any fiction, because what he tells stories, especially some of the stories from his clinical practice, that's what he's doing. He's lighting up those dark corners and you're like, oh, I'm feeling uncomfortable reading about some of these people, some of their problems. I, eh, this is not my job. I'm not comfortable. I'm not comfortable with their problems. I, eh, this makes me uncomfortable. But that's a good thing. You know. Didn't Peterson write a play? That's in the back of my mind. Douglas Murray wrote a play. No, Peterson wrote some fictionalized something. Oh, well, he was working on something. I think he was working on some kind of hard-boiled thing and he was inflicting it on his family at Christmas. Yeah, yeah. Yeah, yeah. Some of that kind of rattling around in his mind. But so there's a particular story that he often tells, which I wove into my essay now, and I kind of paired it with one of the books I'm going to recommend. So here we go. First book recommendation. Esther, I'm feeling particularly colonized. Yeah. Yeah. This is good. This is a good thing. Good for you. This is, you can listen to it back later and make a list, take notes, and like think your reading list even more, Paul. I'm blogging as you type. I'm just adding new things. I've got two more posts already. All right, so write this one down. Write this one down. Well, you got another one for me. I got Thomas Kinkade's death. I got Joseph Conrad, task of the artist. I found that on brain picking. So we're just getting started. We're just getting started. That's what I'm afraid of. Go ahead. Okay. A canicle for Leibowitz. By Walter Miller. Oh, I've heard about that. Yeah. So this is a deeply weird, deeply Catholic science fiction novel. And so it's got a post-apocalyptic kind of setting. So the civilization has destroyed itself with the A-bomb. And it's basically up to the monks to try to save what can be saved and, you know, hold on to whatever little scraps are left behind. And in hopes that one day it can be rebuilt. And so it's divided into three parts, each of which drops into like a different era. So there's a scene in the second one, the middle one, where a figure arises who's kind of like the next Einstein, basically. He's very brilliant. He's very arrogant. And the monks at the church really don't like him, but they know they're going to have to work with him because he's basically the only hope for restoring Western civilization again, or a big part of it anyway. So he has to understand that history, as we know it, our history is so far back in the deep past that people still wonder if it ever actually happened. And so at what point the scientist says, I just, I'm not sure I can believe that it's true that we went to the moon once, that we ever split the atom, that mankind ever did these things. Because, you know, look around you now, we've got these, look at how far man has sunk. Because like in the wake of the A-bomb, you had like radiation poisoning, people being born with various mutations, people being medley impaired, that kind of thing. So the scientist, he's in the office with a priest. And he says, come here, look out the window. I want to show you something. So they look out the window and he goes, you see that there's an old peasant guy walking down the road and he's leading his donkey home. And, you know, look, you could tell he's diseased. You know, he's got paresis, which is lowering his IQ even farther. And so, he's like, what do you see when you look at that guy? And the priest answers, the image of Christ. What did you expect me to see? It's this amazing, amazing moment. And so that moment in my mind, I thought of it when I listened to a story Peterson tells several times now. And it's also buried in Maps of Meaning. It's this amazing startling passage that sort of leaps out of that book with this amazing, painful clarity after, you know, all these pages of tortured, you know, tortured working. And then all of a sudden you reach this, it's like a thunderbolt, is when he talks about this woman that he met when he was a young postdoc. And she was pathologically shy and she kept coming in and he was sort of trying to help her improve, but he couldn't really make any progress. And then he figured out that the reason she had been coming is that she wanted to see if she could take her dog and give some of the inpatients at the clinic a walk outside. And she was thinking about this even though her own situation was incredibly dire, you know, like her home life such as it was, was completely dysfunctional. There was mental illness and physical illness. And she herself looked like a street person, you know, she was incredibly unkempt and dirty and really not very bright at all and unable to look up at anybody because she was like bent over double with shyness. But she was still, she had that spark of divinity, right, that Peterson talks about. And so I thought about that. I thought about how she, well, it's like it says in the book of Isaiah, how Christ had no beauty that men should desire him, you know. And so here's this woman no man will ever desire her, ever, you know. And so you could imagine somebody going, well, I mean, what do you see when you look at her? Well, you see the image of Christ, right. And that's what Peterson sees even though he doesn't quite have all the vocabulary to put to it yet, you know. So when he tells that story, he's making us see, you know, just like Conrad talks about. So I kind of, I pull that in, I kind of wove that together with that scene from Leibowitz in my essay. And I think people are going to enjoy that when they get to it. So let me see if I can go down my list. So I want to kind of emphasize religious fiction because I think... Esther, people are going to wonder if you're capable of a conversation. Am I capable of a conversation? Well, you can ask me. You can ask me anything. That would be your dream come true, Esther O'Reilly, AMA. Come on, Esther, tell us the truth. Why, you know, there's a few of us that are probably rightly critiqued for being fixated on Jordan Peterson. Why are you fixated on Jordan Peterson? Well, I mean, some of it I've been kind of elaborating here and also in our last conversation. Those are the reasons, but they're all kind of out there. I mean, what about you? Because part of the funny thing is, so a lot of the people who come to my channel, you never say anything about Jonathan Peugeot, which is kind of interesting to me. Because a lot of the people who come to my channel come through Peugeot. You're definitely not a through a Peugeot Christian. Yeah, I only discovered him by sort of getting into this whole Peterson thing. So, I mean, yeah, I love his art, but I don't know that much more about him. I don't like frequent his... So you are kind of the... So in other words, it's not through kind of the neo-sacramentalism, as I call it. That's not the angle that you come at Peterson through. Well, I am in fact a sacramentalist. No, I get that. I get that. But, you know, so I don't know if you saw the video I put out last night where I had this little clip from this doctor and he talked about Jordan... I was starting to watch that, but I didn't finish it. Well, you don't have two hours to vote. It's been a chaotic weekend, Paul. How much getting your PhD in math and writing your blog and being on Twitter and all of those things. Well, actually, I had a car crash, but that's a different story. But keep going. So, but it's interesting to me, you know, is it... So that guy made the observation and I can't wait. I will eventually play the whole video that the whole conversation had with him, because the whole conversation is really amazing. But he's a really smart guy and he had some really clever insights. But, you know, he made the point that Peterson really comes along in a sense as the antidote to the new atheists. And he really is the one that in many ways kind of just calls stop BS on their entire view of the world. And whereas, you know, Christian apologists have for a long time, you know, Alvin Plantinga, who I know you know, Alvin Plantinga for a long time has made snide remarks about the new atheists, basically, why can't we get any real atheists like Bertrand Russell or someone like that instead we have these minor leaguers that are, you know, popping up with their books and such. Well, you know, Bertrand Russell was a lightweight even in his day. But my point is, Esther, I want to know why you're fascinated with Peterson. Because he's a humanist. Okay, well, okay. So we began and we talked a little bit about, you know, a lot of people, because in fact, when I used humanist to describe Peterson, it was very interesting because a number of people are like, no, he's not a humanist. I'm thinking if there are Christians saying, no, he's not a humanist. It's like, I don't mean, I don't mean, I mean, there are Christian humanists. I don't think that there's a problem with that. So what do you mean by humanism? So what I mean by humanism is the apprehension of the infinite value of man. And so that, you know, Peterson, I think it embodies that. And I think that that's accessible to anyone. It doesn't matter if you come with presuppositions about the existence of God or not. It benefits itself to you. That's helpful for me because that then fits into much more of the rest of your profile as an evangelical. I mean, I think of myself as a, you know. Do you consider yourself an evangelical? Not strictly, no, somewhat. What is an evangelical? I just got asked that today. It's like, I think I don't know if you can define what an evangelical is, because I haven't seen yet. I certainly haven't yet seen any list of things that I would be checking all of them and fully saying, Yeah, these 10 things apply to me, therefore I'm an evangelical. Maybe bits and pieces, but not all. I mean, I would say that I'm... You definitely believe in the need of religious conversion. Yes, but not necessarily, right. I believe scripture is authoritative and it's inspired in some sense, although not necessarily inherent. Yeah, so, you know, in that sense, that's one reason why I'm hesitant to identify as an evangelical. And I also don't know that I have the same view of conversion that many evangelicals would. I think in some ways I borrow somewhat from a Catholic view, although I don't completely subscribe to a Catholic view. What's the difference between a Catholic view and a Catholic view? Well, I mean, I think that although some Catholics will say, No, no, you're misunderstanding. It's not like that. But I'm like, if you read the Catholic documents, this kind of is what you're saying. I mean, I think Catholics really do believe there is a sense in which you earn your salvation. It's not like you're saying, well, I don't know, I don't know. I don't know. And so the classic evangelical response is no, that's impossible. And, you know, certainly when you get into things like the Treasury of Merit, for example, is this Catholic view that's like you store up brownie points or something. And so, you know, along comes Martin Luther saying, no, no, solo fide, solo scriptura. Can't do it that way. It doesn't work that way. So somewhere, would you ask you what does salvation mean? What would you say? What do you mean by salvation? I would say that salvation is a process. I would say it's a lifelong process of being refined by God into that which he means for you. That which he means for you to be. Okay, it's not a status? Well, I suppose it depends on the context. You mean like, would you say like check the box status saved status not saved? That's certainly how it's used in evangelical circles. I think that there, I think that I think that there can be point at a point in time, you can say, is this person saved right now? Like if this person died tonight, would you go to heaven? That's, you know, the standard kind of litmus test, right? If you died right now, et cetera. So I think that we can answer those questions meaningfully. But I think that I think you can give a yes or no answer to that question and then also still hold to the idea that we are works in progress and that we are being refined. So I think you can lose salvation. I think that I don't pull the line with a deconvert where people will go, well, yeah, that guy walked away from the church but I don't think he was ever a Christian to begin with. I don't say that. I think you could have been a Christian. You know, it says that when you were still in the church, when you were still believing that it was real, you know, it wasn't fake. But then equally, your loss of faith was real. And your turning away from God was real. So, you know, this may sort of waded to the Calvinist-Arminian thing I'm sure you've heard the illustration of the bird in the cage, right? So does the bird have to fly out of the cage by his own will once God opens the door? Or does God have to reach in and carry the bird out of the cage, right? I've never heard that before. Oh, so I think this is helpful. So, you know, Peterson would say that the bird has to open the cage and fly out of the cage all by itself. That's the Pelagian view. You do everything of your own power. The Arminian would say God has to open the cage but the bird has to fly out. The Calvinist would say birdie is dead at the bottom of the cage. God has to reach in and pick the birdie up and carry it out. Fly! Right. God takes the bird out of the cage, does CPR on the bird. Exactly. Then the bird flies away. That's Calvinism. That's the better story. So the Roman Catholic idea of conversion, you talked about the process but differentiating Roman Catholic conversion from, let's say, evangelical conversion, is there a difference in terms of outcome? Well, can you clarify that? Do I think that you can be Catholic and saved or evangelical and saved? Well, I talked about conversion and you differentiated Roman Catholic idea from conversion and evangelical idea of conversion. I never thought of that and I would understand a difference between Roman Catholic idea of conversion in terms of process from evangelical conversion and that's kind of where you went. But the... Some of the orthodox idea is interesting to me because when I hear people talk about it, it sounds similar to my own view because I would say I have a synergistic view. I'd have to learn more about orthodox theology though to be sure because I do know there are other aspects of it that I would disagree with. So I would want to be careful before saying, yes, that's definitely it. Have you read Molly Worthen's book on evangelicalism? You must have, you might have heard of it. I don't really read books on evangelicalism. It's a good book. Very interesting. Okay. Let's see what it's called. Let's see. University of North Carolina's. She's a historian from there. I didn't know anything about her. What's the name of that book? I read it though because it's a really good book. Come on, why doesn't Wikipedia tell me? You've got to look it up on Amazon. Anyway, this makes for bad video, me looking up stuff. I would say to go on with respects in which I may be more evangelical than Catholic. So one vital thing I think about. Apostles of reason. Okay, go on. Apostles of reason, yeah. So I was going to say one of I think multiple reasons why we needed the Protestant Reformation was to recenter the focus on the individual because the idea of a magisterium and this filter through which you have to go in order to make sure that you're interpreting scripture properly, the notion of an infallible pope, these sorts of ideas I don't think are biblical. And so it was very important that there be sort of unhitching from those ideas. And so, you know, those are some of the back of accretions. Yeah. So those are some of the big reasons why I'm not in fact Catholic, even though I borrow shamelessly from the Catholic tradition for a lot of my thinking. But I simply can't sign on to this. Yes, I agree. The pope is infallible. Yes, I agree. The magisterium, the church, it's like I'm sort of helpless on my own. I need the church to do X, Y, and Z for me. It's like, well, no, I disagree with that. I believe there shouldn't be any barriers between the individual and the scripture. So in that sense, I'm a very classic Protestant thinker. Well, there's been a big movement back towards reformed, in my denomination, I call them Catholic, Catholic reformed or reformed Catholics, that there's been a, you know, some of the some people, some people in my class, made in my class and younger have been really reading Calvin in terms of Catholicity, much more than, let's say, some of the accretions that happened after Calvin. And when they read Calvin himself, they see, you know, Calvin was really a synthesizer of, you know, took Luther and a bunch of the other reformers, because there are a lot more reformers than just Luther, obviously. And then also reading in terms of Calvin was, along with many people of his age, you know, well read in the Church Fathers, at least the Western Church Fathers, and so on and so forth. So that's a fairly popular thing right now in reformed circles to get much better in touch with your Catholicity. And also, you know, one of the things that Molly Worthen mentioned in her book Apostles of Reason was once Orthodox theology came to be better known in the West, since in many ways kind of the difficulties of a lot of the traditional Orthodox churches in their places of origin in the East. There's been a lot of, there's been a lot more respect for Orthodox theology since then. So it's interesting in the last 20 years how much of this has kind of been coming about. It's kind of a new Orthodox ecumenism as opposed to some of the what passes for ecumenicity on the more mainline stage. Yeah, I mean, I've had a number of Protestant friends who just convert to Orthodoxy or just convert to Catholicism. And it is interesting because as I'm watching the sort of influx of evangelicals into Orthodoxy, I'm wondering who will colonize whom. Well, yeah. You know, because I think there's some some of each and there's some there's some pathologies in Orthodoxy that I think evangelicals could help to correct. And so that I'm in a sense, I'm glad, although I want to say you didn't have to go all the way, man. Like, you know, you could have just been a weird evangelical. It's like me, right? You know, or like me sort of. I don't know what I am. But I was going to say you mentioned in one of your videos that Anglicanism is the new hotness in some areas. In a lot of ways, yeah. Among millennials. That's very interesting to me because I mean, I grew up in a sort of aggressively un-hot strain of Anglicanism, which is continuing Anglicanism. Because you may. That's what it's called, continuing Anglicanism? Yeah. So this was a kind of a splinter group after. So the Anglican Church had this schism over various issues. The ordination of women was one major splitting issue in the 90s, I think. I'd have to refresh my memory on the history of it. So the continuing Anglican branch sort of took off on its own. But, you know, it's sort of quietly dying, I guess, you know, probably it's fair to say. The churches are very, very small. My own church is handkerchief sized. I mean, there's maybe only 10 people at most of a Sunday. So, you know, we have a lot of independents. We just do liturgy and mass the way that we like it. But it's very much a dying breed. Yeah. So it was interesting to hear you say that because I thought, well, maybe it's some sense, you know, sort of. Anglicanism is the new hotness. It's a sense that you have like a post Vatican to Rome. There are probably there are probably aspects of the hot new Anglicanism that would be somewhat foreign to my experience of it, because it's probably incorporated certain elements like the ordination of women, for example. Right. Yeah. Well, Tish Warren, of course, is out there. I've just noticed that amongst millennials, a, you know, a resurgent interest in Anglicanism and a number of the people, number of millennials that I've spoken with are now in Anglican churches. The Anglican church that I that hosted me, it wasn't really the church that hosted me. It was really a member of the church that hosted me. But he was a member of that church. And so we did it all in in the building and with the blessing of the of the pastor. But it was it was very interesting because they were in Australia in Australia. I regularly heard a bit of lament of the of the Hillsong takeover of the Church of Australia. Oh, yeah, it's it's very bad. And I mean, it's praise and worship has become like when you were flipping through all the different celebs in the Liberty U video. And I was going through like, oh, yeah, I know that guy, that guy, that guy, that guy. So one of those guys was Chris Tomlin. And he's a he's an American writer. He's not with Hillsong. But yeah, he's he's big. The praise and worship. It's a praise and worship has just become this global juggernaut in terms of terms of marketing. And, you know, it's like I'm sure that some of the writers are nice people. I'm a good capitalist. I don't begrudge them their their their dollars, you know, more power to their elbow and all that. But it's just destroyed the church as a space for meaningful worship, I think. And well, actually, this comes into this is a musician that I really like a lot that I'll throw out speaking of art that I need in my life. A guy named Rich Mullins was. Yeah. So he kind of made his made his mark in the 80s and 90s and then died abruptly in a car crash. And he was thinking about becoming Catholic. And so it's funny, Catholics and Protestants alike have sort of fought over his legacy, tried to sort of claim him. He was really Catholic. No, he wasn't. Yes, he was. So, yes, it's almost a little bit like, you know, I looking at the wake of Rachel Held Evans death. It's been interesting because I get some similar kind of vibes with how people are rushing to like almost canonize her innocence. People did the same with Rich Mullins because he had that that same sort of prophetic. Arra, I guess. But he he said some wise things about music at the church and worship music because he was looking at the rise of these these praise bands, you know. And he said, I'm just not sure this is a good idea because it's it's about creating a particular emotion in people, a particular emotional response and defining that as worship. When when I want to say that worship should be your whole life is an act of worship, right? Making your making your bed is an act of worship. Right. So the church is needs to be careful not to get sucked into this this sensationalism. And he said that about 25 years ago. Yeah, it was it was very prescient because he was right. Well, what do you think of, you know, now that we're I mean, you're not someone to shy from from from controversy or shy from a fight. What do you think response from to Rachel Held Evans? I mean, Rod Dreher has blogged about a bit and part of it is obviously the the concern people want to be respectful to the morning. And but but she I mean, it was funny. On my denominational page, they reposted. They sometimes take stuff from religious RNS, religious news service, and they reposted the just the article that they had. But there's a line in that article basically about unity. And I thought Rachel Held Evans will will not be known for it as a unifier. She'll be much more the the Emma Green piece in the Atlantic as a firebrand. I mean, yeah, well, you know, I liked I thought Dreher was very sensible. I mean, he he was talking about, you know, the backlash to anything remotely critiquing critical or negative about her work and her legacy. And he and he goes, man, you know, he goes, I have Andrew Sullivan is this frenemy of mine. And, boy, if I die, if I die and Andrew writes some sickly, hagiographical thing, I'm going to haunt him to his dying day because I don't want that. I don't I don't want just hagiographies in the wake of my death. There were people who disliked me have at it. You know, go ahead and talk about it. Now, I mean, yeah, there should be sensitivity in class. And I've definitely seen people on the right wing, so to speak, who did not exhibit that needless to say. But then there were other things like Christianity Today ran a piece by John Stone Street, who I don't know him well. I met him once and he's, you know, sort of Chuck Colson, right point, apologist guy. He was Greg, the apologist in her first book, I think. And so he wrote what I thought was a nice piece for Christianity Today. It was just kind of very touching, like, well, you know, I can't pretend that we agreed on much of anything, but she had a story and I knew her husband and I really respect her family. And, you know, it's a good reminder that everyone has a story. So someone referred to it as a nasty piece. And it's I'm sorry, it just wasn't. But then, you know, they heard that somebody in her family read it and got offended. So Christianity Today pulled it and put out an apology. Yeah, you know, we're so sorry for this sensitive piece. And I was just like, oh, my gosh, people, you know, come on. So, yeah, it seems that there might be some residual evangelical touchiness in the in the desire to canonize her rapidly. Yeah, well, I saw some art that someone did with she had a halo around her head. And then Rod used that as the photo for his piece. And that was real. Like some friend of hers had actually drawn that to be serious. You know, Rachel Held Evans with a halo. I'm like, wow, that was fast. That would never happen in the Catholic Church. It takes a while, but they have rules about canonizing evangelicals. I know. I know. I know. Evangelicalism, I think is is is not I don't know how much you know, certainly as an ecclesiastical movement. But part of me, you know, there's a there's so much of a evangelicalism so often seems to be the church of the marketplace. It can be. Yeah. Yeah. And I think there's I mean, there's a certain amount of Catholic envy, maybe. But it's market forces so often in evangelicalism that that sort of determines it sort of determines who the you know, who holds office. And so, you know, Rachel held Evans held office in progressive evangelicalism by virtue of her power in social media. And then that that got because I I early on before Rachel really blew up, I she had written, you know, I was, you know, I'm an old guy, so I've always been trolling for sermon material and stuff. And I first found her blog because she had visited an RCA church in the East, which in the Reformed Church of America meant a very mainline liberal congregation. And she was quite surprised. It was like little girl leaves deep south to find mainline Reformed Church in upstate New York. And so then I began corresponding with her about it because, oh, there's someone interested in the Reformed faith. Well, let's talk about that. And so, you know, we corresponded a fair bit. And I was, you know, I was fairly active in her blog and on the comments section in those years. You know, I, you know, became aware of her a while ago as you know, she was a sort of an emergent figure. Remember that emergent church? Oh, that's right. That's right. And so I was just like, oh, great. You know, it's so at a certain point, I just began trying to ignore her because, you know, she didn't seem like, you know, like somebody really kind of worth following when she went so off the rails with the affirmation and whatnot of, you know, of the LGBT lifestyle. And so, you know, in the wake of that, I'm looking at I'm scrolling through the hashtags, you know, because of RHE. And, you know, I'm seeing things like, well, because of RHE, I felt I felt free to completely embrace the bisexual lifestyle or whatever. And she supported and encouraged me in that and wouldn't have happened without her. And so I was like, see, I mean, I'm sorry. This is this is not good fruit. And I can sort of hold that at the same time that I hold the fact that it's tragic that she died this way. It is tragic that she left her husband and two young kids. These things are messy. You know, they're they're complicated. And I mean, it requires it requires nuance, I think. What do you think? What do you think? You know, so the guy I just talked to briefly in our time is running out, too, but the guy talked to briefly before you. I mean, is the first words out of his mouth were his experience was the mass collapse of propositional truth. And and so he whereas he didn't, you know, really fully ride the Rachel Held-Evan train, she came up in our conversation, too. It's it's interesting to me, though, again, the the relationship between Rachel and evangelicalism in terms of it being governed, whereas let's say a a denomination or something, especially like the Roman Catholic or Orthodox or even Anglican churches, you know, you have you have you make vows, you have commitments to organization, you have confessional commitments. Evangelicalism is, you know, if you grow big enough, you know, it's sort of the wild west of celebrity market based pastor stuff. And, you know, it's very interesting because I remember there was a there's a period for which Rachel was doing a lot of speaking and writing. And she was she wasn't attending church at all. And people called her on that. You know, she eventually found her way into the, you know, to be an Episcopalian. I don't even know if she I suppose at some point she officially joined. But then even the last, you know, the last her last the last chapter in her life was again celebrity book tour with Nadia Bolzweber and I mean that whole crowd. So it's yeah, it's just a it's an interesting way of I mean, are they doing church or what exactly what exactly is happening in that space? What what what should we call it or how should we think about it? Cultive personality. Well, yeah, there's, you know, and in all fairness, if you look at church fathers, you know, Cyprian, Augustine, I mean, even in that these I mean, some of these church fathers were celebrity pastors, Chrysostom. So there's always been this market dynamic. To bring this back around to Jordan Peterson as we close off here, I often wonder what exactly churches would like Peterson to become. You know, because what what you know, once he said the magic words, it'd be like, let's let's get this guy on the on our speaking circuit instead of his speaking circuit, right? What magic words could we imagine him saying? Could you imagine him joining? I mean, Orthodox Church have to go through the process of of, you know, all that submission. You couldn't sit still through it. Yeah, you couldn't sit still. So Mayline? No, they won't have him. Evangelicals? Well, Liberty sure embraced him. But, you know, for how long? And I read their I read their doctrinal statements. I mean, he ain't going to sign that. Well, and I have a I have a piece coming up that people will like, I think I wrote this for the Federalist responding to a Lutheran pastor who was saying that Peterson's the head pastor of First Church YouTube. And Peterson had a little a little wry response. It's like, set your own house in order, baby, you'll get your wish. It's like, it's kind of cute. It was kind of funny. And so I think that that pastor wrote that piece from kind of a bubble. Where in the Lutheran family of churches does this guy sit if he's writing for the Federalist? I mean, obviously, he must be over on the conservative end. Yeah, I'm going to say probably Missouri Senate. Missouri Senate? Yeah, it'd be one of the conservative ones. I think there are two conservative ones. Then ELCA is the liberal. So he's definitely not that he's very, very conservative. But, you know, it was like he was he was working on a sermon and decided to throw Jordan Peterson into it. This is how his his his post came off. I've done that. Yeah. But I feel like he doesn't he doesn't really understand how to how to appreciate Peterson for what he is. Like, all he can do is sort of pick at all the things he's not. It's like, OK, but that's boring. You know, it's not really, really very interesting. So I actually I used your unauthorized exorcist line, Paul. You're colonizing my writing now. I used it as one of the headers. Well, you colonize my YouTube channel. I can colonize your writing. It's a fair exchange. Yeah. And so, you know, basically what I'm saying is just appreciate Peterson for what he is doing and for what he is. And don't be all stat or involved or about it. You know, they're the two two. Yeah. Well, your audience might not. But, you know, the the the puppets, they're always always criticizing like young. It is. He's a young young young was young was a flake. Yeah, he's a Darwinian. Darwin was all wet. But so what? You know, like he's he's he's cool. Just just like what God work like God do his thing. All right. One more minute, Esther. And then I got to go because I got someone coming up after you. So I apologize for coming in and colonizing like this. I was trying to you can't help yourself. You know, I was I was what I was trying to do is kind of show a different side of my work, I guess, because actually, if you if you visit, oh, I'm disappointed. We get to think it to talk about this. But if you look at my YouTube channel, which I almost never like actually use or update, I make some film projects there where I put I put put music together with with movies I see that have that have kind of touched me. And so that's a side that I don't really get to discuss as much kind of my artistic side, because a lot of people, I think people get the impression that I'm a rigidly cerebral, cold, hard, rationalist person. You know, or whatever. That's not even remotely true. And so that was why I didn't come into like, you know, correct your epistemology or talk about or talk about faith or belief or anything like that. I just I wanted the focus instead to be on things I am passionate about and things I enjoy to kind of show that that other side of me. So that I think the music videos I make are one of the best ways to sort of understand me and to understand what what touches me, you know. So that's a new thing I'll throw out there. Well, some folks will go over and look at them. I'm sure they will. Well, as always, Esther, it's a pleasure. And I will see you on the Twitters. Absolutely. Take care.