https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=q66eFTnNr9s

 but is it. can we see who shows this is Jon's first. first into Streamyard. Now John left the room. Hi, this is Paul. I'll do the introduction because John just locked himself out. We, John and I were going to be here today and John just left the room because I told him he could look at the look at the live chat because the ticket site for up now he's coming back in. Making me push buttons and it all goes haywire. I do not see any kind of over on the right. There should be some tabs. You can look at private chat and you can look at comments. If you click on comments, you can see comments. Now he sees now he sees. Alright, John. We're we're yeah. Yeah. Does that guy know how to use a computer? He's learning. I got into your live chat. Did I not? Well, John, we are we are live streaming today to make a big announcement. Yes. The down below in the notes, the link for tickets is available for all of you now. Some tickets went out. I can put it in the and put it in the live stream too. Let's see. Well, John, let's let's talk about this thing is asking me is having issues. Are you having you're always having issues, John. You mean are you having internet issues? No, it says down below here having issues. Oh, OK. Well, let it have its issues. If it if if it drops out, it drops out. So let's let's let's get down to work here. But I know if I'm ADHD, you're ADHD and then we're not going to get anything done. OK, getting the same vibes from John that I get from discord. So let's talk a little bit. So tickets are available. The link is below. Let's first talk a little bit about the genesis of the conference and then what we did to put it together and then details of the conference and so let's talk about the genesis of this conference, John. Well, I remember this day. It have a very vivid memory of it. It was somewhat traumatic. I was unable to go to Thunder Bay because I stayed in England too long after I lost my passport. After you thought you lost your passport. I thought I lost my passport and so I decided to not go to Thunder Bay. A decision I regretted. But very much. But then the next time I saw you after you had returned from Thunder Bay, you told me that you had a clear sense that what our Europe trip and the Thunder Bay experience added up to was a vision for reciprocal development and inspiration where estuary hub conferences might inspire local estuaries to be formed and the local estuaries create estuary hub events. And so this thing could take on a life of its own over a long period of time. We are at the very beginning. Thunder Bay was an important North American estuary hub event and you, John, are next. And I said, oops. Yeah, yeah. Southern California is a great place and you have the kind of relationship with your church where you can make that happen and it's a very easily accessible place. Everybody's going to want to come to Southern California in the winter time. Well, it was originally scheduled for March. But then our friend Jonathan Peugeot had other commitments, couldn't make it. And we decided rather than to move forward without him, we postponed the meeting and the conference to May. So now it will still be beautiful weather in Southern California, but perhaps not any more beautiful than it is where you live or where other people live. So don't come for the weather. Come for the conference. Leave the weather to us. Come for the conference. Leave the weather to us. Okay. And yeah, so we had a terrific conference in Thunder Bay. Thunder Bay was not the easiest place to get to, which I think from what I heard from a lot of people, we had a lot of Canadians who went, who came to the Thunder Bay Conference. Only what? 10% of Americans own a passport. So Grim Grizz had wanted to get across the border, but he was quite sure Canada would not let him in. The state of California can't deny Grim Grizz. So we are having it in the lower 48. So Grim Grizz can come to this. Now, let's- Grim Grizz is waiting to be let in, by the way. It's not working for him. It's not working for him. That's what it says in the notes. It takes a computer illiterate to point that out. All right. Well, he says up above, pin it, PVK. It won't let me. There's the link, Grim. So let's walk through the- Grim Grizzcon 2023. So let's walk through the- it's going to start on the 18th of May. Oh, here he is. All right. It's going to- there he is. Hey, Grim. No, the pin it was for the link to the tickets. I couldn't pin it as a moderator for the chat. Oh, okay. Well, it's the 18th. We're going to have paintball for Jesus and I think just even seeing that is going to make me want to say what's going on. So, Grim, you are the originator of paintball for Jesus. So why don't you explain a little bit what's going to happen on the 18th and Vendon can elucidate some of the details. Well, the paintball for Jesus event that's going to happen is as close as I've gotten everybody to do but the actual notion for paintball for Jesus is that the thrill of paintball is competitive with the super stimuli of video games and there aren't enough young people in church. So, if eventually churches sponsor paintball teams, that could be a beautiful union and the notion that that's something that can be done by religious people is event with the apparently up to 100 people paintball is going to be happening that we're doing for Jesus. Love it. Love it. Love it. Right on the money. I have a little anecdote to add to that if I may because I am dealing with some people at Crosspoint who are in charge of logistics and logistics interface and make sure that the facilities are prepared for our arrival and so forth and so forth. So we had a meeting of that team and I did mention that the meeting or that the conference was going to be preceded by paintball for Jesus and almost everyone there looked perplexed and our pastor's secretary said, of course it is. And she totally got it because she says, yeah, every conference should be preceded by some heavy duty, very physical bonding experience. My boys are totally into that kind of stuff and this is the kind of thing that you do when you want to get the energy out and get people to focus on something. So yes, paintball for Jesus, A, as a bonding experience, B, to establish the continuity of the Estuary Hub Conference tradition. It started in Thunder Bay East and we almost called this conference Thunder Bay West because it's going to have some great similarity and thirdly, there is something liturgical about having this feature as a gathering experience. We gather together and we get all our angry energy out and we beat each other up with paintballs and then we feel a lot better about each other as we come and share a meal together and then the conference proceeds from there. And John Breveke has already let it be known to me personally in a personal communication that because he can only arrive on Friday morning, he is incredibly disappointed, beyond belief disappointed that he cannot be there on Thursday to be on the receiving end of you all's angry energy. Peugeot and I did paintball in Thunder Bay. I'll do it again. I'll do it again. So I'm sure Peugeot will too. He was a good sport. Very good. But Eamon put me in a big yellow outfit so it was like shooting Big Bird. Well, that's an honorary costume also associated with the liturgical manifestation of this pre-conference event. Are you going to give me a big yellow? You're going to give me a yellow slicker too? I don't think we'll have the fogging and rain issues that we had in Thunder Bay. I'm sure our paint will be able to see clear-eyed for the paintball. How about you, Grizz? You going to play paintball? I don't know if there's only a hundred slots. I wouldn't want to steal one. However, I'd be happy to be strung up on a cross and shot with paintballs if an athletic supporter was providing me. Oh my. So that's May 18. Paintball for Jesus. Grim, you're welcome to stay or duck out. It's up to you. No, he's got other important announcements to make. Even way before Paintball for Jesus, Grim Grizz is going to jump into action. I have jumped into action using social capital. I have secured reservations for 30 people at a campground that begins on the 17th so that you can arrive and get set up and then sleep and then attend paintball and leaves on the the checkout day is the 22nd so you can be there for everything Sunday too. What is the name of this campground? The name of this campground is the Mulberry Campground at the Pareto Regional Park. I recently shared on my Twitter a link to the substack coverage that Marmalade put together. It's a work in progress. I've started a what do you call it? It's a it's give send go instead of a go fund me. Okay. For if anybody wants to contribute to the comfort and care of people who show up there because like I imagine people that fly in probably won't be able to bring their tents so so to the extent that we're facilitated it'll be a more pleasurable experience. At the moment there'll be a piece of ground you're allowed to sleep on. But it's reserved and for you. Yeah. We're working toward it. It could be it could be its own homeless encampment for a little although you will have access to a toilet and a shower so. I slept on bare dirt when I was in Spain. At that campground because I've spoken it into existence we will form at least a four-person musical group. We will dub the the Anachino Signs and Wonders. So there will be a performance of Signs and Wonders at the campground. And if you're the kind of person that's drawn to these sort of things by celebrity appearances both Chad and Moishi have expressed interest in attending the campground portion of the event. So you can do the Estuary Conference and then afterwards chill with me and Chad apparently. All right. All right. Well at the at the festival the German festival there was a lot of camping there too. There was camping in Thunder Bay but it appeared that even our own hearty father Eric was rained out and had to seek refuge in some kindly Catholic home that took in the poor wet father. So I think the weather in Southern California will be far more hospitable. But the festival in Germany the campers who camped there also endured great hardship. They did. Because quite frankly we sent Job out to to create access to our very fine lodging in Germany that was reserved for us and he got back into the car soaking wet. Yes he did. There's a story there but we won't tell it right now. All right. All right. So you know, Pareto Regional Park it's it's too bad it's not spelled like the Pareto Distribution because you know get a little word play going there. That's good. So how do you spell Pareto in Pareto Distribution? With an E and an I and a T. But I'd like to throw out there also that oh I forgot what it was now. Never mind. I'll remember in a minute. Oh it's a no. Sorry. All right. So the 17th you can come and you can camp and the experience can start then. Are you are you leading a caravan from the middle of the country Grim? Have you have you gotten that have you gotten that far in the planning? Well budgeted in the in the give send go plans our transportation back and forth but it's apparently only three miles so we might be waking up at dawn and hiking down the highway. You mentioned people had camped at previous events and that was the thing. I've been placed in charge of the camping experience for this event and over the course of my life I've been camping perhaps four times. So anyone familiar with camping and or the needs of a group camping environment or things I should be aware of and watch out for please get in touch with me and warn me. I really have no idea what I'm doing but I'm trying my best. I think the Pareto Regional Park in Chino California on South Euclid Avenue will be a very hospitable place. You won't have to fight bears or mountain lions or anything like that. I think it'll literally be a walk in the park. And bring your fishing rod fishing is excellent. Oh look at that. So so Grim are you flying to Southern California or are you riding in on a colt? I have no idea how the Lord's gonna get me there Paul but I suspect that since I'll be trying to bring a quantity of supplies I will be in my own vehicle and road tripping. All right from here to there. Well I would encourage I would encourage people to find ways of getting in that work for you. I you know for example when I went to Thunder Bay I flew into Minneapolis and then I then Luke and his friend lovingly gave me a ride from Minneapolis to Thunder Bay so that I not only got a chance to do the Thunder Bay conference I also had about 10 hours in the car with Luke and so that was just a bonus add-on. So so Paul that is that is a little bit longer than it would take you to drive from Sacramento to Southern California. I do that regularly and I can do it in seven. But is it not an option for all kinds of people who want to spend time with you to just fly into Sacramento and then you will take them on the bus that you will procure to to Southern California? Didn't I already purchase my tickets to fly into the lovely Ontario airport? You can give those tickets to somebody else. I have in fact I part of me in my mind is going back and forth on flying versus driving because it would be it would be fun to drive down. We'll have to see once once our own little group here in Sacramento decides what they want to do. I think Rick is driving down and is taking his pickup truck. But Ontario is a I think a lot of people fly into LAX if they're coming from a great distance just because they'll get cheaper tickets. In California it's just super easy to fly into Ontario. But yeah. Speaking of flights when I was looking at it there was an airport called John Wayne nearby. Is there reasons people don't use that one we should know about? Well Ontario is significantly closer by than John Wayne and so that is kind of a third tier airport that serves well the people that live in Orange County. But there is a canyon between Orange County and the Illinois Empire that kind of has some traffic snarls and bottlenecks. So it's not as convenient to get to Chino from John Wayne as it would be from Ontario. But if you get a super cheap flight to one of those airports by all means take advantage of that. Yeah it was like 40 bucks from Vegas to John Wayne. So I was like what? Yeah there are all these little airports in Southern California that you can get good deals into some time but if you're flying in from a distance LAX will probably have the best deals. But it's a little ways from Chino. 60 miles. All right all right. Okay any other details Grim that you've got to lay on us? I could use any moral spiritual prayer support for the organization of this event because I truly have no idea what I'm doing but I'm embracing the responsibility as if it's a growth opportunity. All right well I thank you for it John. I would recommend Grim that you put together a team of and I'm sure you'll figure out what to call this team but put together a team who are going to help make this thing a reality and again it's a conference like this. I learned this fairly early on. All y'all can watch me and Peugeot and Vervecki Yak it up on YouTube. That's not hard to find and you can watch free. But the real beauty of a conference like this is getting together with the other people that you've been getting to meet on YouTube and camping with them spending time in a car with them spending time over meals with them. That's the beauty of this thing and so contact Grizz if you're interested in camping. If you're driving in or you people want a carpool that just makes the adventure just get better and better. If anybody has an RV the the Pareto has RV things available but since that's out of my league I'm not handling it but I will be happy to coordinate with anybody who who takes over that portion. I look forward to having my heart feel the vibrations of y'all's laughter. There will be laughter. There will be laughter oh yes. I can promise you that. I assume you're going to walk us through the schedule of events now and I'll just pop out to the audience and view that with them. Thanks for having me on. Thanks Grizz. So back to the paintball for Jesus. I noticed that somebody Joe I think Joe Workman asked about ammunition and actually that is all included in the experience. So the paintball experience will include your instructions, your clothing, weaponry, protective gear, protective gear, your armament and your ammunition. I picked a package with a very generous ammunition so you can shoot it Paul a lot. What is the additional cost for the paintball? $60 and you have to register for that at the time you buy your ticket. If you don't it is almost impossible to register for paintball subsequently and I don't have another mechanism by which I can do that on the side but it is in fact I was going to ask Jason. Jason I don't know if you're listening to this but you need to hack into this software system and change it to our liking because it's not doing what I want it to do. I very much wanted the people to be able to decide later on if they want to do paintball for Jesus but now it appears that you can only register for the conference and immediately following as part of that one experience also sign up for paintball for Jesus and we're going to all jump in the bus after we leave the paintball. Se village there and go and have pizza at Graziano's and you have to sign up for that also. So that's going to be an additional 10 bucks and I kind of think I didn't know quite how to do that. It is a separate eating event that is not for the whole conference only for the people that do paintball so I figure I'll just purchase that separately but I'm expecting that everybody will contribute that and then I can just tell the pizza guy to put a whole bunch of pizza on the table and make it easy. Okay the at Thunder Bay the paintball tickets they had 60 of them and that also that also had a a barbecue it was a you know cookout hamburgers and hot dogs and things like that. That sold out right away in fact that that sold out almost immediately in Thunder Bay and we had a great time we had a great time and uh yep so that's the 18th and then the 19th the conference starts and we don't have the details of the 19th and 20th worked out yet but John and I will work on that. It'll be similar to Thunder Bay and that there'll be main talks being given by each of us and there will be breakout times and we're going to have some estuary type processes involved. Katherine Wilson will once again be the moderator on stage. John will be sharing some of his story and the theme of the conference is the quest for a spiritual home. We came to that theme myself and John Van Donk and John Verveke and Jonathan Peugeot and Katherine. We had a zoom meeting where we talked through a bunch of these things. Coming up in April there will be another zoom meeting with myself and John Van Donk and there's way too many Johns in this group. John Verveke and Jonathan Peugeot and Katherine and we are going to do a zoom conversation to get the dialogos going on the quest for a spiritual home and that of course will be on YouTube and everyone will get a chance to see it. I anticipate that the conference might in fact be sold out by that point already but you never know. There are how many slots John? 300 total. Okay and why don't you talk a little bit about what's happened with early bird discount tickets? Yeah. Yeah because we were going to do that. Yeah well there are two different prices here. What's that? There are two different prices here. Yes and once upon a time the discounted tickets were called the early bird discount tickets and I had once upon a time thought that whoever shows up early could snatch those so that we would have a little bit of cash in the bank from which to pay airline tickets and various expenses that needed to be paid up front. But then it occurred to me and it actually came from a conversation I had with you Paul when we talked about there are going to be some people for whom this conference is pretty pricey and then you add the transportation and the lodging and it's going to take a little chunk out of their pocketbook and that $50 difference might just be to make a break point when you say you know I really I mean I really cannot afford it at the full price. At the discounted price I could consider it but at the full price Nah not really. Well what I propose to do now is to have all of you who can easily afford the full price which is still by the way very inexpensive given the fact that you're going to have five full meals and and three or four days of activity. So yeah to to be able to pay the full price if you're able to pay the full price then pay the full price and that way you leave room for other people who might find it a little bit more difficult to use take advantage of the discounted price which is $2.19. Okay so those of you who can afford the full price please pay the full price and leave those discounted tickets to those who perhaps are just sort of on don't know if they can afford this conference and I know 50 bucks is just only a part of the total cost but John was able to work that into the budget. Maybe we should just run through the event information here. Once again it will be Tuesday May 18 2023. 12 p.m is paintball for Jesus that's noon correct John? That's when the paintball starts? That's when the bus no that's when the bus leaves the venue to go to the paintball court. Okay so you so anybody coming has to plan on being there for paintball Tuesday May 18 at noon at the Crosspoint Church in Chino. Those who are those who are coming just for the conference the conference begins the 9 a.m the next day 9 a.m the next day and let's see Catherine will be the moderator there'll be a hundred people who sign up for the now obligatory liturgical paintball for Jesus which will happen May 18 starting noon followed by dinner at Graciano's pizza $60 additional plus food. Please decide whether you want to add paintball for Jesus at the same time you register for the conference due to software limitations it is complicated to add it later. Well let's talk so the 19th and 20th we'll have events we'll be speaking there'll be breakout groups there'll be all of this sort of thing we're going to have within it one of the things that so after Thunder Bay we talked to a fair number of people about okay what did you like about the conference what could have been better about the conference one of the things that people said was that they had wished that's right Thursday May 18 not Tuesday that's correct one of the things they said we would they wish there was more time for people to meet each other and discuss together now at the Thunder Bay Conference there were some gathering times in the evening later but they weren't structured at all so we're going to integrate into the into the program also structured times for breakout groups that will be in some ways similar to estuary meetings but obviously a much more compressed format because an estuary meeting takes an hour to two hours and this will be smaller but the point will be that it won't just be an opportunity to listen and then maybe for a half dozen people to proffer half questions half statements at the end of a talk but there'll be there'll be chance for people to sort of chew on what's been said and think about and I hope that those small group experiences will for the most part be facilitated by else net participants and else net members people who have gone through the training are familiar with the else net protocol but also know how to modify that for different purposes we have people do that all the time apparently and so that's why I made the tickets available to else net leaders first even before this illustrious event with you Paul I sent a letter out to all my else net peeps and gave them an opportunity to buy tickets and quite a few of them did already so for some of them what we're discussing here is already done deal and old hat so they will be the ones I'm going to enlist their participation and cooperation in in making those small groups happen according to some modified estuary protocol so and the purpose of that is because you've got some tyrannical project that you wish to force on the world or what john to facilitate no no no no no no you said there should be more engagement with one another right so I'm providing the services of the estuary leadership else net community to make that possibility because these people do this all the time they they're all involved in their own home territory with their own estuary groups in their own neighborhood and so they are very familiar with how to rally a group of strangers or people that have never met each other and to engage them or to set the framework the conversational framework to discuss something and while we're not starting with uh brand new stuff you know from scratch to be put on the table we're going to be starting with whatever they just heard in the in the prior presentation and let that be the the starting point for the conversation but the format and you know we'll still do a circle of sorts you know we'll have quick introductions and then say well what did you hear well this is what I heard this is what I heard this is what I heard this is what I heard well what do you want to you know what do you want to focus on as a group let's let's figure that out together and this has precedence because in the event that you and I were at where I was talking with paul kings north right we we did a similar thing with that event where we we broke the entire place down into smaller groups and and that was quite effective I was I was quite moved by the kinds of conversations they were having in Ireland about religion and sort of what has happened to the Catholic Church in Ireland Protestants in Ireland and and in fact there was one there was one member of the clergy who came to the conference and he told me going out the door after the conference he said you know if you had told me that a group of random strangers in Ireland would be able to have a conversation like this on a subject like this before this conference I never would have believed it because there's you know there's it's a very the the the religious context in Northern Ireland is obviously very complex but we had mixtures of all sorts of people having I think some really substantive conversations in in those breakout groups and because we I mean the the purpose of a conference right here is not to simply listen to theoretically let's talk about the quest for a spiritual home a conference like this should be for participants part of their quest for a spiritual home and so having uh processes like this during the day I think will will just enhance the conference and help people um work on their stuff and if in connection if in if in that process and if in that context people get the realization that hey these kinds of conversations can happen anywhere I can facilitate a conversation like this in my neighborhood at my church at a bar that I regularly go to then then I would say then very organically the possibility of more estuaries arising from this conference um would be a pretty cool thing and I would welcome the people who want to lead those conferences to join us on elsenet not that I want to put in a plug for elsenet but I mean since you forced my hand about this and elsenet is exactly what John the estuary leader support network and what does it do what does it involve it meets twice a month online and the people who participate uh compare notes with one another about how to start groups on the ground but they also practice the estuary protocol to have actual conversations about meaningful things online and our estuary conversation is only a relatively small part thereof and that meets twice a month and if somebody is interested in elsenet starting their own their own estuary you can find that information at estuary hub.com and if anybody hasn't watched my conversation that I had with Daniel um with Jordan Daniel Wood today you'll note that it ended on that because one of the things Nate of course really wanted me to talk to Jordan Wood and I you know I was like I'm going to talk to this academic who wrote this complex book about Maximus the Confessor and I understand why that's hot stuff because Peugeot always talks about Maximus but Nate said no no no you should really talk to Jordan he's very down to earth and he was very down to earth and I thought my conversation with Jordan was was really excellent and we sort of again met each other as kindred spirits having a sense of the church needs to be able to host these kinds of conversations and in fact these these need to be these need to be all over the place and so that's the reason for elsenet and it's the reason for estuary and this conference is a part of this and again as as John noted when we started part of my vision is that not only will we have estuaries where people can in fact participate in these kind of kind of conversations on a regular basis but estuaries themselves can facilitate these kinds of conferences and broader events which will sort of bring it up to another level and feed the estuary process so this is you know so we've we've had a few of these conferences we we would be remiss not to mention the group in Chicago that is doing this annually with some smaller conferences I was at their conference last year we had the festival in Germany that went on and Matthias and Cassidy are continuing to think about subsequent events there Marcus Connolly from the more Christ channel is doing more and more conferences and we sort of gave him a vision for estuary in his place Thunder Bay grew up without an estuary but I think Eamon and Catherine would like to do more conferences and now we're doing Southern California and as Chezy was here at least initially he wants to remind everybody that in 2024 he would love to have something in Israel in 2024 which will include tours for those who are curious about sites that are important for the Jewish faith and sites that are important about the Christian faith and so that the goal of all of this is not simply to produce internet content with thinky talky stuff the goal of this is to have in-person meetings and relationships that can in fact help people in their quest for a spiritual home so all right let's um let's let's talk about yeah there's you know there's after my after my conversation with John Vervecki there are a lot of other speakers that we would like to participate in this too it's difficult it's difficult figuring out you can't if you have too many speakers it gets diluted and we're also having a sense of how to grow this thing bit by bit you know Jacob said we should have done this at the count the campus of USC for a thousand people I thought I'm not quite sure we're ready for that yet we'll see if we can sell 300 tickets to this thing but part of the plan that's right well part of the plan of this is that let's say um Nate up in the Pacific Northwest says I want to see my estuary put together a conference and our estuary group is going to decide who gets you know who we're going to have on stage and so I could very much see Nate's group Grail Country could be a grail country event you can brand it that way and have Jordan there maxima's may show up and and the idea is that you know it's not always going to be pvk and Peugeot and verveky add some different people um you know we had a terrific conversation I think with Jordan B Cooper and so there are a lot of different people who can participate in these kinds of events and the goal of this is to facilitate these kinds of events some events will be larger some events will be smaller and the group that decides to put together event is the group that gets that gets to decide who's going to be um on the stage and how the event is going to run so that's but whether there will be paintball for Jesus well every group will have to put that together themselves but um that that's that's that's becoming quite traditional now so I don't know if they do paintball in Europe do they they might be a little squeamish about um weapons our gun-loving North American culture so let's let's talk a little bit John about food so in Thunder Bay um there was you got a little bit of a you got a little bit of a a gift card that could because they had a little coffee shop there so you could buy a little something for coffee there and then lunch was provided but dinner you were on your own why don't you talk about the way food's going to go with this John okay so we have Friday night and Saturday night dinner catered in we have Saturday morning breakfast organized by a local Boy Scout troop who are going to feed us full breakfast pancakes eggs bacon the whole nine yards wow this is going to be a fundraiser for them so you're paying a little extra I'm sorry to say but it's included in the price and I agree to their exorbitant rates these are little Dutch boys that know how to make money but there will be a decent and fast served breakfast on Saturday morning okay on the two lunch periods are going to be uh provided by a group of women at Crosspoint Church who who are really really good at this and they love doing it and I I gave them complete green light to do whatever they want to do and send me the bill so okay and on Sunday morning there will be um I haven't spoken about this yet because it will come later but there will be a super light probably muffins and a half a banana kind of breakfast served at the church to the people that will attend that particular event okay all right so and so the cost of all these meals is included in the price and no there will not be any taco trucks so hey don't let the cat out of the bag father eric knows how churches work so food will be provided so all you do have to have to do is get to the conference food is included in the price and the serving the serving of the catered meals will also be organized by the funeral ladies because they know how to move a fat a crowd of old people around fast all right all right so food is food is included let's let's talk a little bit about lodging so um lodging is problematic in as much as there are no hotels of any kind within reasonable walking distance of the church it may turn out that the prado camping crowd is going to be is going to be the closest to the venue of all lodging oh there is however a really nice um hotel and you have it marked there i believe yeah right there yeah i i reserved 30 rooms um for their their discounted price and they were eager to provide that for us the heiress hotel and uh so if you snatch those up the one thing that i was sort of hoping would happen is that people would get together on that and then the cost per night you know you can put a few people in beds and a few people on the ground and i was told that they don't monitor occupancy rate very closely in that hotel but i didn't hear that from any hotel official all right a little nobody at the hotel said go ahead and load it up now yeah now at thunder bay a number of people did get airbnbs in thunder bay and did it that way so that's certainly a possibility again if you can find a group to get together and split an airbnb that can be if you're going to get some of the reserved rooms at the hotel make sure you call the hotel and there's a phone tree and the first thing on the phone tree is one to make a reservation don't hit that because that will just send you to the corporate site hit zero which will send you to the front desk and then when you call say i'm part of the estuary chino e-conference and then they will give you one of those reserved rooms and give you the special rate so that's um that's what you want to do to to stay at this um number one hotel in chino hills on trip advisor there you go right and um the the the challenge here is and there is always a downside to everything the challenge is that uh it is about five miles from the church uh so i i have contemplated all the different ways in which i can help people get from their hotels to the church but if we're going to you know move people to all kinds of different hotels there are there are less expensive hotels in the area there are also very much more expensive hotels in the area so if you want to bring your family and let them all stay in a fancy beach hotel while you attend the conference then then there is that possibility but um i i am not able to think through the logistics of transporting everyone around from all different hotels and airbnbs and campsites to the church so i made the um seemingly callous decision to let all you mature responsible adult people figure that out for yourself okay um you probably haven't thought about this um the thunder bay conference see this you can start a discord server for zero money and so the thunder bay conference started a discord server for their conference um if someone would like to volunteer to set that thing up i think that would be helpful and we can put a lot of this information on that discord server and that will also let people who sign up for the conference coordinate with each other you'll probably want to do carpools from the hotel and carpools from the campground and you know maybe find people to yep car you know get get from the airport find um find airbnbs etc etc a little bit of um a lot of people who southern california is this massive area and chino hills is what's called um the inland empire is it is it not john um and you know i don't know if you want to say anything about this area so that's why if you fly in so here's here's southern california and lax is is way over here yep um burbank airport is up here santa ana that's the john wayne airport that grizz was talking about um southern california is known for its traffic but um it is you know there are obviously a lot of services it's a major metropolitan area um anything anything you want to say generally about flying into there or getting public transportation into the area if you if you are looking to buy tickets to southern california and you need to get to chino and it is 20 dollars cheaper to fly into los angeles than it is to fly into ontario international airport ont if it's 20 dollars cheaper to fly to lax don't do it fly into ontario because it will cost you 20 bucks to get from lax to chino so make sure that you calculate the the distance after you arrive at the airport into the cost of your total travel expense because it may still be more economical to fly into ontario and ontario has connections easy connections with denver dallas um maniapola chicago there's flights going to all the major hubs everywhere we even have a direct connection between sacramento and ontario in case the bus doesn't drive all right good um any other logistics john that we should that we should talk about we talked about transportation we talked about lodging we talked about camping talked about paintball i'm not handing out tickets on lanyards they're weird you're all going to get a little bracelet so that we know that you have paid for your meal and we're not feeding all the homeless in california oh that's good because that's a lot of homeless um all right so any any questions um show the closeness of pareto regional this is grim's um let's go back to the map what i do with my map um um agent prado regional euclid avenue so there's the park and uh the church the church is right over there so the church it's four and a half miles i believe yeah it's right up the road because the church is on euclid isn't it yes it also is yeah so it's super easy to get to the park is very close so camping will be a terrific a terrific way to go are there more campgrounds around too john or is um no that's just the closest prado is pretty much it i mean you're gonna end up becoming you know there's another campground in the canyon in the not along the 91 further south from the map that you're looking at right now um there is a campground along the santa ana river there by uh what is it called um yeah can't think of the name right now okay but it's right down there on the southern end of that green zone right where the z where the green cross is the 91 freeway to your left to your left right there yeah right okay all right good okay anyone have questions questions in the chat that anyone wants to post dum dum dum dum i will i will put the um i will put the link what screwtape asks if the california institute men have spare rooms now that is actually a super good question what is the california institute of men that's an institute for men yeah okay yeah are we going to be institutionalized by this that's the state president you know all right so i have just dropped the stream yard link into the into the chat so if anybody wants to come in and discuss something or ask something in person this is not time for general comments or not time for general conversation but if it's connected to this event just you can click the link and jump in and ask your question in purpose in person too just give people a minute to see if they see if they want to do this are we also going to be talking about the sunday oh talk about sunday john because that the whole thing has pretty much come together beautifully um as i mentioned earlier there will be a light breakfast serve on the on the crosspoint campus john vervecky will do a meditation time at seven o'clock in the morning on sunday immediately following that light breakfast and the church service starts at 9 30 and um you apparently are going to be our guest preacher for that sunday i know that that's news to you looking from the look on your face but uh it's really it's you're going to be asked to preach paul so i will i will preach so and then uh we will have the we'll have a a situation that i haven't completely resolved yet it may involve more money but um there will be a speaker lunch and then at two o'clock we will be expected which means we will be leaving at 1 30 in buses whoever wants to go to uh participate in uh john jonathan pageau showing us around saint andrew's orthodox church in riverside which is a fairly new orthodox church but beautifully appointed some of you may be familiar with father john trenham who is the senior pastor there and uh or the head priest as he calls himself and um yeah there you go and and we we have been warmly welcomed and and father father josei was quite uh pleased that jonathan pageau would come to his church and show a bunch of our conference attenders around in um in his church we'll do that on sunday afternoon the bus would leave at 1 30 and probably be back around four or so thereabouts okay so this will in in thunder bay jonathan pageau gave us a an introduction to iconography talked about the right hand and the left hand this will this will be the opportunity to go into an orthodox church and i'm i'm very much looking forward to this because i mean i could walk in this building and i could see things and have thoughts but to have jonathan um do ladies need to wear head coverings jon van donk um i don't know about that i think so but i know that the men will not be permitted to have head covering and also will not be permitted to wear shorts they actually provide uh sweats there for people who are non-compliant but you will not be permitted into the sanctuary uh without um meeting their their uh their um constraints requirements for access into the sacred place okay it's a sacred place for them okay so and i'm i'm very much looking forward to i'm very much looking for our father eric are you going to make it to this one um we'll see let's let's quick on the draw right now yeah yeah yeah father eric was and father eric i talked about how you got um rained out oh good oh oh we've got someone coming into the stream hey there hey there cad yeah uh so i was wondering are you going to have a documentary crew there at all doing anything yes and we're going to hold that close to the vest um for a long long time probably longer than um than the uh the german festival crew did to make sure that nobody will be tempted to not come to the conference because they'll be able to see uh the content on video shortly thereafter that's not happening um well not just that though but i mean will there will they be documenting say maybe even stuff not just the speakers but like the event the event oh oh oh i'll be talking to justin uh on tuesday i'll ask him about that yeah good idea think about it you know something where it's like because the way it'd be really cool if you could capture the hype that we feel right now um i know that'd be really hard to do but something like that so yeah how do you like my tile i've done here that that tile's looking good there chad will you be wearing that mask when you do paintball for jesus no i i i was i'll probably bring it but like when i went to the chicago event i didn't bring it i just i'm not gonna you know but maybe i don't know if something happens for for chits and giggles maybe i'll bring it but other than that i have to still pack a tent and a sleeping bag and get that on a plane and possibly a guitar and so i don't know if if that's possible yeah all right otherwise i don't need much clothes i just need like two pairs of pants and a couple shirts and i'll be fine one pair of underwear one pair of socks maybe sandals yeah people will love camping with you so no i just wanted to say thank you uh john and of course paul but john you've really done you you really all did yourself man i'm really i'm really grateful for you and i want you to know that and i wish that this mask wasn't on so i can just tell you that in a way that's more sincere so i hear it in your voice so it's all good all right wonderful thank you dad yeah now now oops wrong wrong one we already had that one um uh where is it will the will the will the conference produce videos like thunder bay did in terms of after we plan on recording everything okay all right good good um ontario does is a solid connection on southwest that's i usually when i fly into ontario i usually fly in there on southwest um just looking for any other comments or questions in the chat um to quote natalie wood chino why chino chino has a they chino gets a hard time from people sometimes but um chino's lovely chino's lovely is the question why chino a serious question i don't know i well you might as well answer it that's where i'm at there you go my church is there yeah the venue the venue was readily available yeah i'm sure given the proliferation of cell phones there will be other um there will be other um videos flying around and again we'll uh we'll get together hopefully we'll get together a discord server for this so that people can what's one of the things that happened at thunder bay people were able to share photographs and all sorts of things on the discord server it's really nice way to to share things um documentary folks on will require a press pass through me all right so see grim gris for your press pass um camping with the homeless well uh that someday if we do a conference at living stones there might be camping with the homeless yeah that'd be so cool because you have the space for quite a lot of camping on that campus we have the same space but for some reason the facilities committee would not let us use that space yeah for camping um we don't we currently don't have space for camping because we have all these fallen trees in that space but lord willing they will be removed at some point um grim gris says jesus ain't with prostitutes have 27 more slots to fill there you go gris um uh chad says if people want to send me videos of their experience i will make a documentary so we could have multiple documentaries made in due time all right um i was praying i love that is pvk going to baptize grim gris after the event um in the christian reform church we baptize people into church membership so gris you move to sacramento i'll be happy to baptize you if you haven't been baptized already we don't christian reform church does not do rebaptism and apparently i made a comment about that on the orthodox church and i got an email from a orthodox priest that says this question about rebaptism in the orthodox church is a hot topic so that was a very interesting thing all right okay anything else that we need to cover any more questions in the comments otherwise um we will continue this conversation we'll continue the planning like i said tickets are tickets are available right now online in the notes below and again be sure to buy the paintball for jesus tickets with the um right away when you purchase the tickets that's and the pizza that's pretty important and the pizza you buy you get that all together i'm just looking for here's the link to i'll just put that back in the comment here's the link again to the event for those of you who have difficulty finding it um all right are we done john yeah i can't think of anything in particular that we should add um i'm hoping that the uh the musical uh band that's going to gather at the campground will practice enough that they can make an appearance later at the conference so that would be good that would be good that would be good all right very good well and then perhaps we should land the plane if there's nothing else we can think of and no other questions in the group um so thank you one love