https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=C6thkbOqIJg

 Hi, this is Paul and I am back again with my good friend John Van Donk. Now some of you have been around the channel a while know that John has been a regular face and presence with me in this channel. John actually, and I've got a few previous videos with John and I think I made a playlist of my videos with John. And if I haven't, then I will for this one. But John was quite instrumental in some of this whole thing happening. And a lot of this actually has a lot to do with John's story, some of which he told, especially in our first video. John's also a good writer and he sometimes gets articles into the banner, which is the monthly periodical of the Christian Reformed Church. John is a former minister in the Christian Reformed Church. And so I first met John on this little listserv called CRC Voices. Voices is a little listserv, which for those of you who are too young to know, is an old social media on the internet where basically you send an email to a listserv and everybody who signs up for this listserv gets that email. One of the things that I've discovered over my time on the internet is that different social networks afford different layers of community. And CRC Voices actually was started by a Calvin College professor named Don Waltheis, who years, this is, early days of the internet started this and it had, the listserv had kind of a wild history. Some preachers went on there and said things they shouldn't have and got into real trouble in their local churches and denominational officials would be on there. And it's all sort of settled down now into what might resemble something of a church similar to Living Stones, mostly older people, sort of a dying little community. But I had been active on that group for a number of years. That's where I'd met Rod Huguen and other individuals who shown up on this channel. And then one day John Van Donk appears in this group. Every now and then new people pop in. And John was very interesting to me. I didn't quite know what he was about because there too you get this little low resolution view of who the person is. And John had been on the Camino, which is a pilgrimage in Europe. And a good friend of mine who was, it was sort of a new age professor at the at Sac State College here in sociology had also been on the Camino with his son. And I thought, well, this is, this is rather strange. I've never seen this former Christian reform minister out there doing things like this. Maybe some of that has to do why he's former and not a present Christian reform minister. Not just simply because of his age. And so, and I very quickly found John to be a very interesting conversation partner on Voices. He brought a lot of fresh ideas. Some of them I knew weren't necessarily ascendant or popular within the Christian Reformed Church, but John was kind of a free thinker. And then of course I bumped into Jordan Peterson and started talking about, before I ever started a YouTube channel, I was talking about Jordan Peterson on CRC Voices. And John really bit into that. And then when I started my channel, John was very interested in that. And right away he was at me saying, you should start a meetup. And I thought, and John is a schemer. He, once you become his friend, he soon has plans for your life. And he's a Dutchman. And if there's something you want to know about, he's a real Dutchman, unlike me. I've never been to the Netherlands, but John was born there. And again, you can go back and listen to the first conversation we had. And John is a real Dutchman. And the thing you have to know about Dutchmen are that they are very industrious, determined people. And if such a people would wrest land from the sea, be wary in your relationships with such people, because they will not give up. And if you're willing to outweigh the sea, you're a very determined person indeed. And John is such a person. So John has had various schemes for my life. And one of the schemes was the meetup. Another one of the schemes was the tour that we did. We only got to do half of the tour. Of course, very quickly, John met Job, who is also from the Netherlands, and driving with those two, those two speak Dutch back and forth, and very much leave me and Rod Huguen out of it. But one of the interesting things I found out about John was that John had for a long time, partly, John has a very interesting story, because on one hand, he's sort of an outcast and a misfit, because he is a former minister in the Christian Reformed Church, not a retired minister, as the banner once erroneously noted, but he is retired. But he left the ministry before his retirement. And so he's got some free thinking ideas. But also he has a great deal of care and love for people, which was something of his pastoral heart, no doubt, when he was in the ministry. And he's also into storytelling. He had a very formative experience with the ministry of Richard Rohr, who is a Roman Catholic priest. And if you allow John, he will talk to you about Richard Rohr. And he's tried to colonize me numerous times with Richard Rohr, has so far been frustrated, but remember what I said about Dutchmen in the sea. So John continues his determined efforts. He wanted me to give an introduction, and this is way more of an introduction than I'm sure he was counting on. But that doesn't surprise him, because John knows me fairly well after all the time we've spent together. But John had started a group of competitive storytelling, similar to the moth. And now when he had showed his determination to the people of the moth, and they told him that Chino, California is an unworthy backwater for their fine establishment, John said, nuts to you, I'll start my own. And so he did with another friend. And so the DNA of the meetups that we've been doing, John has very much been a part of that. He's been very interested in that. And although John is in fact a faithful and loyal and well established member of Crosspoint Chino, California, he also has this love for helping people have productive and fruitful conversations with one another and building community in some ways just next to the church space. And those of you who have been following the estuary conversation will notice that, boy, that's sort of like estuary, what Paul has been talking about. And so John and I have been working on this for quite a while. And in fact, before I had my woodshed video, John was developing for his church a program he called Conversations on the Edge. And I thought that was a good name. And in fact, his church has really rallied around John and the senior pastor has been enthusiastic about this. And the staff has allocated some time and resources to it. And so John was quite enthusiastic about this. Unfortunately, COVID struck. And so it was sort of waiting for COVID to lift because it's hard to have face to face conversations in the midst of COVID right now. But then John heard my estuary video and has been excited about that. And so John has really been, a lot of people have wanted to talk to me about estuary. And I keep telling them that, notice I'm not starting the estuary. I am trying to inspire people to start estuaries, to start instantiations of estuary like efforts. And as I think we'll talk about today, I had a little meeting with some of the stakeholders of what used to be called the Sacramento Jordan Peterson Meetup. We're going to change the name to the Sacramento Bridges of Meaning group or meetup or something. It's not fully noted. But we were talking about that yesterday and talked about the variety and diversity of estuaries that will be. And I would assert that every estuary will be unique in its own way, just like every estuary on the planet is. And actually, Joey's idea of bridges works out quite well with respect to estuaries, because most of the time if you have an estuary, you're going to have a bridge. And so we've got a lot of cross-fertilization things happening here. Now, John had a whole introduction written for me here, which he likes to do because unlike me, who usually likes to come in and just kind of play it by ear, John likes a script. And I know there's a good number of you who've been following the estuary conversation, and a good number of you have been like, I wish Paul had a script. I wish Paul had a few more things written down. I wish Paul had more clarity on this so that, and I would say so that what, so you can feel a little more comfortable so you can know what the program is moving forward so that you can invest in this because you're worried about investing in something you don't want to invest in. I'm not here to reassure you tremendously today, but what has been happening in my continual conversations about estuary, I had no idea what unleashing just one little word into the world would do, especially a word that is common in the English language that everybody should know about if they know anything about biology. Here's where we're at. So John wants to talk to me about estuary. And in many ways, John is one of the, if estuary ever becomes a movement that is named with estuary on it, John deserves at least partial credit for this whole thing. And part of why I'm a little reticent to set down a lot of this is estuary, this is how it will go, is because currently there are three or four, I would say, estuary type things in development around the U.S. and Canada. And there are a dozen or so things that I would categorize as estuary-like that started almost from the beginning of my channel and have been going ever since. And so I'm quite free with the category, but in all fairness, to many of you who have wanted to nail me down in some ways or another, it is important to be able to say this is estuary, this isn't estuary. And again, I very seldom, if you listen to me, use, in fact, probably never use the definite article with the estuary because I don't imagine estuary being one thing. I think of it much more as a movement. And my role in this, I hope, is to inspire and promote. And now John has a whole bunch of ideas to let loose on me and now you via my YouTube channel with respect to these ideas. Because as I said before, he is a schemer and he's also kind of a planner. And so his scheming has plans. And I'm sure he'll continue to let me know about how I fit into his schemes as we go forward. So, John, there's your introduction and probably more than what you were counting on. But welcome to the channel once again. Well, thank you, Paul. This was really, yes, way more than I had bargained for. But perhaps a good jumping point because I so totally agree with you that estuary cannot be a uniform, one size fits all kind of thing. And yet I'm thinking that maybe of the experiences that we've together had in trying to set up conversations on the edge, we may have learned a few things that may be applicable to other people who are trying to initiate any kind of an effort like this. I think that you're right in that in some ways some of this is going to sort of emerge organically in the right places at the right time. But some of us who are a little bit more intentional about, okay, well, what must one do to initiate any activity at all that could perhaps fall under the umbrella of estuary? I think that's probably how I would say this. Okay. Okay. Yeah. So, I have to begin, John. I have your sheet here, but I haven't had a chance to read it. So let's jump in. Well, there are a couple of categories. There is the host, and then there is the space, and then there is the protocol. And protocol is a highly technical term in this context. We'll get to that in a minute. And then there is what can go wrong in an estuary. Here's part of the thing that I'm really noticing is that when I did my Big Five personality profile, I am very low on neuroticism. And I think part of what I'm bumping into is that I'm very low on neuroticism, and just about everybody else is higher than I am. So a lot of people are looking at me and they're saying, do you know how many things can go wrong? I say, yeah. They're like, no, really. Well, yeah, but I come at those things more in the sense of, okay, can we anticipate some things in order to build a levee somewhere and maybe do a little dredging somewhere? Okay. But anyway, we'll get to that. And then there is, of course, the whole celebrity concept and the status idea. You have basically what you've done is you have combined your passion for entering into that very fruitful biosphere, the estuary, but you don't walk in there as an old Dutchman in rubber boots. No, you kind of descended upon it in a helicopter with a bodyguard. And you came as a celebrity, you came as a person who can rattle some cages and make some noise. And you've made plenty of noise already. And all of your subscribers are here to testify that you know how to make noise. And it's a good thing. In this particular context, it's a good thing. The question is, how can we capitalize on that noise that you make and perhaps scare away some monsters or some birds that don't belong in the estuary? And so, yeah, let's start with the host. And so basically ask the question, and I think I mentioned to you before we started recording this, I don't have a whole lot of answers. I just want to lay out a little kind of an outline of how we might converse about this within these parameters. But I'm asking the question, what sort of leadership is necessary or helpful in order to be able to create an estuary-like space? And where should that space be? So in your situation, you embody the connection between the estuary and the church. It's one and the same person. But that's not true everywhere. And for example, in my situation, I am not the senior pastor of Crosspoint Church. And so a lot of it depended on the kind of relationship that I have been able to build with the senior pastor of Crosspoint Church so that he would trust me to do this weird thing. And you should probably mention what you sent me before we started recording, because that is really cool. You're going to have to talk about that at some point somewhere. Oh, yes. Yes. On Twitter this morning, let's see. Let me see if I can pull this up. I got a wonderful notification from... And why isn't Twitter working on my browser right now? Okay, well, my blog is working, so I can go to it from there. I got a wonderful notification from the author of this piece. And this individual... Let me pull up his... Still waiting on better internet here at the church. Which is necessary. Blog by Kale Zeldin, who I didn't know who he is. And he has a blog, 1P5, or First Peter, Rebuilding Catholic Culture, Restoring Catholic Tradition. He wrote and he tweeted me and he said, I was thinking of you when I wrote this, which was a tremendous compliment. And rightly so. I... Things are broken, we need to upgrade our sense making apparatus. He didn't name me in the piece, but he talked about the IDW. And here was, I think, a wonderful example of a loyal, faithful, believing Roman Catholic individual who recognizes that there needs to be a space for some sense making, as rebel wisdom would call it. Or as Eric or Brett Weinstein would call it. And it's... I'll post a link to this in the notes here. And if I don't, you just comment in the comments that, Paul, you forgot to post that, which is often happens, because I'm not a control freak like John Van Dunk, and I forget things like that. But it's just such a penetrating, searching blog post about this man who loves his church and is... He's sorrowful to see it flounder in our world. And as a Christian reform minister, I could, if I had the gifts that this individual has, he... It's just such an honest, loving, yet painful piece. And in many ways, in listening to people talk about estuary or an estuary, I hear... I often hear them, quite rightly, using some of my metaphors, some of my metaphors with respect to, well, the church has it all together, and so this flows out. But I think, actually, churches need to have estuaries in order to pursue their mission. And some have noted that, in some ways, my estuary is a little analogous to Jonathan Peugeot's narthex. A church needs to have a narthex. Now, in the Protestant church, we call it a fellowship hall or some of those type things. But it's... And to get back to John's point here about a host, some will, if in fact this estuary concept goes anywhere, some of what I'm using to incentivize churches are that you're dying anyway, you might as well try something. But that, in other ways, initiates them taking off on the wrong foot. Because if they wade into this space thinking, we're going to start this evangelization program, and so we're going to lure pagans into our barrel, and then we're going to shoot them as fish. I would say that your fish are going to jump out of the barrel pretty darn fast, and you won't hit them anyway. So this is not what this is about. This is about honest, good faith conversations, relationships, and I will have to tell you that I have grown and learned at least as much... I have received at least as much as I have given in terms of my YouTube channel and my efforts. And I don't know... And I don't know... Some of you might say, well, Paul has... I do not feel in any way that I have lost faith. I feel like I have grown in the faith, and I've said it many times on my channel. I believe I am more certain of the resurrection of Jesus Christ because of everything I've done in the last two and a half, three years than if I had not done it. I would assert that my faith is in fact stronger, and in some ways perhaps more refined and more orthodox because part of what has come into this estuary has been big O orthodox Christians and Roman Catholic Christians and Christians that are a little off the bubble like John Van Dong who are making noise in some areas. And so hosting is vitally important in something like this. And I can imagine a hundred ways in which the wrong host will mess this up. Part of my low in neuroticism, anxiety-free living is the fact that such an estuary likely will not take off because, you know, and if a church wants to start an evangelistic program, more power to them. I've got absolutely no complaints with that. Part of my motivation for this is because the church is so bad at evangelism and so bad at exactly the kind of evangelism that will reach some of the people I most care about who are honest, intelligent, truth-seeking individuals that at this point in time might identify as atheist or agnostic or some other category. And what I find many of them are hungering for is conversations about all the most important sorts of things we should be talking about, which again Jordan Peterson sort of became a lightning rod and attracted all of these people to himself. And so that was our starting point. But absolutely. So what sort of leadership is necessary and helpful? I think in some ways, people who have already started this journey on their own. And it's similar to that piece written by Kale that he is, you know, he loves his church. He wants the best for his church. He wants to see it flourish. And it isn't. And he's seeing things out there in the sea and says, my church needs to know those waters. And some of what's in those waters need to help the church. And I would argue now, if I say the word Kiperian to John Van Donkel, smile, because that's a cause of all sorts of things. But part of what Abraham Kuyper and his strangeness promoters was the idea of common grace. And that would it be, would we be wrong in thinking that God has graced this world with things for the benefit of the church? I don't think that's a heretical idea at all, frankly. I think it is all for Christ and his church, as the Bible says. So pastors, you know, and so penetrating about this piece, again, which I really have to like now, what was so penetrating about this piece is towards the end, he had this comment about that the church needs to be more Thomistic. And what he meant by that is something a little different. I humbly submit St. Thomas was our model here. We need to imitate him. And by this, I do not again mean that we should read the Summa more. There are worse ways to spend an afternoon, of course. But instead, we should look to him as a model of intellectual conduct. Do we have any record of Thomas scoffing at a thinker or a source because it was pagan or Jewish or wrong? Of course we don't. Thomas read wisely and generously. And in fact, when I read that book, Fatal Discord, which is ironic, giving her discord servers, Fatal Discord about Luther and Erasmus, it was noted that before Thomas, the newly introduced works of Aristotle to the Western Church were banned by the church. And here Thomas comes along and takes these banned works, integrates them, and it basically becomes the foundation for the Roman Catholic Church for the next few hundred years, even though Luther, of course, well, that's not called anything. So anyway, yes, we need the right kinds of hosts. And in my opinion, what we've been doing actually by this YouTube channel and with the bridges of meeting discord and with the meetups that we've been doing is we are, in fact, I think, attracting the right kind of people. And in the process, part of what I want to do, I was having this talk with Joey and Tyler and Rick yesterday. I said, you know, we might not be expanding great guns in terms of numbers, but from what I see from from Jeff and Sherry and Joey and and Tyler and how many people in our group and Joe, I mean, look at Joe. We have been developing the leaders for this movement, and I would rather go slow at first and develop that cadre of trusted leaders so that when the next growth spurt happens, we have the leaders who can be the hosts and create the relational fabric for that next level of growth. One of the things you learn as a pastor, and even though Living Stones has not had very big or many growth spurts, we have had we have had a few growth comes in spurts. And if you really want to develop a strong movement or community when you're not in a growth phase, be in a building phase. So build those leaders and get ready for the next growth phase. And so even though right now with Jordan Peterson's absence and I mean, my YouTube channel hasn't grown great guns. I see this as a building phase because what we are doing is in fact, even though we don't have a list of attributes right now, what we have been doing, just as Jordan Peterson talks about in the first biblical series, we are watching each other talk. And we are getting a sense of what's in, what's out. And we're actually programming each other to, okay, so I meet with Vaush. And before I meet with Vaush, the distributor sends me an email says, don't talk to him because you know, he's rabid and he'll blow up. Well, okay, well, way to notice that. Good. I'll be wary of that. But then when I talk to Vaush, it comes out well. And so what we're doing with all of these conversations, even though they might not get thousands and thousands of views, is we are building the leadership of the community. And just like- And the vocabulary. And the vocabulary. And just like, you know, people will ask me, my father was a terrible, my father was completely non-direct in his mentoring of me. He seldom told me what to do. But now at this age of my life, I realize my father mentored me deeply just by being who he was. And so what I have from my father in me, I've got some of my mother too, but what I have in me from them, I have because of watching and absorbing and sort of the community aspects of formation. And what I've seen happen in the estuaries that have emerged so far, at least the estuaries and the vocabulary-like structures has in fact been this. So there's a long speech for you, John. Yeah. Well, but we're not quite done with that yet because I think that it would be extraordinarily helpful for any aspiring leader in any estuary is to be very cognizant of and understand at a deep personal level the difference between sense-making, as is in the article that you are quoting, sense-making and evangelism. Those are two different postures and they're two different purposes. And we may think, and it is really tempting to think that if we simply evangelize people to join with our tribe and learn our language, then the sense-making will take care of itself. Because after all, this always made sense to me as long as I've been around. Yeah, but the truth of the matter is that that group for whom it all makes sense is shrinking rapidly. And so now we're dealing with a whole different population for whom it all doesn't make sense. And so sense-making is taking on a whole new urgency and priority. But for the pastor who is more concerned about cultivating the walls of the walled garden and how to welcome people in on his own terms, that may not be the posture which is going to enrich life in the estuary. So let me make a comment about that a second because one of the things that I've learned in terms of getting feedback from people is I see Living Stones Online and Estuary as two very different things. Now obviously because both are coming from me, there will be overlap. But Living Stones Online is within the walled garden. And in that walled garden, I unapologetically do what is appropriate within the walled garden. And Estuary is a different place for different things and different ways. And so go ahead. But we can easily dismiss that relationship by saying, well for Paul, it is united in the one person. But that doesn't solve anything about the relationship between church and estuary because all it really means is you're a weird guy. So no, I mean, Well that's my point. They'll understand Dutch humor now. So because people don't understand why I laugh. I always get these negative comments. He laughs so condescendingly and dismissively. It's like, I don't think you understand the Dutch. No, but my point is that, okay, so if it is appropriate and valuable and necessary to cultivate the walled garden and to apply professional skills there and to be intellectually prepared for that task. Okay, so now is there a whole unique set of skills and gifts and aptitudes necessary to cultivate the estuary? And if so, what then will be the relationship between the estuary and the church? Because that notion of conversations on the edge, which was our original model, nevertheless suggests a center. You can't have no conversations on the edge if there is no center. So there is no such thing as an outer court unless there is an inner court and a holy of holies. So these spatial relationships are all kind of, I think that Jonathan Peugeot could run a number on us here and run circles around us when we're talking about the symbolism of space. But nevertheless, the spatial relationship between living stones on line over here and estuary over here, even though it is embodied in the one person, which is you, there is a different kind of relationship between those two things, which you may not be terribly inclined to articulate, because then you have to go into your soul and say, now I'm operating as the, and now I'm operating as the, and where that meets in my head somehow is a mystery. And that's all good and well, but the rest of us who do not have that same, we are not the center of the universe like you are, we have to figure out what is what and how does it relate to one another. And so I personally found that as far as the qualifications of a host, I actually, I raised the question and the question will come up again, is some form of credibility within the church necessary to be a good host in the estuary? Let's talk about that first. Okay. One of the surprises for me in this movement has been how insistent many of the atheists and non-church stakeholders in this have been insisting on a relationship with churches. I've been quite a bit more reticent about that because I know the mess that our churches and I know how messy things can get in terms of relationships with churches. But I think you're quite right that in a sense, I know that mess and I know that relationship, but that is a fixed point for me and it's pretty fixed. And so I'm quite free with this, but a number of others who have not been in any way related to church say a part of this has been a fixed point and a fixed relationship with a congregation. That came up yesterday in my meeting with Tyler and Joey and Rick because Tyler and Joey, Tyler really wanted to sit down and talk through some of this estuary stuff too because the conversation has kind of been blowing up on the Discord server. And so I have to listen to them and learn from them and maybe push away some of my own biases because a lot of my talk has been towards pastors and saying, I'd like to see you consider this and lean into this because even while I think part of what some of the unchurched and atheist friends have noted, part of what obviously I brought to this effort was, okay here I had a space that we could use at least pre-COVID. And your credentials. My credentials. But churches actually, whatever you think of their doctrine, churches that are effective and can actually go through time usually have built up a whole bunch of skills that actually are extremely useful in this. And again, I've seen that churches and church people in the Jordan Peterson meetup space have created some of the healthiest, most enduring, and I use healthy in that sense, these groups have been able to endure partly because the hosts understand small groups. Okay, this number, you know, just in terms of the numbers, in terms of the dynamics, in terms of, because it's all this learned stuff about when to sort of, how to sort of quiet someone down who's talking too much and maybe invite others to say more. And it's the subtle management of the conversation. Small group leadership skills. And churches have those in abundance. Yes. Churches have a lot of the skills needed to maintain and grow communities because again, whatever you think of the doctrinal aspect or the supernatural ideas, churches have those skills and churches have infrastructure and churches have those values. And so churches actually have a lot to offer this space. And sometimes when I talk to people who are a little further out and get a little allergic to church and I watch them do things, I think, yeah, you're not going to last because you, anybody, even with just these skills, watching what you're doing, probably knows you're going to fail for, not because your ideas are wrong or because you're stupid or insincere or any of those reasons, just because there's a certain mechanical knowledge to human community that churches promote and collect and foster. Now, back to space, because now we're talking about, okay, where are we going to do this in relation to church? So these things are all totally integrated because when I say, okay, what are the necessary qualifications of a host? Some of those skills are useful, but we have to acknowledge and admit to one another that they are not exclusive to the church. I mean, there are people with small group management skills, community organizers, of the vein of business communities. Business facilitators. Yes, they have that skill set. So then I would repeat the question in that sense. And then also in relationship to the space, could this equally easily happen adjacent to a mosque or a Buddhist community or a secular humanist worship service as they have begun to sprout up in various parts of the country and in Canada? And so my question again is, is there something unique about churches offering this estuary space as though living water can only come through the church into the ocean and flow towards the ocean? Or is common grace really so wide and so deep that it flows even around the church to the ocean and estuaries can emerge or be created or be found apart from the church? My Jordan Peterson meetup group has never met at Crosspoint Church. We meet in the, or used to meet before COVID, in the clubhouse of the senior park where I live, and it's a wonderful facility. You've been there. You know how perfectly suited it is. If we, I had a meeting at church this morning, if we meet at our church, we have very, very hard and uncomfortable chairs, which we place in a circle, and everybody wishes that they could go to the bar shortly thereafter. But at the clubhouse, there is comfortable chairs that almost invite lingering conversations. And so this is strictly speaking about the space now, and that space would, COVID notwithstanding, would continue to be available. And so yeah, I mean, is a person of goodwill out there listening to this video, is a person of goodwill bound to have to associate him or herself with the church to find the space there, or would it be better to find the space there, as your meetup guys would say, yes, it would be better to do it at the church, as opposed to some other space. And is a church familiar host better than a non-church familiar host that has learned his small group skills elsewhere? Speak to that, please. I wouldn't say a church familiar, there's, human beings are so complex, I would hate to make a generalization. There are a number of non-Christian hosts for groups like this that are exceptional in their skill and ability to create. So I, in terms of this movement, I wouldn't say the host must be a Christian, I'll say it that way. The space question, it's interesting, that least in the context that I've lived in, so I've lived my whole life, I haven't lived my whole life in the United States, but I have lived my whole life in the West. In my experience, that, you know, it's usually churches or sometimes there are community centers, I mean, your community clubhouse is a good example, but I think that's a good example. Clubhouse is a good example, but churches or colleges, there's, as society gets more efficient, some of the fringe of society that things can grow on gets less strict, and so people are having a hard time finding space in places other than churches. You used a room in a restaurant, a back room in a restaurant, sometimes restaurants have party rooms or meeting rooms, those can be used, but I think especially in the West where most of my audience is, churches are predominantly going to be the available space. You know, and I, we're looking at our meetup and in conjunction with the church are going to renovate a room and make two rooms into one larger room to give us some more different size rooms available at our church facility, partly for this effort. The part, but you know, when I, there's a steady stream of church plants that approach me looking for space, and even as having been involved in church planting before, finding space even for churches is increasingly difficult in our culture. It used to be that schools would rent to churches. In many places, schools are saying no to that now, which to me is just really rather silly because I'm sure the school could use the income, and they're not doing anything on Sunday with their facility generally, but yeah, those are hard questions, and some of those questions I'd rather not pontificate upon until I get some more data based on experience. Yeah, very good, but it is a nice transition and segue then to the mental space inside the hosts, and I want to give credit here to, because Ryan Bennett did a super job of talking to the church of talking about what makes the IDW the IDW, and we've already agreed in other, you've already mentioned it in other conversations, your conversation with Andre with the banks was very much to the point there that if there is not the kind of mental space and mental attitude, I mean you often refer to yourself as high in openness, but there's actually a little bit more than that, and so I wonder if this might be a good opportunity to, I'll just list them here, the estuary protocol as opposed to the estuary boundaries and organization, and the same with the players, and Ryan of course talked about the players in the intellectual dark web as not being very significant, but the thing that was the common denominator is that they all had an appreciation for the IDW protocol, and then he outlined the protocol, so I wrote it down as you have it in front of you right now, so there's mutual respect, there's openness, there's the ability to listen, and the willingness to first fully understand before judging or critiquing, and that requires sometimes having to ask for clarification, what do you mean by that, and we've all heard Jordan Peterson do that so well, and then Ryan comes up with this little gem, when you pursue truth instead of power, you are in the IDW or in the estuary, when you favor understanding over judgment, you are in the estuary, and when you value ideas more than identity, you are in the estuary, and so then you know this is all good and well, and we've all heard it in various sources, but the additional question is can the protocol inherent in and necessary for estuary be taught, and if so where and by whom, and Andrea with the bangs complained that the guys in the IDW do not do a great job of empowering the grassroots to carry the flag, but then I ask you today, is there a role for Paul Van der Kley in laying the groundwork for how to promote estuary protocol and teach it in a way other than the amazing example that you already show, and it should escape no one's attention that you have been teaching for a long time strictly by modeling it all for our very eyes to see, I'm not suggesting that you haven't been doing it, but on the other hand there are some things that the local people need to know and learn if they are going to be effective hosts of a local instantiation of estuary on the ground in a town. Well there is caught and taught and we have been relying on caught, and that is fair and I like that, I like that partly because it takes a while and for Vickie really I think articulated this well in his awakening from the meaning crisis. Once we get into the taught phase, it's tricky because there is a wisdom embodied in the caught phase that even those who are practicing it cannot necessarily distill into little if then statements. What would be the curriculum? What would be the curriculum? And actually one of the ideas that I have because there has been so much response saying I want to be involved in your estuary and it's like how am I going to do this? You are already listening to my channel so you already are, there are various ways people can, one of the beauties about the bridges of meaning discord was that gave people a concrete way to participate, but by its very nature discord servers are not for everyone by no means, and I think there is even a capacity question with a discord server, the degree to which that type of technology which we have used for purposes other than what it was created, I think in some ways we might be at the limits of some of that. Joey I think was quite right yesterday in saying he sort of watches gamer culture to learn how some of these technologies can be used for other things and my channel sort of followed on that in some ways I started out twitching Jordan Peterson, but you know you're right and I like Ryan Bennett's articulations there and there does need to be more of that and people are pushing for more of that and I want to give it but part of my experience in church has been that as a culture we are we are overly optimistic in what the intentional propositional can produce. Oh very good point, very good point yes and that may well have been partly behind the demise of churches in the minds of many, information overload, catechism overload, strict propositional truth overload and that's why perhaps now and let's put in a plug where it's deserved perhaps that's why now the orthodox church which is not so propositional content driven, the one church in the whole world where the most important catechetical line is it's a mystery and we don't know. I mean that's pretty cool when you think of it and but yeah I mean that's kind of where people are drawn right now and so I mean I know that I'm arguing against my own desire for some curriculum yeah but I agree with you in that it's easy to kill the thing with too much stratification. Well and the as a pastor one of the things that I one of the things that I began to learn as a pastor was people who are in a certain degree of trouble or there's a crisis or there's a conflict and they come to me and first they say pastor what should I do? Like they're looking for advice I usually don't like giving a lot of advice again learned that from my father but if you insist here and in the majority of cases they don't listen they don't follow it it's not there you know it is it is it doesn't help every now and there's a very teachable person who is humble and they'll take it and they'll take it to heart and maybe it will maybe it won't work depending on the quality of advice but they can actually accept advice the vast majority of people and I think this is a product of the way we've done education as a culture the way we do propaganda as a culture the vast majority of people imagine themselves to be far more direct and in and in control of themselves than they actually are and my experience has been again and again you know I would often have it where people would come to me and they're usually they're usually frustrated and sometimes angry with me because I haven't been sufficiently direct either in my preaching or in a particular conflict or in a particular circumstance and so they finally get fed up with me and they corner me and they have me alone and they're saying you need to be more direct and I say okay shall I start with you then they kind of pull back well what do you mean well I have some I can be if if if direct is what you want let's begin with you because I have some direct thoughts about your conduct and your behaviors and where I think you could do better so how do you like this load and in almost every situation I want you to be direct with them oh okay well if if you think that's so important why don't you try that I have tried it and it doesn't work really but if you do it it will work really I've fallen for that trap numerous times and so on one hand I very much agree that I tend to prioritize caught overtaught sometimes I do need to be a little bit more direct but I want you to understand and I think you do understand because I know you but I want those listening to understand why that I've got some real I've got some real questions about the efficacy of the talk tool even though I have a YouTube channel where I'm doing a ton of teaching yak yak yak yak yak yak yak so there's that's those are my thoughts on that yeah well and and and super legit and I I I maybe you noticed that I put some of this stuff out there as a foil so that you know this there's some clarity about all of this and and yeah okay about space okay let's talk about space so we kind of established that it might be helpful for an estuary to be associated with a local church but then you say that every church should have an estuary and my question is every church can have an estuary want to speak to that well you know again it's the I I am not going to say that if you have a vision for an estuary like enterprise that you should wait for a church to come along to be a compatible partner with you again I think churches have a variety of skills that can be helpful but the the the I there are a lot of there and this came out quite clearly after the woodshed video there are a lot of people out there who were raised in churches and have internalized a desire for church and even a a guilt if they are not connected with a church that have for one reason or another simply experienced repeated frustration in trying to satisfy that desire and that sure some of that is on them you know I'm not going to let them off scott-free but some of that is on the church too and every single pastor is an individual um loved by God but broken and fallen um sons of Adam and daughters of Eve and church that you know these kinds of things can get super complicated and so I have a fair number of clergy who follow me um in you know in the U.S. Canada UK Australia and they also often I think part of the reason they were drawn to my channel is they they've had similar frustrations to what I've had but they they might not have had a church situation which was quite as conducive and free as the one that I have been blessed with and so I have talked and I've spoken with some clergy who have they would love nothing more than to do what I've done but they know they can't because of their church so it's for that reason that I value and would love I and when I talk to churches I'd say this is I think you should really look at this this is something you should have uh can every estuary have a church I don't know and I would you know part of this church planting ethos that I picked up in my ministry was a bias towards action so as long as something just lives in your head it's just living in your head and if you actually want to do something do something now um lots will fail but I and this is a this is a topic this is a question that came up with my conversation with Joey and Tyler too people are afraid of failure rightfully so if you fail at something you lose status let me tell you some of the blessings of failure once you've done it you kind of get used to the routine and the second time isn't quite so painful so you're willing to get up and fail again and again and again and now again for some people that failure is debilitating and I want to be sensitive to that John Van Donk and I we tend to wobble but we get back up up and get up to fail again but you know that's so so there's a persistence a bias towards action getting you know getting um coming to terms with your feel fear of failure and to say I might go out and I might try this and I might blow it spectacularly and a thousand now with my channel you know so I have 14 000 subscribers and maybe two or three thousand people might watch a video so let's say that there are 11 000 people out there in the world that say yeah I used to subscribe to Paul Vanderklaas channel but he's a failure he led me wrong and he's not going to accomplish anything and you know what I'm living with it yep no but I think that what you just did just now is you gave a nice handle to the person who feels a little bit inspired and a little encouraged and they have some meanderings going on in their head should they go talk to their pastor should they go find a space somewhere should they learn the mechanics of small group leadership and how that all works there are really good books about that on the market by the way and so yeah I mean but yeah in the end there is a totally real possibility of this whole thing failing spectacularly so that that is also yeah I want to squeeze in a I want to squeeze in a a I almost know where this conversation is going to end up or where this little segment is going to come up I want to talk about dykes and drag lines and especially I've been doing way too much LGBT talk lately to talk about dykes and drag no no no dams dams dams levies levies levies okay okay okay but I mean we were talking about our our mutual friend job and he he made every effort of killing this whole estuary thing right from the get-go when at the very beginning of COVID he showed up in our country here carrying he sent to me to my house two big boxes of of Dutch cookies called bachertjes yes those so then then he left because we weren't going to go on our trip and he left all those cookies at my house and and I took it took enormous self-restraint and the grace of God for me to not eat them too fast because they are delicious and I would have been dead by now and in no way involved in the estuary movement so there you have it so but but bachertjes is named after Bachran Bachran is dredging and Job van Achtenberg lives in the Dutch or maybe worldwide capital of building dredging equipment that they have shipyards that build phenomenally huge dredging equipment primarily to offset the consequences of our dam building which caused rivers to silt up and making navigation impossible for larger ships so then they have to call up Job's neighbor over there in Sliedrecht and say hey can you send me a drag line and a dredging tool that I can use to open up the flow of water again in this through this estuary because if it silt up it becomes a mess all of that to say is there anything that one could do to expedite the flow of water through an estuary is there anything useful about redirecting water is there anything useful about a little levy perhaps or perhaps I'm strictly sticking now with the metaphor of the estuary and the dredging equipment and I want Job to feel important so he needs to be part of this thing but yeah so you have a way of addressing estuaries your own estuary my estuary estuaries as such estuaries everywhere is there anything that you could say or do that would make a difference in how the silt gathers how the chaos interacts with each other how living creatures are formed and flourish and how monsters are kept at bay I think there needs to be some monsters I I don't know I don't know there's part of the power of this word was that it is so evocative and it produces so many productive metaphors but there is a limit there well you know there are times when well let me say it this way the the managers of the bridges of meaning discord have they do dredge I would say that because they as there's a group of moderators that sort of keep tabs on the discord every now and then there'll be a troll in there and they'll tolerate a little bit of trollish behavior but when they come to the conclusion that the troll is going to as potential to do a lot of damage in the estuary clogging things up that's right they will and and sometimes the clogging up comes from part of the reason I wanted to I announced living stones online even though I'm still working to roll both of these things out is because in our culture the Christians and their theological disputes can sort of dominate the estuary sometimes and so some of that I want you to go over you okay you got this you want to talk about the Trinity you want to talk about eschatology you want to talk about you know Protestant Catholic Orthodox Jew or at least the Orthodox the Christian go into the walled garden and have your conversations there keep that keep very good point keep the water flowing because you know if you're coming to bridges of meaning discord and yeah again that isn't for everyone but you discover that all we talk about here is all we do is debate the Trinity or universalism that those that those types of inter-bural theological conversations are better done within the walls and hopefully done well within the walls so that we don't have competed wall cities lobbying and you know in the west we've had long histories of that that that most of us can I think appreciate the fact that yes there's there's knowledge that comes from that so let's let's debate the ideas but let's um let's also remember Christ's prayer of unity so sometimes Christians have to be encouraged to okay I'm I'm I know you're really excited to have a place of lots of other articulate intelligent well-read people so that you can go to bat on your particular theological hobby horse we're going to have a room for that it's not going to be in the estuary I'd love for you to take that high resolution intricate theologically informed knowledge into the estuary and be able to topic right and be able to relate because a lot of these issues flew out of past estuaries almost every Christian orthodoxy arose as a response to a heresy and this has been one of the this is a this is a comment that regularly gets youtube comments when I mention it that the estuary is a place and I borrow this language from a friend where where one might entertain heresy and that that sounds very scary and this is why we have a walled garden and we have an estuary because in most cases I would assert you know if you read the gospels you don't have a fully fabricated Christology or Trinity in the gospels Jesus didn't some come down and by the way after I finished healing that man with the withered hand let me explicate my two natures let me just get this clear and not happen right and and and that that isn't to say that the two natures isn't important what it recognizes recognizes is that the debate about the two natures arose often because of some union of philosophy and theology that required the church to deal with these issues but those issues are just as dependent on the philosophical movement that is happening out there in the oceans as anything that came from the rain down into the walled garden and the water needs to flow out because again if your walled garden does not have a place and Jonathan Peugeot has this nicely in his little icon if it doesn't have a place to let the water out pretty soon your walled garden becomes a reservoir and a swamp and so you need to let the water out so if you want to have those theological debates go off into a different room but when you're in the estuary you're probably going to have to not only learn a little bit of dogma and doctrine which maybe in your tribal things and again tribes are important maybe in your tribal moments you want to demonstrate why the Roman Catholic tradition or the Orthodox tradition or the reformed tradition is superior to the other traditions and I don't have any problem with having those kinds of debates go do it but don't do it in the estuary why I'd love for you to say historically when did that you know with Calvinist the issue of of determinism or predestination or divine election these issues always come up and as as Richard Mueller emphasized the form that these came up with came up mostly in the 17th century not in the 16th century and my assertion is that probably for philosophical reasons so I would encourage all of the well-meaning theologians to actually read a little bit more history because if they can perhaps discover some of the philosophical historical context underpinnings they might be able to connect that actually to living breathing issues that are going on in the lives of people in the estuary that have learned none of the dogma or history or philosophy or philosophy but actually relates to their lives and in fact of course that's what pastors are supposed to do because pastors are supposed to take the dogma and help say this truth over here is applicable to your truth swimming out here in the ocean that's what pastors are supposed to do and pastors are actually not always too good with it so again this is part of the function of the estuary and part of what and as a Christian pastor I can say this more easily you two Christians you go over there because you're bothering some of the other fish and some of the other fish need to do some exploring and when they ask a question about this if you really learned your stuff over here I bet you'll have something that this fish will be interested in hearing wouldn't that be refreshing I have a short sentence that I came up with myself when I had a couple of beers around the swimming pool a couple days ago with some friends of mine in the middle of the day and they like to use the line whatever it is that your church is selling I'm not buying and I said to them how about you take this question serious what would you buy if we were selling it and that speaks to your thing about people taking a little deeper look at their own questions oftentimes people fail to explore and pursue their own questions and so maybe maybe we can redefine dredging dredging is getting deeper into the underlying dirt underneath the the water channel and and we should talk about historical analysis or historical review or simply historical awareness as the actual activity of dredging so if we're going to be doing any dredging at all in the estuary let it be to pursue historical context historical depth and historical origins so thank you for that I appreciate that was very well done I guess well one of the things that that I often noted with the IDW which perhaps its time has passed now but so you've got a you've got an economist and and eric weinstein you have a biologist and brett weinstein you have a celebrity atheist and sam harris you've got a psychologist and jordan peterson you had many of the disciplines they didn't have any historians and that was a that was a real weakness now historians are complicated actors especially in academia because the culture of academia encourages specialization and it's the same problem that we have in medicine now because everybody you can make a million dollars being a a heart surgeon or a brain surgeon or a plastic surgeon but if you're a you know if you're a general practitioner but what mostly we need are general practitioners and and you know actually I've been lately listening to a bunch of will durant's stuff lately and so his training was in philosophy but he wrote these huge long histories and of course some of this stuff is dated and he gets stuff wrong and that's true so if you're interested in history you should read some of the cutting-edge contemporary history about specific things but a broad problem part of the problem right now with history of course is that it's been severely discredited because the critical theory advocates will say that all history is somebody's version of history and so probably wrong so go ahead and try and live without go ahead and try and state your case that that it's all it's all racism and and patriarchy without writing without reading history so you're just I'm gonna take this on faith you know I mean there's just so much non-seriousness out there right now so if we are going to do any dredging at all or dam building or levee building we run the risk of what John McPhee writes about in the control of nature especially chapter one in atchafalaya which is an absolutely masterful description of the consequences of messing with nature just just a this is kind of an aside comment but I I mean if we're gonna try and and and flesh out this estuary concept that chapter is precisely about what happens when you try too aggressively to control what happens in the estuary and that's a fascinating book the part about the part about the Los Angeles Angeles crest mountains is even more interesting but but this is about the Mississippi River estuary and it's extremely interesting so for those who want more background about you know what actually happens in an estuary that adds an additional perspective and that then is my segue to celebrity because Paul you can draw a crowd we both know that when you show up in Chino attendance triples and that's why we organized the road trip we were going to go to all these places and Paul would show up and conversation would be lively and attendance would be increased and all kinds of new people would join our little group our little local estuary or our little meetup group and then we would Paul in his on his fourth missionary journey would go to the next location whether it be Salem or Portland or Seattle or Vancouver and we would have all these new plans of of Jordan Peterson meetup groups except that I also personally have the experience of having you show up at my meetup twice now or three times three times I've had you show up at my meetup three times now and the numbers were formidable it was amazing who all showed up when you announced your your participation and then you went home and so did all my all my new maybe if you shave your legs John why don't you try that yeah but you know what I'm talking about there is a sense in which all our estuary efforts um can in fact be influenced by you I have people show up at my meetup that occasionally say well the reason I'm here is because I was listening to Paul Van der Kley and and he mentioned this or that about you know your your your Jordan Peterson meetup group and I have your name listed on my meetup announcement so you know Paul Van der Kley will be there in spirit Paul Van der Kley will be there in spirit Paul Van der Kley will be in spirit Paul Van der Kley will be there in spirit Paul Van der Kley will be there in person so so yeah but I mean what do you think of that I mean how do you see yourself fit into this from that angle and that point of view well well obviously because to one degree or another my youtube channel has had a bit of reach and I you know I'm gratified by that I'm humbled by that and to the degree that that can work for building um building a movement and again I'm I'm I'm most gratified by you know when I lurk on the discord server and I see I see community being put together and when I when I see people getting together in healthy life-giving productive ways I think yeah that's that's worth my time and you know one of the one of the greatest compliments people can give you is when they start doing what you're doing after you because you've done it and you know these other little youtube channels that have started the randos meeting code mary um and others uh burn I love birds channel um you know I I obviously can't take full credit for any of that but I'm you know I they got a little bump because they talked to me and it's it's it's fun sometimes doing going to those channels because I don't watch everything in all those channels but I do go sometimes and check out comments and I notice comments from people who are no longer giving comments on my video and you know that's that's absolutely okay because in the in the end it does not matter um but you know paul vanderkley is incidental to this and and this I think is one of the blessings of being a christian because in a sense what we can do is we can say christ is the focus of this I am not and you see the apostle paul do that he says you know if peter versus paul versus apollo you know I'll have none of it because it is about christ and I think that's and and the church has taught that to me and the church actually rewards me for embodying it and not you know embodying the other and I think that's part of why that's part of what churches bring to this that the to to say okay so I completely understand if you've watched hours of my videos and I mean because I'm fans of people out there too and you know if Jordan Peterson shows up if he's able to do stuff you know I happily show up and and do that and you know it's it's great to meet with John Verbeke and and Jonathan Peugeot and how many others out there and so celebrity culture is real and I should admit I should make my better peace with it but there's a part of me in my christian background that says yeah you gotta really be careful with it for a number of reasons one of which is it is corrupting of character it it also sets up a dynamic that the higher and again you learn this as a pastor the bigger pedestal they put you on the bigger the fall when they kick it out from under you because part of the reason if they put you on a very high pedestal that's coming from them there's they have a need to have you there and so now suddenly when you disappoint or no longer fulfilling that need and and we watch this all the time with how many celebrities and and social media just makes it possible to become a little minor social media celebrity so you know I when when we do our our when we did our little trip and hopefully when we get to continue our little trip the goal of that and I'm very clear with the pastors and with the local leaders to say if if me showing up can can make and put a couple other cards in your virtual rolodex and can maybe you can have a key conversation with someone and maybe find a new leader and get three or four people around which you can create a community that's how I want to use whatever celebrity I have so that because in the end you know this is this is something about youtube channels too those of us who listen to a fair amount of youtube know you know I'm subscribed to over 300 channels on youtube how many youtube channels do I actually listen to well it all depends now I'm listening to this person a little more now this person a little more I mean that's sort of the way it goes with content creation and if if your ego is all tied up and locking people into listening to your channel all the time well you've got a you've got a god complex that is not going to take your soul in a very good place so you know we have to I think acknowledge celebrity culture make our peace with it but at the same time the focus needs to the value is locality more than screens and screens have an important part to play we're going to keep using screens but locality is the value because you know finally it's the people that you spend your life with that actually are the foundational relationships now and totally affirming that I nevertheless wonder if it wouldn't be possible talking about scheming and having a plan for your life if it wouldn't be possible and you've already told me several times why it might not be the wisest thing to do but I'm going to ask it anyway what would happen if you became and your youtube channel especially the anal the the estuary side of it became a clearing house for information about all local efforts towards estuary which means that if there's going to be an estuary directory anywhere why would it not be in the comment section of your youtube channel so that anytime you say something pertinent to estuary some kind of content something about how to organize it something about where or how or what you could direct people to the comment section and say you know this thing is happening throughout the country and perhaps throughout the world here is a list of all the local contact information of all the local estuaries and so so so this is kind of the kind of probably a bottom line question for you because it's easy for me to say what would you have to lose by doing that but I've never asked you that question seriously what could you lose by having some schmuck in podunk city um put his name submit his name to you hey put me on your estuary list and then and then it's there it's associated with your channel and somebody sees that and goes there and finds it to be uh a hell hole full of monsters in serious need of in serious need of dredging yes it's serious need of dredging or or a nuclear bomb or just clogged up with christians debating infra versus super lapsarianism exactly yeah yeah yeah yeah so so so so then the next question would be I mean I think we're both on the same page about this so then the next question would be is there a way to filter that is there a way to say that is there a way to say this estuary here is worthy of my advocacy and this estuary here is not I I think we have a lot of experience in working these kinds of questions now I have in fact um registered estuary hub.com and I'm going to check so I transitioned the church over to livingstonecrc.com if you go to livingstonecrc.org you'll find the old website on Squarespace so I'm going to see how many more months I have that I've already paid for so I'm probably going to take off livingstonecrc.org and point that to the new Tively webpage for the church and I might take that other Squarespace account and connect it with estuary.hub and create um you know create something what you've described now there's each of us has a personal network that we are willing to vouch for because of personal experience and relationship and that is defined and trusted by virtue of face-to-face experience conversation gut instinct all of those things and each of us as individuals are used to managing those lists by ourselves yes John Van Donk is a friend of mine John Van Donk yes do you do you know what he thinks of Richard Rohr yeah I do but he's still my friend and people get that okay people get that now what happens when you have a network which is beyond an individual trust relational network is you have a credentialing aspect to that network we have that in the Christian Reformed Church I'm a credentialed minister in the Christian Reformed Church which means that I am under a degree of accountability I invested with a degree of authority and this is a function of that beyond face-to-face network I think it is inevitable and important to do such a thing but that type of thing requires I think we started out talking about the building of the leadership um community and network I think that sort of thing requires that a lot of that work has been done because now quickly um I talked to Job and Job says you know I talked to this person over here and I think they should be in and I might not have I won't have any opportunity to get to know this person over there but I trust Job so because of Job I'll trust this other person so you set up these dominoes of accountability and relationship and reputation and so um yes and and we've talked about that with the bridges of meaning discord server and in some ways we've done something like that because we've established different sub-servers to assist different meetups and communities in different places and so I think that will continue to grow naturally but a a situation like that is both necessary but is necessary because things very quickly get beyond individual relationships but also hazardous because of like you said you have a and churches have lessons in this all the time because such and such happens in one church there's a moral failure or something or there's a fraud or something like that and suddenly the whole the whole group has a bad name because of this and so then churches just as in that piece we talked about this morning about the Roman Catholic Church very quickly what happens in organizations like that is it's we we want to protect the branding and so you know pay no attention to the pedophile over there um because and and all of these dynamics are normal and natural and in some ways inevitable I'm not too quick to lean into them because again I don't think that the leadership network is all that all that clear yet and I think that will take time and it also requires what we were talking about before in terms of right now it's more caught than taught as the teaching becomes you know as we have our little estuary dogmas they will develop they're already starting to develop as we have our estuary values and dogmas and best practices and do's and don'ts that's usually the basis upon which you can start to establish credentialing but again what many people are brushing up against in terms of their chafing with respect to denominations religious organizations academic organizations is the older these things get the more brittle they get and then the more corruption sets in the other things begin to clog up the estuary and pretty soon you need a dredge or an explosion to blow the whole thing up so that new things can flow that's a natural part of the age of decay about life and death and how things flow so a lot of people are excited to get some of these dogmas and values and things down and I'm like these things will come let's I tend to think the more organically we can see them come and and have them be have them be implicit first in the minds of many foggy vague yeah but implicit and but therefore also tested because then people are testing them and I think in the natural part of time if we take our time with it we'll establish these things as they're needed but we're not going to run up and say here they all are or where'd you get them from I copied them from my denomination which is usually so if you're a church planter you plant a church you start talking to people it's bring non-church people to Jesus blah blah blah blah pretty quickly once you start a new plan church and maybe you have some better music from the church down the street here come all the Christians and they're like I'm so happy to be in a new church that's their first thing they say the second thing they say is these things like the old church yeah these are the great things that really worked in our old church let's do them here it's like I thought you were wanting to get away from that church no only some of the things I want to make the other things like them and you watch this whole process go so yes at some point if this thing has legs if this thing lives if this thing continues to go there will be values there will be dogmas there will be oral tradition usually comes first because that's really how the caught first becomes taught through the verbal and all that will come but I'm not too anxious that I'm not too excited about getting that nailed down here's estuary I've got a nice packet here to to show you you know here's estuary right here and here in lovely pages to our mailing list of thousands yeah okay maybe someday and god bless it if it comes but I'm not in a rush and if it doesn't happen well I think and again this is about the failure thing I think even if this all sort of loses steam there are now thousands of people out there that in the back of their mind yeah there was Paul VanderKlay and he was sort of like you know John Eldridge or you know how many or Jordan remember Jordan Peterson remember how he was all hot for a little while and he disappeared can't even find him anymore but here this new instantiation because there's nothing new under the sun and things come up again and so again the goal here is when I was a missionary in the Dominican Republic most of the Haitians we worked with were in the country illegally and many of them could be at any given time depending on the winds of politics be grabbed by some soldiers put into a truck driven to the Haitian border and dumped and so we knew that the lives of the people we worked with were enormously unstable and Ray Brinks who was my mentor when I was fresh out of seminary he said what we do is we put things in people's heads they can't be taken away from them we build them into people and that's what actually will go out and bless the world because you can steal a Haitian's camera a story I told you can steal his property you can take the food out of his mouth but if you've got stuff into his head and heart that will produce fruit that the army can't take away and so for me that's where my values are at in this and if by 2030 no one remembers Paul VanderClair or watches his videos or any of that or he's just like this weird blip in people's past but they've learned something and they take what they've learned into their new church or into their family or into their group or into their office I believe I will stand before my maker and say I don't know where it all went and yeah God's got his list of stuff he's got to take me to the woodshed for but some of these other things I think he'll say well done well then wouldn't faithful servant that's that's what you're looking for now in the same way that I cannot eat a lobster without thinking about Jordan Peterson there you go I propose get ready to pick up that thing I propose that we make buckers the off no the other thing the the tin that we make buckers the authorized cookie of the estuary movement and we should and we should go ask that baker in slither if we can get a discount on large quantities because what's inside the man cannot be taken now this is really gonna mess with everybody's keto diet I know I know that's why I say that's why I said there were enough cookies in my house to kill me yes for sure maybe he'll sponsor the Freddie and Paul show oh that would be cool yes that would be cool so I have one more question for you Paul okay but but you are welcome to blow me off if you feel like it but I have a communication from you not too long ago oh in which you said something about why words like truth and dogma are problematic for you please elaborate the the problem isn't actually with truth and dogma it's what human beings do when they see the potential for such powerful things as truth and dogma that they can wield and use usually towards their own status individual benefit and at the expense of others yeah so that's what I would say and and either say oh Vanderclay doesn't believe in truth or dogma oh no I do I just know how powerful they are and just like I don't leave you know if there's a if there's a storm and there's a power line that's fallen in the street I tell people to stay clear of that you be careful with truth and dogma you be careful especially if you if you deputize yourself as a wielder of it and and that's pretty much exactly what the bible says in terms of not many of you should aspire to be teachers wielders of truth and dogma because you will be held to a higher standard and and I take that seriously yeah thank you for that excellent words and and and again this is the kind of thing that gives us a little taste of what that space the estuary could potentially feel like if it all kind of estuary drop the definite article because again every time you say that people think oh paul is starting a corporation and maybe vendonk will be on the board and whether or not I ever do start a corporation what that's one of the things I've learned in this process is that when you say the estuary then I've got people um saying I want to be part of the estuary I'm going to totally disagree with you there is no way a person can walk around either in the Sacramento Delta or in Holland around the the big rivers especially the base bus you cannot say well let's go to estuary today we're always going to the estuary so if there is going to be a localized instantiation of estuary it will be the estuary sorry dude wouldn't choose wouldn't had wouldn't listen no I know what you mean but I I know what you mean it is also true that that that any kind of local embodiment thereof is going to have to have a definite article because it is a thing yeah yeah and yeah I agree that a movement should not have that definite article but the local instantiation of it which is actually way more important in my mind than whatever it is that you're doing on your channel the local instantiation of it is is really where the rubber is going to hit the road for actual real life people and that's where the relationships will be built that's where that's where the thing will bear fruit and so I think we're both right well well shall I end the recording here John sure this is a great way thank you for giving me all this time this is super thank you very much I talked more than you did so it worked out well it worked out well thank you thank you yeah thank you