https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=hapZUYnMbuI

 Coming back. I'm pretty good with faces. So, okay. Look familiar. We've met. No worries. Yeah, and it's kind of hard to with the computer stuff too. So that's impressive. So yeah, I guess the there are a few things I wanted to kind of go over. And it's kind of like an interesting mix because so I am in also involved with the estuary groups. So I am an estuary leader with the band on crowd. And I'm trying to kind of balance this conversation between promotion of estuary and then also like that usually in these conversations, I know you ask about story and so I'm willing to share that and I have some complications with trying to kind of get involved with the whole church thing. So I'm trying to make this a balance between promotion of estuary but also like my story but not letting my ego so much get in the way. So I don't know if it's ego with story but I just found that people will care what you have to say if they care a little about you. So if you're thinking that we're going to I might share this on my channel then you should probably give us a little bit of background into who you are so that they'll care about what you think. So it's up to you. It's your time. You can do with it as you wish. Okay sounds good. Sure yeah I mean we can start it off and then well I guess we'll kind of see where things go once we're done. Sounds good. All right. Okay so where do you want to begin? You want to begin with you? Tell us about you. Yeah sure so I guess for me I grew up going to I guess being in a family with people who went to Willow Creek Community Church and so that was a part of my upbringing. Very nominally originally growing up actually I think the biggest part of my initial story is more less so going to a church environment and more just how do I fit in with the people around me. I had really good parents that provided for me but as far as like the friend thing it wasn't that was much more challenging to me because I didn't have people that were consistent. It was you know sort of like a what are you going to give to me in this relationship and as soon as it's gone we're going to kind of take from you what we can kind of take. And so I was always trying to prove myself to others and like how can I be more popular? You know how can I take all those quick jokes that get people to laugh and you know I felt like I almost had to like break down this mental barrier of you know swearing is bad but we need to say those words quick to get the laughs and that sort of thing. So yeah I guess for me it was all about like proving myself and it just for me it wasn't really working. I always wanted to be higher up on that pole and I just I guess being an introvert I wasn't great at doing a lot of those achieving a lot of those goals so I was always trying to figure out who am I and that sort of thing. Where that started to change is when I got more involved with Willow and the high school ministries I had really some awesome small group people who were able to build into me. I felt like at that age I was able to kind of connect with the faith in a lot better of a way. You just don't have the capacity I think as a you know elementary school kid. And so there was just a lot of more practical ways that everything fit in. And basically what I took from that is the difference that I could make as a person is I could live into the love that I believed God portrayed through the Bible and then build into the church community around me. And so some of the things that just kind of like how that sort of played out I had some small group leaders that were like you know you should know everybody's name here. You know it's Willow Creek is at mega church they kind of split things up there are still like 50 students that would go into like a group setting so they were like you know challenge me and you know everybody's name. Through that experience and just kind of learning about people I really learned how the importance of empathy and learning people's stories in order to understand in some sense like others metaphorical home. So to give an example you know for me I was committed to you know what I was doing within my house group setting but I learned a lot about a couple of people who really had a very difficult time there. So one I met this person freshman year who turned out to be this incredibly staunch atheist. And it was through conversations that I learned really sad stories about her dad was a pastor and made some bad decisions to not only like cheat on his wife but to do so with another man. And so it was just like one of those things where it's like you know what is this and so like just really and there was a bunch of other stories of just you know being able to really connect with people. I had a few people that were going through to few friends that were going through depressive episodes and so I learned basically to listen or how to listen to others and to learn what are the things that are driving them. I also learned to kind of challenge myself to be a better person that can do that type of thing as opposed to trying to prove where I was on the social hierarchy with making fun of people and doing stuff like that. It was more about how can I actually build people up and like there was a lot of ways that I changed in that. And then yeah just really having this awesome group of friends who really challenged each other to be better. We did this thing called Steel on Steel as a like a small group of just basically people that were in my age class and then also who were guys. And we did this thing called Steel on Steel which is kind of as iron sharpens iron so one man sharpens another. And the basic premise of it is we shared 100% of the 10% of our lives we don't share with other people in that group and it was really interesting. Yeah and I mean I in some ways I kind of question how much that was fully done but I think we did a pretty good job of it. 100% is a lot. 100% of anything is a lot. That's true. It's an ambitious goal and it would be yeah it's a very interesting idea so good for you. Thank you and I guess for me the for me some of my journeys started to change again in college. I went to Hope College and the better Christian Reformed AI now. They're not Christian they're Reformed. They're Reformed. You're smarter than me Paul. Well you have many more years to work on that. I've had more years yes. But anyway yeah it was just it was an interesting environment for a lot of different reasons. I had a lot of challenges there that I didn't have in high school. I think there are a lot of challenges to doing Christian community in a Christian community that you don't have in a secular community. I mean a lot of advantages too obviously but I guess for me it was my first time kind of seeing some of the church politics and not seeing how interpretations of passages are very different. Seeing very different cultures kind of come together and not being so sure on some and yeah I guess for me it was very difficult because I had a challenging time finding that same sense of home that I had in high school where I was able to invest in people emotionally and that sort of thing. And I think also going to a private school it's just people don't necessarily have the same issues that they do coming from you know high school. I was in a high school that was very diverse. We had people from all sorts of socioeconomic and what was it like ethnic backgrounds. It was very very different. And so for me it was kind of a place where I started to question you know through a lot of different experiences is God more than just an emotion or is God more than something that's just like a voice inside my head. And so for me it was you know a very challenging time because I didn't necessarily feel like I had people I could talk to about that. Like over a long haul because those questions really made a lot of time and a lot of I guess lived experience to work through. And for me as those questions started to continue and I still tried to kind of fit in myself with the church. There were just I think post college a lot of things I just kind of continued to build like a wedge and started putting me outside of that. So I wanted when I finished college I went back and tried to be a small group leader in the church I was part of for Villa and there was just a lot of I didn't see some of the same things that I had with some of the groups that I was involved with the group that I was a part of. Like not that they were there's anything wrong it was just very different. And like part of it was kind of like I guess going back there in some sense was trying to figure out how do I fit in like how does my story fit in from before to now and trying to work those things out. And so as I started to kind of learn that my theological differences were a little bit different from some of the leaders that were around me and I didn't necessarily have that support. And even the people that were like somewhat supportive they just weren't there when sort of push came to shove. I was trying to kind of figure out how all that would like how does this whole thing work. And it started to kind of get to a point where I was like okay I need to figure this out and so one of the people who had been kind and nice but wasn't like willing to put in the time to me I was like okay you know I'm starting like I'm trying to think of the best way to put it but I guess I sort of kind of like laid the hammer down I was like you know I there's some things I need to talk about. And I didn't get really any response from that at all. And so for me it was kind of like okay well I don't know where I fit in the leaf structure. I don't know kind of where I fit in the emotional connection to like what God is sort of a thing is God more than a feeling that sort of thing. And now there's now that especially because I put this ultimatum down that's not being resolved there's kind of like this thing where it was me questioning like how do I fit into any of this. And so basically I kind of like took a step back and stopped going to church in that sense. But at the same time I mean I don't necessarily know what it is like there's still obviously like all those things that were built into me from that high school time like those are still significant to me. And I don't know exactly I guess I'm sort of agnostic about what all those things mean but like I know that they're important. And so is that that sort of propelled me into being an escherich leader with the bandang group. And yeah and I've also been involved a little bit with the Chicago Bridges of Meaning there group as well. So it's yeah that's kind of where I'm at now and yeah I'm trying to figure out. How has that been for you? Both the escherich group? Both groups? Yeah. You know they're both kind of interesting. So it's kind of interesting because I in some sense I consider it three groups. There's the Chicago Bridges of Meaning, there's the escherich leadership group, and then there's the personal escherich group that I've been trying to start. And that's been kind of an up and down sort of thing. So I guess I can kind of just go one by one. So the leadership group that's been really helpful because there's some awesome guys there. I had the fortune of being in with Nate Hile. Luke was in with us for a little while. Did Luke actually go to an LSNET meeting finally? Maybe it's a different Luke. Oh okay. Luke Thompson from Minneapolis because he was one of the first people to sign up and he's never been to a meeting. So Luke can get that fixed in lots of different ways. He's already built his own ecosystem. So yeah. Well yeah but yeah I guess I don't know Luke. I haven't been really on the Bridges of Meaning that much. That's fine. Yeah it's just been an awesome experience being able to kind of learn different perspectives, see everybody building each other up. And it is very refreshing because I feel like a lot of times when I talk to my friends about where I'm at, they kind of want to get their propositions out and want me to kind of believe the propositions that they were growing up with or at least that they believe now. I just don't really have interest in that game because I don't think that's how it works. I don't think that's how people work. At least now I probably would have thought that before but that's where I've been. And so yeah I guess for me what Estuary is is a bunch of people that are willing to build each other up, ask questions, probe into things and you know a group that's trying to create something together and we're not exactly sure how to define that. I don't know that we ever will be but we do know that we're trying to create some sort of structure that has the ability to fight nihilistic thinking and yeah I think that's important for where we're at in this so-called meaning crisis. Well it's interesting because I mean you're at an interesting nexus because the Chicago Bridges of Meaning group is I guess one of these legacy groups that predate the Estuary movement and Vindank of course was right there at the beginning but he has developed ElseNet which is a really cool network online in order to support local groups and you've got a local group that you're building so you're kind of nicely involved at different levels and the Chicago group who's you know they've already put on two little conferences and they're going to be and the Chicago group who's you know they've already put on two little conferences and they're thinking about a third which has some you know some high profile people of course Sam from Transfigured is one of the key leaders there and they've got another they've got a number who have showed up on channels here or there and so they've been an interesting group and what fascinates me by the development of this is how each group is not unlike churches each group is unique they do different things they serve different needs they accomplish different things and and so you've had a chance to sort of you know see all of them and you know I don't know if you'd want to tell tales or name names but it's it is interesting to me because I've you know I've got my Sacramento estuary we have a second Sacramento estuary group that has a different leader than I also another Christian Reformed Church minister and and so it's been it's been very interesting for me seeing the kinds of things that have arisen from these different groups and again sort of like churches every single different group is going to be different and because of leadership because of context because of the history of that group so it's a fascinating thing to watch it develop yeah and yeah I would say the LSNET group for us tends to be much more centered around like religious topics and you know how every because a lot of us just come from different faith backgrounds the Chicagoland I would say that tends to there is some of that it tends to be a little bit more right-leaning um a little bit more political yeah in some ways that's because of Hank. Hank can't keep the politics out of it. Well yeah it's it's interesting too because we've had some people who there was one person who came in he was I guess a big person in conservative talk radio and I think there's just I don't know why it just tends to be you know when I guess we also talk a lot about Jordan Peterson and that sort of thing and so it tends to be more of a in some ways a this corner of the internet Jordan Peterson and it was tied to I forget what it was that um when Weinstein and Harris and all of them were together that was all kind of like influenced by that too. And they're also not really following the estuary protocol? I think they laughed at the problem. I think they laughed at it but the part of the wisdom of the protocol is what will naturally happen and I saw this in my local Sacramento group to a degree what will that naturally happen in a group is if you've got some strong personality and the things that they care about the group can very interest easily sort of become an interest group around those topics. Yeah. And if you sort of stick to the estuary protocol those topics can come up that's fine but I think it'll tend to self-regulate better with respect to the interests of the people around the table. Yeah and you know it's been kind of interesting um I mean I say they laugh but they they respective respectfully are doing so and um you know I think in some ways they do serve some purposes and have some advantages over the protocol too because um the protocol it's hard to find that thing like um that holds everything together. Yep. Whereas when you have a group that's around something you know you can name it you can say this is what we're doing and it makes sense because we're doing the protocol that I mean not the estuary protocol but our protocol um and so it attracts less diversity but sometimes that can be a good thing. Yep yep yep yep and and that's what's lovely about an ecosystem is that there's there's lots of different it's it's it's niche development niche or niche I don't know which one it's niche development where you want you want people who are a little more political and you want people who are a little more religious and you want people who are a little bit more tougher to track you want all of those in your ecosystem because then you can actually be helpful to a broader range of people. Yeah definitely um and yeah it's just it's interesting just to see how everything is developing too because um they are um the Chicago land is much more about focusing on big things and like trying to get into the politics trying to put on big you know events um and then the one that I'm personally leading is just very small like what are we going to do for each other and um that's actually been on hold for a bit because it's been a struggle to kind of find the number of people that can meet consistently but it's um that's kind of where I want it to be on the level that I want it to be um but yeah it's you know one of the things um I thought maybe you would be a good person to talk to about this is um learning I guess my story and saying you know I'm kind of doing this alternative thing to quote unquote you know church um in some ways I think that makes a lot of the I think that makes a lot of the uh Christians around me a little bit nervous um just like you know um I tried uh kind of promoting it with um some people and leadership and then just also some friends um and didn't necessarily get the receptivity that this was something that they wanted to you know put forward or put resources either put resources towards if they're on the leadership end or you know what is this thing and um is it just anybody gets to do whatever they want and that sort of thing and I think that's um there might be some fears in that um and it's kind of hard for me to speak to it from um I think my uh background just because there are some divides and where those beliefs and um I guess um I don't I don't know if I want to say covenant but like um you know what you would put in your church mission statement um there are some differences there and I think that maybe turns some people off um but yeah I kind of wanted to maybe use this as potentially a you know this could be a video that um I could share and say you know this is what estuary is this is maybe Paul you are a pastor um in the Christian Reformed Church um so you know this is your perspective on it and maybe you can reach some people that I can't but also what is this what does this mean for um you know people who aren't in churches at all and how can they be involved with this yeah it's it's very broad as you said and and breadth has its downside because um you know a group a church that is passionate about one little thing can be very strong because they're passionate about that one little thing it could also be very narrow because the number of people that are passionate about that one little thing I mean even even just Sam in Chicago he's you know he's a passionate non-trinitarian so he's passionate but he's a passionate Christian in many ways evangelical non-trinitarian that's a really small group you know it's a very small group and and it can be a very powerful group because you get dynamics in the ecosystem where if you're going to survive at all you've got to sort of be rigorous and focused and in a global stage in some ways have been reading a history of the Jews the Jews have arrived at that I was just before this conversation I mean usually I do these randos conversations in pairs and the person I was talking to before I doubt that I doubt that we'll share that video because it was quite a bit more personal which about half of my randos conversations are and um and you know he we talked about all of the sort of Christian deconstruction things that are going on and he's he grew up in a more fundamentalist church and now he's going to a sort of a non-denominational church that is sort of reformed Baptist both of them were were large churches let's say four-figure churches and he's wrestling with all the you know and and he started he he actually started listening to Sam Harris because he was watching Christian atheist debates and he was a committed Christian and began listening to the some of the arguments from the atheists is like those aren't dumb arguments those you know and and so but the but he you know he's a he's a married man with children and everyone's happily embedded in the church and he's got these questions and where do you go what do you do and he said you know I I you know I you know should I talk about these questions with my elder so it's kind of a in a reformed church you sort of elder districts and so the late your lay elder is kind of a go-to person but he's hesitant to do so which I totally understand because you could you could raise for yourself a world of trouble if you get the wrong elder or the wrong pastor and start asking the wrong questions and then suddenly the whole church starts focusing on you with all of these things and it's like you know even if your desire is to sort of work have a community to work through these questions together I pointed him to else net and said you know here's the website click on that and you might want to you know look into that group because he's in a he's in an area and he needs to have conversations that he can't have in church at least in the way that the church is configured because the church is very focused and concentrated on one very good thing and it's a thing that I'm very you know so I'm a reformed pastor I'm a Calvinist pastor you know I I want to see all this stuff supported and affirmed and yada yada yada but not everyone is equipped to well Sam Harris said this and you know I didn't necessarily think that the the the Christian answer to Sam Harris necessarily worked that well and then I started looking into these things I started looking into these things and and so he's and and this is what I said to him basically I said this is part of the reason that I've been promoting these estuary groups because how this usually works in your church goes like this a guy like him you know he by virtue of his job or whatever you know he finds Joe Rogan or YouTube or whatever questions start to arise now you got lots of YouTube channels that are just sort of answer channels oh Sam Harris is stupid for all these reasons okay well maybe you're not finding those reasons terribly convincing and you're finding some some of Sam Harris's reasons more convincing where do you process this with whom do you process this because where and with whom is going to have probably a pretty determinative influence on where you end up and there are better and worse places to process this and part of the problem with YouTube answer channels is they're all answer and no process and reality is complex enough that people need process space and I'm not saying that churches are always going to be happy where the people end up because that's just a reality and and I fully get that and I accept the that I accept the the challenge and the dangers of that but I think actually the estuary process is better than the alternative which is he's just doing it all on his own and not only is he you know maybe not getting the best quality answers but what he's also getting is a sense of isolation and some of what you talked about earlier in this video a sense of isolation and and actually the way human beings work that isolation is more deadly than the quality of the answers because we're finally we care about attachment we care about relationships we need we we we believe the people we trust often more than the quality of the answers and so if you really want to help people in with my agenda let's say you know help people stay knitted together in Christ build communities for them that have the relational quality that I think in my opinion theologically the church was always supposed to deliver anyway and in fact generally speaking the church's the best foot forward that the church puts forward is not are not the answers answers to these abstract questions but the quality of relationships that's why gangs work gangs have terrible answers but they work why because they build relationships cults have terrible answers I mean look at look at Scientology I mean this stuff is nuts and it's made up by a science fiction writer and it's there for all of us to see why does it work the quality of the relationships and so if churches really want to be smart about shepherding their flock they're going to need to build places to have a quality of relationship where people can engage in these difficult things and so I'm not saying estuary is perfect or foolproof and I think the what we talked about already is an example of the fact that it's enormously complicated that different groups and different people and different leaders they're going to have different emphases and there's going to have some different outcomes in there but again I'm not I'm not I'm not evaluating estuary against the ideal I'm evaluating estuary against the competition and I'm saying I'm not going to make better the enemy of the good because the perfect group and the perfect church you will not find I just know that so there's there's a spiel for you I don't know how that lands with you but there's a there's a spiel no I think that was good and yeah I just I wonder too because I mean there's a lot of people our corner of the internet is sort of focused on you know they have the we kind of say at the three and the one p where there's the propositional perspectival and how all those other ones on perspectival I can't I'm terrible at remembering the names of them maybe you can help me out but participatory procedural proposition and perspectival and I've you know I've been living with them for a few years and they're getting they're getting more helpful in my model the more I use them I just did a video on it today so that was helpful too um yeah and like you know that's where the propositional the perspectival um I forget the last one but those are where all the belonging happens it's not in the propositional um necessarily and so you know in many ways the degree to which churches thrive is how they build into those other three um not so much the dogmas like the dogmas kind of help me filter the cognition so everybody can kind of move in a certain direction but the degree to which I mean I'm sure as a pastor many people in your church don't get the propositional nearly as what price as you would like them oh my church is so non-propositional people stay here because they love each other yeah there's some propositional floating around in there but they they are they have relationships there's the glue of the church not saying the propositional isn't important but again for sure you you can see a lot of strong groups with horrible propositions and then they last and that's the point so um yeah I guess I'm also kind of imagining um like all all this um so far I think has been really good but I'm sure that there's a lot of people that are like you know I've heard Brandon's story I don't really connect with that I heard Paul what he's doing with his whole um pastor thing and I don't really care about Christianity and that sort of thing so um you know what it what is this uh meaning crisis and you know like I don't know I'm just kind of living my life and um you know what are we what are the other things that we're doing here so I guess for me um I don't know I like I guess there's so many different ways that people can come to this um but one of the things that really does concern me right now is just this back and forth and politics and um all this um how people are just kind of really accusing other sides and it's not really this healthy thing and then the places that we can go to are for to get our news are you know and many ways commodifying viewership and um you know Reveke talks about this whole where do you go to for wisdom and um I would like to imagine that uh estuary can be something like that um but yeah I guess I'm just trying to figure out how like how do we kind of um promote this for people who are outside of you know the groups that we kind of talked about already well it's hard to promote it for people who aren't going to watch the video but I I know I think you're right and you know one of the key so I I've you know I've watched up to episode three of after Socrates and and John in you know in a few places now has talked about the fact that in one of one of Plato's um Socrates um one of Socrates' dialogues there's a um you know there's all these generals who want you know there's all these generals who want to raise their sons and they want to their sons to have courage and so you know they do all this thinky talky stuff about courage which is good you know it's good you know we still have it because it's it's good but finally they send their son to live with Socrates to learn courage because we can learn we can learn courage by sort of vicariously watching stories in movies and on YouTubes and following people on YouTube but it's it's in real life it's in real relationships it's in face-to-face relationships where the power is because it's one thing to think a lot of courageous thoughts and have a lot of courageous feels when you're watching a movie or watching a YouTuber it's another thing when stuff is right here that's where courage is measured and so it is going to be in the face-to-face relationships in the in real life 360 degree relationships where the true formation is going to happen and we're still field figuring out you know we've had text with us for a few thousand years we've had the printing press with us for 500 years we've had video content with us for less than 100 years and we've had democratic video which is YouTube for even shorter so we have no idea really how this stuff plays out we haven't even had it for a generation but I think we can say that it's the in real life formation I mean if you were I mean they already know this about babies I mean look at what happened with the Romanian orphanages that you know you can have you can put a baby in a bassinet and you can give it food and you can keep it warm and dry and it will die you know the Jesus first temptation man shall not live by bread alone but by every word that proceeds from the mouth of God we might also say babies will not live by food alone but by care and attention and love and physical contact and without those things infants die and without those things children are malformed in a permanent way that they will never fully recover from their whole life long and so you if if people are I mean this is in some ways part of the you know the whole Grimm Grizz channel I was watching Grimm this morning you cannot be nurtured by a computer screen it's going to form you it's going to shape you and you can get some good things from it I wouldn't be doing this if I didn't believe that to a degree but it's your in real life relationships that are categorically different and we're really finding that out about children now because you know what COVID did and COVID isolation and there's you know my wife is an elementary school teacher and it is not good what happened with all of that isolation because of COVID and you know they're figuring out so yeah not just children and so I and you know the guy I just finished talking to in the Randall's conversation I made the point that it's awfully nice to have a you know consumerism is all about having a ready a ready service provider for a need that you have and so if you live in a city if you live in a populated area the chances are someone might have be addressing a niche or a need that you have but for many of us and even if you live in an urban area for many of us it's more like so I just finished watching 1883 one of these Yellowstone stories and it's basically about this family on the Oregon Trail well if you're a pioneer you're not a pioneer you're not a pioneer you're not a pioneer you're not a pioneer you're not a well if you're a pioneer and a homesteader you're gonna have to go out and guess what you're not going to eat grass with the buffalo you're gonna have to grow a garden you're gonna have to and it's you know what you've been what you've been doing and it's really hard you're gonna have to go out and you're gonna have to develop around you the niche the niche and you're going to have to this is what human beings do and you're gonna have to to furnish it and you're going to have to cultivate it because the truth is you can't just buy it because you can't purchase people. You're going to have to grow your friendships and what you're, you know, it's just like a marriage relationship or a child. You have to grow together and that's how human beings are. And estuary is one way to pursue that. So I think what you're saying is, within the estuary protocols, there is an opportunity for people to basically put forward what is important to them. So you almost have to cultivate that habit of listening where you can understand where people are at and what's motivating them and what's driving them. And then you have the opportunity in some ways to live into that and live into that relationship with that person. And I think what you're saying is that the fruits of that is really what is going to create communities for people that are meaningful and, you know, that isn't just like your sports team on a weekend where you don't really have to get to have those meaningful conversations. I'm not going to say anything against the sports teams. They're powerful. But not every sports isn't for everyone. That's true too. Yeah. And these, I mean, so bowling alone, Putnam's book, you know, a generation ago, that identified part of the problem. America was a nation of groups and subsidiary institutions. And we've been hollowing out the middle. And part of why we've been doing that is we've been replacing it with screens and first mass media and now social media. And it has an ability to do some of that. It's sort of like eating junk food. You know, a bag, I like a bag of potato chips as well as the next guy. I really do. But you can't live on potato chips all the time. And that's kind of what these screens are. Yeah. And so it's putting in the work to actually develop something that is more substantive and nourishing. And what that is, is kind of hard to define exactly. I was a psychology major and I've learned a lot from John's work and like all the levels that you have to kind of look at to say, you know, this is what you're putting forward. It's a challenge. We struggle with it all the time in estuary as to what we're doing. So yeah, but the work, I think once you go through it, it does, I believe it speaks for itself. That's, I guess why I'm an estuary leader. That's exactly why you're an estuary leader. You found it valuable and nutritious for you. And I really try to calibrate this for people because there's so much promotion that happens on these screens that people, when they listen to me, they almost always think, well, estuary is the new snake oil. Estuary is the new magic mop. Estuary, I said, no, estuary is not the new magic mop. It's not the new snake oil. It's a tool. You know, it's like a spade. A spade is a lousy hammer. It's a lousy ax. It's a spade for, it could do something pretty well. And some people have real need of a spade and other people have, they're doing pretty good with their hoe. But it's, estuary isn't the be all and end all, but it's a really good tool that I think churches could use. And I think other people can use to, to garden on the frontier. Yeah, for sure. And then I'm trying to think of anything else that I have. But I appreciate you being generous with your time. Do you have any questions for me, Paul? Because I well, I was just really interested to hear. I was just really interested to hear the the pros and cons of because you're you're a little unique in that you've got some experience with the Chicago meetup. I'm not asking you to throw friends under the bus, the Chicago meetup of the else net and also your local group. And I'm, you know, so two of those three are local. And you've already said a lot. And from what I know of the Chicago group, it makes perfect sense. And that's why, you know, I'm interested in any other any other things you'd like to say about your experience of different groups, because, you know, even in Sacramento, I'm really happy we have two different groups right now. And there was a couple that came and visited church on Sunday who came through the channel and everything. And I they had never heard of estuary. So I talked to them about estuary. And, you know, you know, how many times do you meet a month? Well, this group meets month and that group meets once. So between the two of them, so the hardcore estuary people, they got twice a month, they can hit one in Sacramento. If we get two more groups, we'll probably have one a week that you can the people can have. But for many people, once a month is about right. And so you know, it's, it's very difficult sort of hitting all of the layers for different people. So I didn't know if you had any other reflections on what you've seen from the different Yeah. Yeah. So from the Chicago group, like I did say they were kind of politically and I would consider leaning towards one side. But and I was kind of curious, too, when I first started there, I was like, you know, what is this group? What are they about? And one, I'll share a cool story from them. So they meet in a public library once a month. And after, I think one or a couple times, we decided to go to the spa. And there was a there was some local there that was very opinionated, very far left and talking about, oh, you believe this, you guys are trash or garbage. And that I will say that people over there, they were so well mannered and in the Chicago land bridges of meaning they were very well mannered. And we're able to kind of build a relationship with this girl where every time we kind of go there, and we see her we'll play darts and stuff. And she's a little, you know, interesting. And but it's kind of this cool thing where, you know, as much as they do have their propositional stuff going on there, they also walk the walk. And so that's really encouraging. That's what I would expect from them. Just knowing them. Yep. Doesn't surprise me a bit. So yeah. But yeah, I think that that's really important for where we're going. And as far as like building communities, how are we going to, you know, navigate a lot of these challenges that we are facing? And yeah, I'm just, I guess, happy to be a part of groups that are fostering those sorts of things. Awesome. Awesome. Oh, Brandon, this has been wonderful. What a great idea. Yeah, thank you, Paul. And appreciate your time. Thanks for posting that hour. I thought I was able to like snag. It's not easy. It's not easy to get a rando slot. I've been thinking about that and trying to find some other ways. So besides just I mean, yeah, you have to focus on your church to which, you know, we're glad that we have you for when we do. Yeah, well, I have to figure this out. So anyway, thank you, Brandon. Delight talking to you and I'll post this probably pretty soon. Sounds good. Thanks. Thanks. Bye bye.