https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=p5uKjqD-tSk

 See, this is where I go with Sam Harris because I get so frustrated because he seems like such a, doesn't seem like a very helpful conversation partner to talk about his religious productions and promotions in contrast with other traditions. In other words, he can't play nice with other kids in the religious marketplace. Yeah. A lot of people, I mean, just, just the fact that Tammy Peterson is both talking Rosary with Jonathan Peugeot and doing Sam Harris's my, doing the Sam Harris meditation app daily. That story is really important for those of us within the church to remember when we think about the kinds of conversations we're going to have with people inside and outside the church. I, you know, I guess I should download Sam Harris's app and see what's going on. Part of my problem is as I confess to Nate Hile, I'm a little bit of a mocker sometimes. I, I see things and I just, the troll in me, is that a good troll or a bad troll? I don't know. Is it an integrated troll? Is my shadow troll integrated? I don't know, but maybe I'll have to download Sam's app. I know it'll give me more ideas, but how many more videos do I want to make about Sam Harris? I mean, I don't want to make a lot of videos about Sam Harris. There's so many other interesting people to talk about. So I don't know. I don't know. But Paul? Yeah. Nate was going to make a response video at some time and he has technical reasons and specifics and facts and history and all that stuff that I don't have of why you're getting aspects of your criticism of Sam Harris wrong. But I think my big thing would be, I just, I mean, part of it is like, you're not going to have a conversation with Sam probably, so that's part of it. And so we're using superficial kind of identitarian labels and granted Sam plays the modernist rhetoric, tribal, religious, anti-religious game. But I think when you're truly participating in a dialogos and if you can even manage to do that in a thinking way where you're critiquing someone who you may not actively be able to have a long form face to face or live conversation with, it doesn't feed into the culture war non-tense. And I think it plays into a dynamic of equating who is in, who is out on the basis of self identity, which I would argue is a huge part. It's a huge symptom of the whole disease to begin with. I think that's a good point. The difficulty is once you, the problem with the whole who is in, who is out and calling that out is once you call that out, you reinstate it. There are those who play the who is in, who is out game and those who don't. Then you have a who is in and who is out. So no, point taken. And I, and that's why I, I mean, what, what have I done with my channel? In some ways I have used public figures who I will likely never talk to. At least I, I imagined I would likely never talk to most of these people in order to provoke a conversation about the material that they're putting out into the world. And that, that I think is, is not a bad strategy because to one degree or another, if you're putting out content on the internet, it's fodder for public discussion. So what Sam Harris puts out, you know, I should, I should try to get to critique fair. And so that's why I'm open to correction with respect to it. But, you know, and then I think the reason your channel has grown is your, is the rando stuff and the genuine community. And it's not that you don't make good monologue videos that are strictly about intellectual content, like that's all good and fine. But, but mainly I think that plays at a culture war dynamic that is superficial at best. And, and this thing with the thing that I struggle with at the Sam Harris conversation is that when he's not playing his rhetoric game and when he's talking about these kinds of mystical experiences, I think he's getting at something that's valid. And we're all trying to learn to talk about that stuff. I mean, at his best, he's talking about the one in the many in ways that a lot of Christians don't talk about it very well at all, because that's kind of the hardest metaphysical stuff to talk about as far as I'm concerned. And a lot of Christians don't do it very well, but you don't go after them with the same kind of like mockery. And I think we should, I don't know. I just, it's, I self identify as a Christian. I'm going to be a lot more charitable to Sam Harris than I am to someone else. Like I've come after you after like Calvinist ontology and we don't go and I could mock you about some of that because I think it's ridiculous and doesn't hold water, but, but that's not going to get us anywhere. You mocked me on that. You know, but here's the thing, like even when you talk about all your Calvinism and your Calvinism videos, every time you talk about that, it's not about the specifics of the Calvinist ontology. You would just say things like God is sovereign. I trust him. Me too. But I'm not a Calvinist, you know, Armenians too, but they're not You're a Calvinist. You just don't admit it. Just like Sam Harris is a Christian. No, cause here's the thing. And this is, this is where I push back on you with like even saying, like, cause you just did it with like, it gets into non-dualism stuff, but you just did this with saying, what did you just say? Normally the thing you'll say is well, in regard to dogmatism, you'll say like people are anti-dogmatist, but then when you say I'm anti-dogmatist, what have you done? You've created a dogma. Ha ha ha. Gotcha. And I think that's silly. And where I would pressure you is to go into the Ian McGill, Chris, the non-dualism past the dualism of dualism and non-dualism. Like if you haven't watched his Ralston lecture, you really should. Cause that's to me until you get to the place where you can see past the representations in an iconic way. During intellectual conversations, we are just in the realm of Renee Girard and the medic rivalry over representations. And we're not saving the appearances to bring in barfield. And I know that's like, there's a lot packed in there, but that's predominantly the, the intellectual conversational problem of talking heads in the West. That's why it's a competition hierarchy, no matter how well or poorly you're doing that. And it's a waste of time. Isn't same Harris worse at that than basically any other major talking head in this space? Maybe, but he doesn't self identify as a Christian. So I give him a pass. Hold on. What does that mean? You give him a pass because he doesn't identify as a Christian. So anybody who's not a Christian is an idiot who shouldn't be criticized. No, I think I should criticize the people who are most in my group. And I think that limits infighting. Come on. That's, that's ridiculous. Sam Harris is a public intellectual who deserves to be criticized. Yeah, but that criticism, see, this is part of the issue though. Jacob is like, I understand. Like you've put things out publicly. You can get public criticism. I mean, on one hand, that's fine. But the problem is, is that feeds into depersonalized competition hierarchies about ideas that are what you are depersonalizing him. You are dehumanizing him because he's not a Christian. How so? No, I'm just saying I'm not going to, you wouldn't criticize him because he's not a Christian, therefore he's not human. Well, let me clarify then I won't criticize him because I don't know him. I will criticize Paul more about this stuff because I have some semblance of a relationship with him. You don't know John Calvin either. You criticize him all the time. Well, fair point. Calvinism things downstream of him. I mean, what? I don't know, Calvin, you're right. And I just wanted to pop in real quick and just like, but just to go back before it's missed, I wanted to defend my brother Paul. Sorry. I don't know if there are other Calvinists in here, but I'm just going to take the torch for a second. The issue that you're having with God's sovereign nature and that we're intellectualizing or coming up with the reflections of people's understanding, you're it seems to me that you're doing the same thing. You're asking people to watch McGilchrist. You're making arguments from authority. I mean, I'm not trying to throw up at the tattoo or anything, but I'm just saying like you are doing some similar things when you're when you're accusing or at least commenting on what Paul is doing. That's that's my only criticism there. I mean, we can't go into. But this is where these things get hard, because if we're going to have like back and forth about the specifics of disagreements about whatever it would be, it takes a long time. So, I mean, I'm just throwing those things out without being able to go into them in depth, but and the whole Calvinism conversation, I mean, I've. Whatever I'd be open to doing that sometime down the road. I've tried to do it with on Randall's conversations and things. I've tried to talk to Colton about it. Ultimately, in order. Well, I don't want to go into it. I mean, OK, go ahead, Julian. Sorry. I just wanted to make a comment. This is something I've been thinking of for a while. For a while, Luke, you just said you like to criticize people who are in your own tribe before you criticize people outside of it or something to that. Yeah. And I think. If it's easier for you to criticize someone, that means by default that they're not your tribe anymore. Like I've been. We've been noticing this with regards to certain sort of. Evangelical critics of evangelicalism and they'll sort of make a kind of a big deal about the fact that they're very critical of their own tribe. And I think that kind of just shows that they're not very much invested in the group anymore. So yeah, I mean. The person who you have a hard time critiquing, I think that would be closer to your tribe. Right. Doesn't so it's a sort of a subconscious rather than a conscious thing. Um. Potentially. I mean, I've always. Yeah, I mean, personally, the closer you get to me, the harder I am on you. So like I would say I'm like, I'm really hard on myself. That's why, like when I I've talked to you about this, I've been saying this that's why, like when I I've talked to you about this, Julie, when I was going to this self compassion notebook, like I can't even hardly do it. Or like when I go to a men's group and it's like, say something from the last week that you're like proud of yourself for. Like I basically can't do it. This is all like residual. Stuff that I call whatever divided man POS theology. Um, and so. Whether or not criticism in general is a good thing. I don't know. Also the hidden life is one of my favorite films of all time. What that whole movie is about is about like having your convictions and critiquing no one else. Like that's pretty much what that movie is about. But I don't, but I don't do that all the time. I mean, these are aspirational things. I mean, I don't. When the student is ready, the teacher will appear is something that I believe. And so in that sense, there's no point criticizing anyone because they won't be able to see it until they're ready to see it. So even if I'm right, it doesn't matter. Um, so. I think there's a fair point in what you said there. I mean, that's. I send all my comments, continue, continue critiquing Sam Harris. Oh, don't, don't, don't leave like that. Luke, it's okay. I don't know. No, I'm not upset. I don't, I think actually the, the back and forth is good. And if I didn't critique Sam Harris, you wouldn't critique me. And I, I listened to your critique and I grew from it. So I don't, I don't think that's a bad thing. And is there, is there a degree of, is there a degree of unfairness in me critiquing Sam Harris because he. Doesn't have a chance to respond to my devastating videos where I defeat him with facts and logic. Um, I don't really think so because he's got a far bigger stage than I do. And if he and I in fact did have a conversation, the status difference would be enormous. And his, uh, clapping fans would drown out, you know, the little sullen corner of the internet after he defeated me with facts and logic. So I understand, I understand the, um, the qualms about the game, but if I thought that the game wasn't in some ways profitable, uh, I wouldn't, I wouldn't play it, but I think the critique of, I think your critique of the, of the game is fair, but, um, I, I, and I, and I, and I wrestle with it. Um, you know, and part of what makes part of what is much more fun is when I get to have a conversation, a good faith conversation with, you know, people that I've critiqued, I've critiqued John Vervecky and then when, you know, John sent me notes and said, let's have a conversation and we did, I mean, that's, that's blossomed into a beautiful thing. I mean, it could be that if Sam Harris had any interest or really any reason to pay me any attention, um, Sam Harris and I could become wonderful friends. That, that could happen. I have a great idea. I have a great idea, Paul. See, here's the thing. Your conversations with John are always like, you're so great. I love you. You're so great. Like we think, you know, it's fantastic. It's, it's like when I used to go to young wrestlers from reform churches and you just praise everybody for five minutes before you'd switch speakers. Um, and I do like it. You guys are, you are wonderful. He's wonderful. Everyone's so wonderful and nice to each other. Um, but you should talk to Vervecky about where you think Sam is correct about certain religious and philosophical things. And then in conjunction with that, you could, you could just ask John outright, like what are his, some of his biggest problems with Christianity and certain aspects of it and not to hold back and just tie that all together because sometimes it's just a little back patty, you know? No, I know that. And, and there are, there are times sometimes when, you know, I, John has, and he said this, he said this aloud a number of times in a number of our conversations that he, he is, he is pursuing the Dea Logos in a very particular way to not necessarily engage some of these aspects. Now, some of the conversations that we've done recently, you know, the next one that he'll, he and I and Sam will probably have together, they're, they're very much our issues that we want to talk about and, and differences, and we, we, we definitely do talk differences. And if you listen to John's conversations with myself, with Jonathan Pigeot, with Sam, with Paul and Leitner, plenty of differences are noted. And I think part of the, I think it's, I think we shouldn't confuse some of the positivity and expressed appreciation for softness. I think some of that is to try to encourage each other and encourage each other and to continue to believe that we can have differences and still maintain a container of commonality and goodwill and good faith and all those words that we tend to throw at this because- So why is that not with Sam? What's that? But why don't we do that with Sam? Well, because there's no point, because he's not listening. And actually- If it's personal, if it's, I don't know, I'm almost like the opposite of that, you know, switch, I guess. Yeah, I could see that. But part of what I've often done and I've, you know, is I'll poke at someone a little bit and, and make some comments. And then it's sort of a bidding in terms of play. And, you know, think about, think about kids on a playground, you know, little, little boys and little girls on a playground and, you know, the little boys might have a crush on the girl. So she, he goes and gives her a little shove. Now is that kind of set? And the girl will be like, why are you pushing me? That's so mean. But if you understand what the boy is doing, the boy is saying, Hey, let's play, let's play. Let's, let's, let's go further in the conversation. And so there's a certain degree of bidding. And it's also the case that sometimes showing differences is an invitation to, okay, let's explore these differences. Maybe you're all wet. And so it's, it's remarkably difficult to actually get a good faith conversation going about differences. And I think part of this dance that we do that includes mockery and sometimes cheap shotting and, and characterization is all in some ways a bidding to, to involve us in, in conversation. No, Nate Orman, for example, would, you know, he did a video basically, you know, saying things about me and Peugeot and, and they'll, he'll, you know, he'll, he'll poke at me on Twitter sometimes. And, and then, you know, usually if someone pokes at me enough, I'll, you know, Hey, let's talk because I'm, I love talking to people with whom I have differences. But then once we start, I mean, I think, you know, my, my relationship with Jacob, I think is one of the great examples of this, because on almost every level, I am doing everything wrong, according to Jacob, except I'm also doing some things right. And Jacob and I disagree on all sorts of things, but I love that Jacob just tells me what he disagrees with to me, to my face. And he'll say things about the apostle Paul that make a lot of other people angry. It doesn't make me angry. I love it. And that's, you know, that's part of me too. So in some ways I'm doing to Sam Harris, what I wouldn't have any problem with Sam Harris doing to me, if he did this to me, I would probably say, okay, Sam, let's have a conversation about it. And in the process of the conversation, it would probably be hoping to build more of a relationship that we could, you know, have ongoing sustained relationships, such as let's say what Jordan Peterson and Sam Harris are doing. And I think this is part of the reason why the breakup, let's say, between Sam Harris and Brett Weinstein is so telling. Because someone in that conversation could not maintain a relationship beyond approaches to Ivermectin or to COVID or to such and such a thing. And right. And that's kind of a symptom. I have one quick thing, Julian, I'll shut up. But I think, okay, but there's, I think the worst version of what I'm afraid of any particular Christian falling into, because I think it's just antithetical to everything Christianity is about, is like the talking heads within politics, like within American politics. So like you could make an argument that like, I'm just being really critical of their views and you know, it's all public and we're going back and forth. How's that going? Like it's not going well. And I don't think that is going to, I don't think that's going to contribute to anyone figuring anything out and coming to any greater understandings. It's borderline all out war. I think this is just, I think participating in criticism publicly of that kind, especially divorced from a personal relationship is on the spectrum of that kind of thing, which in the end is like physical violence. I guess that's my thing. I think the real disagreement, if there's a disagreement here is not like at the level of how we should be relating to people where, you know, if I'm going to sort of characterize sort of in a, in a, in a stupid way, sort of essentially Lucas saying we need to dialogue with Sam Harrison and Paul isn't saying this, but that sort of implication of the argument is that no one needs to kind of very strongly critique Sam Harris or something like that. So I don't think it's a level of, it's a problem of relationship. It's a problem of Luke seems to think there is more room for dialogue. There's more room for common ground. There's more room for, so, so I think, I think this shows a different in how Paul and Luke think. And if you sort of take our political disagreements, you know, in some cases, the two tribes are sort of so estranged from each other that dialogue is just impossible. You can't talk with someone who is in a different universe than you are. But if, if, if your position has moved closer to where they are, then you have some, some points of contact and they can see some shared reality that they're talking about, then dialogue is possible. So the more interesting question to me is what is the disagreement in outlook and thinking like, where does, where do you see room for dialogue that Paul doesn't Luke, or is that an unfair? Yeah. Do you think there is something to what I just said and whatever? Yeah, I think there's something to what I just said. Whatever. Yeah, no, I think so something I've been saying in, um, just like whatever audio Voxer group recently is like, and I don't, I think Paul would agree with this, but you see what you love. And, and I, and I think when it comes to salience and there's some great examples of this, like when we were, Nate and I were talking about certain videos of Paul's and we would just in our box, we would just, I would be listening to it and I would screenshot it and I timestamp it and I'd go off for like 15 minutes about why it annoyed me of something you said. And, and I would just think like, if suspicion often creates what it suspects, but that works the same way with vision, like once you get into a mode, certain principalities, they just, they just start to take hold. And then all you'll see, and then it's, it's about unity and difference, right? Unity and particularity. If you want to hyper-focus on the particulars and hyper analytically break them down and, and destruct them, you'll miss the forest. You'll miss the forest for the trees and unity will be lost. I guess that's my point. There is unity to be found with Sam Harris because he's a human being made in the image of God. And if you can't see it, the fault lies with you. It's like when Jordan Peterson says, if someone's boring, it's your fault. You don't have eyes to see. I guess that's what I'm saying. Like there's definitely bridges to be made. And I don't think it's made through just like dunking on him, I guess. Paul isn't just dunking on him. He's actually engaging with him. Sam Harris doesn't listen. That's just true. Even if he's not listening, even if he's somehow dunking on Sam Harris, the fruit from the conversations that are had outside of the conversation that has even taken place, I think are ripe and I find it to be quality content. That's largely in great, in good faith. You know, I think that they're doing a good job and they're putting the conversation out there in the public for people to consume and discuss at the proverbial water cooler. And Paul has a lot of people listening to his water cooler convo. As he discusses the entertainment of the night before with Jordan Peterson and Sam Harris. I talked to Jeff yesterday, Jeff Pace, and I made the comment to him that I look at, Doug Wilson made a couple of little videos commenting on Jordan Peterson and Joe Rogan. I look at what a lot of people do. I look at what a lot of pastors do on the internet, you know, sort of just Sam Harris, or, and then I look at, and then I look at what the sort of the whole cadre of Christian apologists and anti-theist apologists do and go back and forth. And I wish, you know, I'd love to, I'd love to, I don't know if I'd watch it or not, but I'd love to see when Doug Wilson, he's a conservative reformed pastor from Moscow, Idaho. When he treats Jordan Peterson, Jordan Peterson says, oh, the Bible is the foundation of Western civilization. Doug Wilson says, yay. And when Jordan Peterson says that, Nate Ormond and rationality rules say no. And they might go into a little bit more depth, but not much. And so, you know, I, on one hand, Luke, I agree with you that the fruit I feel most gratified by in terms of my work is the relationships. I think it's astounding that now four years later, I mean, Luke and Julian, you, you two were some of the first that started watching my videos and contacted me and we talked and we had Rando's conversations and Rando's United started and Bridges of Meaning started. And we're still talking together four years ago. And unfortunately, we haven't had the opportunity for me to be in your home or, or you to be in my home or, you know, we haven't had that level of fellowship, but we're still talking with each other with a degree of friendship and interest four years later. And Luke, you feel comfortable enough, which I'm glad to come on the question and answer and basically say, Paul, what you're doing to Sam Harris is un-Christian. And, you know, I, to me, the reality of those relationships is, you know, I'm not going to push them beyond what they are. That's the fruit of this. And so when you say, you know, it's the, it's the Rando's conversations and the relationships, they're the real thing. I agree with you a hundred percent. But I'd love to say something here, if it's okay about something I see, I really appreciate you doing Paul and I feel compelled to in certain ways, I actually feel a little bit of this when I listened to Mark LeFavor, there's a sort of a strategy or a technique that Sam Harris uses, which feels a little bit to me like, it's sort of demeaning or bullying, like the way that they structure their arguments, it sort of just doesn't leave you a way out. And so I feel in a way that you're coming to the defense of those who might fall prey to that and say, Oh, well, I guess there's no other answer than the answer they're providing. And so, so I just appreciate that somebody is kind of saying, Hey, you don't, this, this doesn't, this isn't an open and closed case. There are questions here that are actually sort of being waved away as though they don't even exist. And so, so I like that somebody, I think this is part of the reason why people appreciate some of the like Jordan Peterson approach to things is they see somebody taking a, not an aggressive stance, but a position of almost as a defender for those who may not know how, or may not have the, the demeanor to, to say, I don't agree or I don't understand. I don't have the sort of intellectual firepower to present another solution. But so anyway, take that for what it's worth. So my, my one thing with that though, would be like, if someone is, if someone, and I'm air quoting leaves Christianity because of Sam Harris, they probably needed to, and they were probably under delusions within Christianity for the reasons they left Christianity is stuff that Sam Harris says I'm on the fence that there are legitimate deconstructions where people are, if people have a faith that is capable of deconstruction, it needs to deconstruct. You know, I, there's a point to that, which I understand, Luke, but as a pastor, I also have watched people who have deconstructed whether or not they're listening to Sam Harris, I don't know, because a lot of this stuff is out there. And Sam is one example, but I've also seen them leave Christianity and pay a heavy price. And, and for that reason, I do want to engage some of his arguments because I don't think some of his arguments are very good. And so I want to actually go through that and say, now you're all talking about the Bible in this way. Is this really what Christians think? And then they're like, yeah, I can point to all of these churches where Christians are making all of those noises that Sam Harris is, is basically throwing under the bus. And in many cases, what those Christians are saying that Sam Harris is throwing under the bus deserves to be thrown under the bus. And then I want to say, and for this reason, I mean, what's, you know, the whole debate about the existence of God is a great example of that because, you know, God is not a super thing in the sky, but there is a relational way that we relate to God, which I think is appropriate. But to draw out that kind of nuance takes time and probably won't be understood in the first round. And my articulation of those things will, will also be subject to critique and there'll be plenty of flaws and error in them too. But the process of exploring, you know, and again, I, on one hand, I love, I love the conversations that we do, the Randos conversations. Those are great. But I also look at the, I also look at the analytics and I have reason to believe that there is a relationship between the monologues and the conversations that I do that is actually helpful. And so that's part of the reason I keep doing both. And again, I've always said my monologues and my commentaries, I do them for me because on one hand, I'm listening to this stuff and what you get when I get it, when I do a monologue or a commentary video is pretty much what I'm doing without you, but actually by recording it and sharing it and getting your pushback, it's just a whole lot better than watching video by myself. I appreciate you taking, I, I, somebody in my opinion, needs to tear down the straw man that's being built by atheists. And it, or even other Christians. And I think it's doing a great service. And as a pastor, you know, leading his flock in a situation like that is, is vital and people are subjected to the internet all the time and all of these straw men are built unfair caricature of what they might consider to be Christianity in some of these discussions. And it's an unfair caricature. But, but it was a breakdown of a conversation and that Sam Harris was nowhere on display in the conversation that Paul was analyzing. So I don't really care about Sam Harris's feelings at all. I'm not particularly a fan of Sam Harris. All the things that are people are accusing him of I've absolutely seen him do. It's true. But I think maybe Paul was guilty a little bit of doing a little bit of perhaps what Julian and I did a little bit in our conversation around, around the pageau conversation with Paul, where it's like, we have all this, all this stuff about pageau that we have in our heads that we brought to that conversation that weren't necessarily on display in the conversation we were trying to comment about, and I wonder if that's what happened. I also felt that like, like mysticism, like whole wholesale in any form was straw men and the way Paul was talking about it. Yeah, I know. I know that that's the part you reacted to. I think, you know, and, and, you know, even this is, this is where the seeker of unity videos are really interesting because when we talk about mysticism as such, boy, that's a complex thing to talk about because we don't know the framing of mysticism as such, it's sort of like talking about romance as such when I've been married for 34 years. There's, there's layers of, of construction in there that, you know, it would be, it would be interesting to begin to poke around in and part of, at least in this little corner of the internet, mysticism as such is, isn't kind of a bull market, you know, everybody, everybody wants to be a mystic and that's, that's partly because of pageau and that's partly because of Reiki. And I'm probably the least mysticism, the least mystic of the three, but the least mystic of the three. Right. Well, you can also see some of that, those different, uh, those different understandings that people have of mysticism. And so let's take the video you did after that, where you're commenting on Peterson and Peterson is linking mysticism to psychedelics and Dionysian ecstasy, which is completely the opposite of what Sam Harris, which is, which is more of an ascetic traditional, really aligned with more traditional Buddhist and Christian mystical practices, as opposed to what Peterson is advocating. I don't think that what Peterson advocate is advocating is properly called mysticism, um, at all. I don't think that's what it is. I think it's a very fair point, but, but again, partly notice where we're gleaning some of these insights and learnings it's from conflict. Any, and, but, but yet here, at least in this little corner of the internet and this little estuary, I think our conflict is productive. 110%. Yeah. Without a doubt. Like, like I've had, and I, I wouldn't, I would say that one of the thing about this estuary though, is the conflict often seems to be able to happen in such a congenial way, like I know I've had, I've had a lot of conversations with the Yosef lately and we have significant areas of disagreement, obviously, but those have been some of the most productive conversations I've ever had with anyone. Yeah. Yosef has been the best ad to the boxer group. Probably. He's so great. And also like it's faithful to the wounds of a friend though. Like if you think someone's, if you think someone's against you, you're not going to listen. I mean, you're not, I mean, that's on you. If you're, if, I mean, that's a mark of maturity. Yeah. If you think someone's against you and you can still benefit from their critiques, they might be in fact be against you, but if you can still benefit from your, from their critiques, that's a, that's a mark of maturity and wisdom. Maybe that's true, but that also doesn't prevent you from trying to make that as possible as you can. Oh, absolutely. I agree. Um, Hey Paul, I, I have a, I have sort of a question and a take on the Sam Harris thing. Well, let me, let me ask something a minute. Rick, you don't have to go to work now, do you? He shrugs. Don't tell, don't tell his boss. He says, keep going, keep going. Okay. We should land the plane soon, but go ahead, Sam. All right. I'll be brief. When I was watching your commentary on the same Harris stuff, it seemed to me like you were kind of talking with your atheist member of your consciousness Congress and that this was represented by Sam Harris, but you weren't actually talking to Sam Harris for all the reasons we've already said you don't actually expect to have a conversation nor would I think it would be a very good one anyway. But it was sort of like, I don't know, like smegle casting out Gollum or something like that, saying that the Sam Harris member of your consciousness Congress, who may be at various times has had varying levels of sway is, doesn't seem to have anything to contribute anymore. And, and that that was something like what was going on. And I, I don't know. I don't, I really don't mean to mischaracterize you. I'm curious what you think of that. I think it's probably quite true. And, and, you know, this weird thing that I do in terms of making these videos, I think about that a lot because this is very strange and I'm not always so sure it's a great idea, but I haven't stopped because it seems to produce fruit. And I, I get regular comments from people that thank me and say it's helpful. And it's like, okay. But no, I think you're right, Sam. I'm, I'm certainly working out things in myself and, um, yeah, yeah. And I think it's a good point. It's a good point. Paul, I was curious, uh, quickly. I can't hear you. You're going to have to get closer to the mic, Bruce. Sorry, sorry. Is that any better? I was curious. Um, have you heard of Carl Truman's rise in triumph of the modern self? Look, Carl, Carl Truman's. Yeah. The theologian. Yeah. Yeah. I, it's one of the books on the very large pile. Yeah. Yeah. Sure. I just, I don't want to recommend it if you've heard of it, but I'd love to hear it take one day. Yeah. And, and how things, gosh, you know, part, part of this whole thing is enormously humbling because I know what a mess I am. And for that reason, I stay a Calvinist and yeah, maybe I'm not the Calvinist. I should be, but, um, I, I look at myself and I'm disorganized. I'm haphazard. I don't follow through. I don't finish sentences. I don't finish thoughts. I don't finish video themes. Um, and kind of a mess. And so sometimes I make videos and it's like, boy, I'm glad only, I'm glad, I'm glad this video only got 2000 views instead of 20,000 views and maybe I should take it down, but then part of me thinks, no, if I'm going to be a mess, uh, you, here's the record of the mess. And, um, so I don't know. Well, and obviously Paul, I want to say that I'm a fan. I mean, I'm still here. I like me. I mean, that's one of the, I don't do anything else online. Like this is all I do when I do it because I am busy doing other things. And so you're, you're one of the best people that's out there, but it's just, I don't know. I mean, I, I just came, I just heard you talk about Sam Harris and I came on here. I thought about just reaching out to you privately, but I just did. So now you and I are going to have our own little lovefest online. How Luke, it's true. I like you too. And, and I like, there's a lot of, there's very few people I don't like. I do like people. I'm a very happy guy. And you compliment me and then you just pull the rug right out. Yeah. So that's the way I love. And if you, if you talk to my wife, she'll just be like, he, yeah, he does that. And it's, it's horrible. He should stop. And she's still married to me for 34 years. So, um, it's true. It's how I love. So. All right. I love you, Paul. Pookie, pookie. And, you know, and that's again, why the most gratifying thing about this is you're still here and you know, many people aren't and that's fine too. There's such a thing as churn and not every community, but, but I mean, you can go on Voxer and, you know, tell everybody that I'm being an idiot. And, and if someone would come up to me and say, Oh, you got to listen to this Voxer, Luke said you're an idiot. I'd say, of course he did. He tells me that to my face. And I love that. That's how real relationships are. Yeah, I agree. I love that, that you said you're, you're a mess and that's why you're a Calvinist. Right. That's, that's exactly. I resonate with that. And it reminds me of a Spurgeon quote that says, uh, like if any man speaks ill of you, don't be angry with him for your far worse than he thinks you are. It's true. It's true. Well, I suppose we should land the plane. We're only a half hour. Oh, I should, I should finish the questions. They're not long. Uh, interested in your discussion of Kansas. Yeah. Gosh, I listened to a lot of Kansas. Um, as a youth in the seventies, I had an almost spiritual connection with some non-religious music. Absolutely. Oh, me too. Uh, one is, was Jackson Brown's, um, late for the sky. Um, other, were there other non-religious bands or albums you respond to spiritually where the, where's the, where's the line around spiritual in our lives, you know, it's we were so, I love grim grizz's comment about regularly scheduled programming, so shoot. When I was, when I was a teenager and listened to all that music, I was being programmed by that music. And so was that spiritual? Yeah. But there we are. I mean, I, Boston, Kansas, I mean, all the music that was popular in my demographic group and my weird little subculture in Northern New Jersey, and Rick gave me a thumbs up for, yeah, all right. Rick, Rick has far broader musical tastes. He's 10 years younger than I am, and he's always introducing me to new bands. He's like, you've never heard of these people? I'm like, no. And yeah, so that's, but that's what friendship is, is, that's what friendship is for. What are your favorite summer and winter drink? I am, I am in some ways an enormously boring person. Most of what I drink, I am such a rough person. I have two water bottles that I fill with ice and water. And that's most of what I drink. I mean, when I sit down for a meal, I'll often just grab my water bottle and drink out of that, so there's one less glass to wash. I am a deeply strange person. I mean, there's something, there's something deeply strange about me. And although when, when my kids were young and we'd go on trips, my kids would always drink from my water bottle because they'd always say, well, dad's water just tastes better. That's because I was rather neurotic about always making sure the water was filled with ice and it was cold and it was refreshing. So my favorite, my favorite summer and winter drink is ice water. All right. Oh, Rick just got out of the chair. I don't know what that means. Maybe he's heading over here with it. No, there he is. Are we going to be able to end transmission soon, Rick? He's back in his chair. Okay. So thank you all for joining us. Oh, he's back in his chair. Okay. So thank you all for joining and thank you. I mean, this last little bit over the last half hour, this is exactly why I love doing this question and answer here. So that Luke can come on and say, Paul, you're full of shit and you're treating Sam Harris wrong. And as a Christian man, you should stop it. And Nate Hile will come and have some really smart, thinky esoteric reason why I should recent rethink some things. And because I at least know you all a little bit, a little bit more than I would know someone from just one random comment somewhere or a Twitter interchange. I can listen and I can grow and I can, I can, I would say I can understand what Nate says and I can understand what Luke says. And again, for me, this is all part of someday I'm going to get up to Washington and, you know, be able to sit and have lunch with Nate and one of these days I'll get a chance to hang out with, with Luke in person. And, and I think that is what Christian fellowship is for because it's sort of a chance to get a jumpstart on eternity. So someday when I go to the UK, I'll get to meet Anselman and, and Vixen and Dixon and that's because all of our little interchanges are, are like first fruits of far greater fellowship and enjoyment of each other and growing together from now into eternity. That's, that's the vision of Christian community. And why do I love it so much? I don't think there's anything better. And in this age of decay where, and when atheists say, no, at death, that's all there is, I say, I'm not going to believe that I'm going to keep believing that even people that I've only had one or two exchanges with on this crazy little channel, I believe in the hope that one day we will be able to spend hours in a new heaven and a new earth, exploring God's glory together and the glory of his, of his handy work and his fullness that he spills out onto the world. And we will enjoy that fellowship with each other and it will be even greater than anything we've tasted here. So that's why I do this. So, all right, Rick, very good. You can end transmission.