https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=QN75goCK6ZU

 Hi, this is Paul. This is Rough Draft for Sunday, where every week I go through the current status of my sermon. First week in 2020. First week of a new decade. First Sunday of a new decade. This week I made a video entitled, Why I'm Still a Christian, and in some ways I was riffing off a book by Clarence Boomsma. Now those of you listening who have deep roots in the Christian Reformed Church will probably recognize that name. Clarence Boomsma is here pictured in this photograph from the Plato Club, a storied group from Calvin College and seminary led by the storied leader of that age, Henry Staab. Henry Staab was a hero to my father. And here Clarence Boomsma has a young man is sitting right to the left of Henry Staab. Clarence Boomsma would go on to serve one church in Imly City and then take the congregation of Calvin Christian Reformed Church, which was right next to the old Franklin campus. Boomsma retired in the 80s, I believe, and then passed away in 2007. And I wondered when he passed away because the book actually I think was released upon his death. And the book was entitled, Why I Believe the Gospel. And he writes about being a young man and entering the ministry and having read two books, a book by a priest entitled, Confessions of a Priest who had for much of his ministry not believed the gospel or not believe the historic elements of the gospel that traditionally Christians had believed in Albert Schweitzer's quest for historical Jesus. This was very much towards the end of the great fundamentalist modernist debates. J. Gresham Machin, of course, from old Princeton Seminary and his classic book Christianity and Liberalism touched on these ideas. And young Clarence Boomsma, old Clarence Boomsma remembering him as a young man reflected on his seminary training and that prepared him for what he had to deal with. In many ways that great debate was hinged on a great divide. It was the divide between heaven and earth. Albert Schweitzer in his book, Quest for the Historical Jesus, this being quoted out of Clarence Boomsma's book. It's not given to arrived at what you often find today, which I will call the spiritual solution. It's not given to history to disengage that which is abiding and eternal in the being of Jesus from the historical forms in which it worked itself out and to introduce it into our world as a living influence. The abiding and eternal in Jesus absolutely independent of historical knowledge and can only be understood by contact in his spirit, which is still at work in the world. In proportion, as we have the spirit of Jesus, we have the true knowledge of Jesus. Jesus was as a concrete historical personality remains a stranger to our time. But his spirit, lowercase s, which lies hidden in his words, capital H, is known in simplicity and his influence and its influence is direct. Every saying contains it in its own way, the whole Jesus. Now, Boomsma eventually rejected this and believed in the historical resurrection. It would have been difficult for him to maintain a ministry in the Christian informed church if he hadn't. But these are, in a sense, the two poles. And I've spoken that you have the split world. You have the world of matter, which is the world of stuff and history and physics. Some of the vision videos that I've been doing, the scientific vision where things run on their own. And this very much is the age of decay and a complete embrace of the world of matter at the exclusion of another world is the world of spirit. Now, the world of spirit, truths, words, ideas, story. But when that gets divorced from the worlds of matter, then you get things like I'm identifying as a woman or something like that, where the materiality and the story are completely disconnected and sort of hover over each other. Now, these are perennial issues for us because part of us time travels and part of us doesn't. The last few sermons, I've told the story of my grandmother, and this is the woman, Grace, who told me as a woman very much over here from the 1991 picture, made the comment that inside she feels young, but outside she feels old. Here's a picture from 1937 with her and her husband Hiram holding their son Stan, who's about two years old in that picture. And this picture from 1991, the two of them holding their young son's grandson on their lap, my son Philip in 1991. And my grandfather would die not too long after we took this picture. But we're these weird time travelers. And whenever these two realms get sort of disconnected, like Schweitzer sort of does with his, well, it's the Jesus of history doesn't matter. Part of us says, no, history does matter. Matter matters and contact matters and events matter. Or those who come out at the other way and say all that matters is events. But then in many ways where we're left with no story and we as human beings quite naturally time travel in these two realms, but they always hold together. And the union of these two things is very important and very, very important to us. Now, I think Schweitzer was quite wrong in his judgment. And I think the author of the Gospel of John would very much disagree with that. In the beginning was the word and the word was with God and the word was God. He was with God in the beginning. Through him all things were made. Without him nothing was made that has been made. And right away at the beginning of the Gospel of John, you have this idea of in the beginning was the word. And contemporary editors have it capital W because if you read a little bit longer, we're talking about a man here. We're talking about this man Jesus. Obviously the Gospel of John is harkening back to the book of Genesis. In the beginning God created the heavens and the earth. Now the earth was formless and empty. Matter was over the surface of the deep. And the Spirit of God was hovering over the waters. And God said, let there be light. And there was light. And you have this act of creation over these waters which are sort of formless. It's not unlike what happened last week in church when we sort of need events and words to go together. Because words clarify events. We have these two hemispheres of our brain. And one is sort of open to everything, unmapped territory, taking in all sorts of things. And the other is mapped territory. And where they come together, that's where we make sense. And last week the woman who was visiting our congregation who sat over in the side in the middle of my sermon decided to sort of take a little tour throughout the sanctuary. And while I was preaching I was watching all of your eyes follow her. And you were following the chaos. And you were wondering what is this woman doing? What is she looking for? What is she after? Now if I were to say or if she were to say I lost my glasses, then all of you suddenly would have been relaxed in the congregation. And you would have thought okay she's looking for her glasses. And you would have settled down and probably continued to look at the sermon. But actually again Nina got up and kind of ushered her outside and they had a nice conversation. And you all were able to pay attention to the sermon again until of course she'd walk by the windows and then all of your eyes would turn. This is how we are. But we need these raw events and word to come together to actually make sense and meaning of this world. Now John continues. In him was life. And that life was the light of mankind. And again just word is sort of light. And if this woman were to tell us last week exactly why she was wandering around, she probably didn't know why she was wandering around. But if she were to tell us suddenly it would have been like light coming into the room. And suddenly we know what's going on. The light shines in the darkness and the darkness has not overcome it. And you see here the Gospel of John iterating what you'll find in the epistles of John where you have this this where you have this this test between between darkness and light. And and the the epistles of John love to set up these contrasts of light dark light death truth lie on and on and on and on. And here the Gospel of John brings those antithetical elements into the picture and into the story. There was a man sent from God whose name was John. He came as a witness to testify concerning that light so that through him all might believe he himself was not the light. He came only as a witness to the light. And if you remember last week's sermon when we looked at Hebrews the sort of echoes the beginning of Hebrews when when the author says in the past God spoke to our ancestors through prophet. At many times in various ways. And in this sense John the Baptist is a prophet. But in these last days he's spoken to us through his son who he appointed heir of all things and through whom he also made the universe. Now it's very interesting to see the agreement between the Gospel of John and the Book of Hebrews and how these two how these two authors are very much playing from the same book here. And it's very interesting because these books are you know this is very early on. A lot of people say well mythology developed but but this isn't I mean as as authors have noted as critics have noted you know we don't have any solid understanding from these books that you know the temple had been destroyed in 70 A.D. So these things are are quite likely quite early. The true light that gives light to everyone was coming into the world. He was in the world and and though the world was made through him the world did not recognize him. Now we have this theme of rebellion. He came to which was his own but his own did not receive him. We did not extend to him the hospitality that certainly would have been due one of his status. Yet to all who receive him to those who believed in his name he gave the right to become children of God children not born of natural descent nor of human decision nor a husband's will but born of God. And again as we saw from the passage last week in Hebrews 2 were very these books are very much tracking with each other. Hebrews talks about how we become through Christ these children of God. And in fact the same ideas right here in the beginning of the Gospel of John. The word became flesh and was made his and he made his dwelling among us he tabernacled among us. And this is where this split world comes together. The word is made flesh this organizing principle this light in the darkness this this story that makes sense to all the matter actually becomes matter. Heaven and earth become one in him. Now if you look in also in the Book of Genesis you find human beings are in fact we are the stuff of earth. The man is made out of clay and the breath of God but here in a in a in a unique way. Heaven and earth join in Jesus. We have seen his glory the glory of the one and only son who came from the father full of grace and truth. John testified concerning him he cried out saying this is the one I spoke about when I said he who comes after me has surpassed me because he was before me. Out of his fullness we have all received grace in place of grace already given for the law was given through Moses grace and truth came through Jesus Christ. No one has ever seen God but the one and only son who is himself God and is in the closest relationship with the father has made him known. So here we are we are in the age of decay and we are these split creatures we are we are split and we feel the split as unnatural and wrong that that somehow that that that young woman inside the elderly body of my grandmother. Had an inkling of something deeply true and something deeply right but but although we make ourselves up and she'd be mortified if she let you all on that little secret that the hair she had in the 1991 picture was not the same hair she had in the 1937 picture. We dress ourselves up to to cover decay and avoid decay and we try to arrest decay but we can't the age of decay wins every time that everyone in that 1937 picture in terms of their flesh has passed. Christianity is about resurrection the word takes on our decaying flesh and he becomes one of us he suffers from what we suffer he becomes subject to decay in order to break that subjection for us. We are now brought into the family of God as Jesus brothers and sisters. How should we then live. We live out his story. We are like him. We act like him. We live like him. We suffer like him. We die like him. And we are raised like him. So go and do like him. And the night he was betrayed he took bread and broke it and said this is my body given for you. Do this in remembrance of me.