https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=yd-qIx-lR7k

 Okay, now we're ready. Ready for Freddy. Ready for Freddy. Are you steady? Are you rolling in a Chevy? Are you getting it ready? I set the mic straight to the top. Talk to this hip hop gang, no shame. Do what it is. A-con to C. Luther, Chris, doing his thing. Four Cigar G. With the mind that I tripped, that I hit. I'm from the A-C. Baby, Cali made me. One love. To the brothers on 3rd Street. Drinking their whiskey again. Read your Bible. Pray every day. That's the only way you're gonna make it, man. I'm not Yosemite Sam. I'm Freddy D. Mario Brothers ain't got nothing on me. I said once. I said twice. That's right, I got advice to make it right. I make it to the top. In this industry. I think you wanna be like me for Cigar G. My rhymes are fast. Trattin' them tracks. Platinum tracks. Always gonna get the rap right too. Forget you. I walked down a red carpet. In case you didn't start it. You heard it now. Boo-yah. That's right. I do it alright. That's right. I do it alright. That's right. I do it alright. That's right. I do it alright. That's right, I do it alright. Like sugar and spice. Like sugar tea. And E4D. Snoop Doggy Dog. Got the twist. Smoking on a cigar. That's a trick. He got it going on. All the time. He got the ladies in the funky fresh rhyme. But me, Freddie G. Jewelry always might appear. And I do not stare. I glare to the top. Don't you see. I'm the big daddy. Coming hardcore G. I be doing it. All the time. We'll bust a hardcore rhyme on time. That's right. It's tight. And I gotta go. But you heard my show. Peace out. Really though. Good to go without a word to say. That's why we pray. Just to make it today. We'll be back. Where are you? There I am. Where are you? Got me? Oh boy. Walk with me. Walk with me. Walk with me. Walk with me. Walk with me. Walk with me. Walk with me. All that love is a little bit too much. All that love is a little bit too much. But Lord, Wedding62 Jesus Journey Walk with Me Walk with me. Walk with my Mama Walk with me. So. Work with My Mama Oh Hold my Oh Yeah Oh Mm-hmm Say walk with me Oh I want Jesus. I want Jesus With me to walk with me walk with A little shepherd boy Yeah You walk For joy Walk with me walk with me Walk with me Walk with me Me You gotta walk with me lord, yeah Oh, yeah So So Does not want you And I day and night. He is like a tree planted by streams of water, which yields its frills and caesars and his leaf does not wither. Every faith he does prospers, not so the wicked. They are like chaff that the wind blows away. Therefore the wicked will not stand in the judgment, nor sinners in the assembly of the righteous. For the Lord watches over the way of the righteous, but the way of the wicked shall perish. Day and night. Day and night. Day and night. Blessed is the man who does not walk in the counsel of the wicked, or stand in the way of sinners, or sits in the seat of mockers. But his delight is in the love of the Lord, and on his law he meditates. Day and night. He is like a tree planted by streams of water, which yields its fruit in season, and his leaf does not wither. Every faith he does prospers, not so the wicked. They are like chaff that the wind blows away. Therefore the wicked will not stand in the judgment, nor sinners in the assembly of the righteous. For the Lord watches over the way of the righteous, but the way of the wicked shall perish. Day and night. Day and night. Day and night. Day and night. Day and night. Day and night. Day and night. Day and night. Day and night. Day and night. Day and night. Day and night. Day and night. Day and night. Day and night. Day and night. Day and night. I'm going to do some things today. I'm going to sort of do a weekend review. I've done that before, but I'm going to try and do it a little bit in a little bit more organized way. I'm going to, well, I should probably drop the link. And first I'm going to talk about and sort of set it up. And then we'll give time for people to come in for the different topics. So let's see if I can, there we go. I can pin the link. First topic today is actually not a video from this week. It's a tweet that Phil Nickerson made. Phil Nickerson really got into this channel by the Randall's Conversations. Phil Nickerson decided he was going to go through the entire conversation playlist. And he did. And I know he did because every time he went through an old Randall's Conversation, he would leave a comment. And the way YouTube deals with comments is that I get notifications of comments in time, which means if someone comments on an old video, it just shows up in my email. It just shows up in my comments stream. And that's where I first noticed what Philip was doing because he would go. So there's one playlist that's the Conversations playlist. And it's kind of a mess. It's not purely Randall's Conversations because there's all kinds of other conversations, even conversations with people with status in it. And so, but he decided to go through that and he decided to watch every Randall's Conversation. And usually, and I told him, so he started making comments. So I told him, I said, every time you see a Randall's Conversation, make a comment. And actually, any of you watching here who, if you ever go into the back catalog, leave a comment on the video. And that helps me know, okay, you're in the back catalog and you watched something and you thought something because that's really helpful for me. Because I've made so many videos, my channel has an enormous back catalog. And because by virtue of what I do, thank you, Mountie. Because of what I do and how all of these videos, they're not finished products. They're all rough drafts. And they're sort of process thinking for me. And people say, well, you know, I like such and such a thing because it's sort of the process. Well, this really is the process. And so then, so then what Nick said was, has PVK's Randall Conversations become less personal and more thinky talky over the last few years? And Food Truck Emily jumped in. And then they went back and forth a little bit. You can find this on Twitter. I watched BJ Novak's movie Vengeance recently and really enjoyed it. And the climax of that movie, well, let me run through some of the comments that I made on there. I think it's a really good question. And I think there's probably something to that. When the channel was smaller, there was less visibility to them. And that's part of the reason why I like the membership section because the membership section is smaller. Julian this week left a comment and said, well, a bunch of us on the Discord were talking about how, you know, the membership section is kind of a pain because they're Randall's Conversations. And if you're not a member, you can't see them. And that's true. But the whole point and part of the reason that I keep the membership section at like $3.00. A month of which Google gets 30%. So I keep the bar really low so that the bar is really low. And for at least most in the developed world, three, I mean, you can if people regularly with memberships join and then stop and I don't have a problem with that. I mean, I know I have sub stack memberships and some people whose work I value and support and I often hesitate to unsubscribe or to relocate my money to something else because I worry this is going to send a message to them that I no longer like them or I no longer value them or any of those things. And I think all of that is real because people normally have those kinds of feelings. But if you are no longer a member or no longer, you know, I don't have a problem. I completely understand that people have seasons and all of that and money needs to be relocated and so on and so forth. So I have no problem with people subscribing, watching them and then unsubscribing and maybe coming back a few months later. I also haven't done a lot of pure randos conversations recently because I've been I've been trying to deal with the backlog of other conversations. People, right? So I did a conversation recently with Christian Baxter. He asked for that months ago. I did a conversation this week with Lucas Vinos. He's been asking for that conversation for a very long time and there's a bunch of you who have asked for conversations and I really didn't have a mechanism of sort of doing that. Now I have a mechanism that led to that blowout that I had before. I've sort of resolved that. And so now I'm working through a backlog of conversations that people have asked for and it's it's a it's a sensitive thing because is it fair to give a conversation to someone who because they've just asked for it rather than there's a lot of people have asked for it and I haven't. And so there's no science to that. And so what I try to do is measure number one urgency, number two interest if they come at me with a really compelling thing to talk about. But then it's really not a pure randos conversation. Then it's much more thinky talky. If they are doing, you know, one of the things that I saw about Christian Baxter is Christian made a real effort to not only get into the community but serve the community. And that might sound weird because serving the community is making a YouTube channel. But if you look at the amount of time that people like Christian and Chad and and even Grizz even though Grizz has these griffs that he runs and it's his basic source of income, you know, Grizz is not in the market for a private jet at this point. I'll say it that way. So I tend to prioritize people who are showing a a real commitment to the larger effort that having been said, there's a super amount of value just to the pure randos where the link is just out there and Calendly anybody can grab it. The problem is, of course, that after I release links, those links are almost always gone within days, if not hours or even minutes of when I release them. And I usually tend to release them on Monday. But I haven't released them for a while and then people get frustrated. But I see that as sort of the normal ebb and flow. Sometimes people will ask for a conversation because they're all hot and heavy into the things right now. And then two, three months later, they're sort of cool on it because they're off to something else. It's the normal churn. And again, I totally understand that. But some of them I've been coming back to and said, you know, about six months ago or a year ago, you wanted to talk to me. Okay, let's have that conversation. And sometimes they're not interested. Sometimes things come about like the whole math conversation that I did this week. And I'm talking to Gavin Ortland on Monday. So other conversations come down the line. And so I'm trying to sort of normalize and figure out how to do this. But what I really love is that Christian, Chad, many others in sort of the corner, the Virtually Not Alone network. I mean, part of the reason that I'm playing this branding and part of the reason I have this, see if I can get my dyslexic brain, this little circle up there in the Virtually Not Alone. Let's see, this thing right here is because I want to, Father Eric said something a while ago when he said, yeah, the TLC dies the day Paul VanderKlay stops making videos. And there's a degree of truth to that. And I don't want that. And so I very much want to support people doing different things. And so, you know, even making my own branding or using some of Grimm Grizz's branding and doing all of this, this is all a way of having this not be the Paul VanderKlay show and having this not be the Paul VanderKlay corner and having this not be everything on Paul VanderKlay. I think that's why I'm saying that I don't like the attention on Paul VanderKlay, not that I don't like the attention, not that there isn't other perks don't flow with it, but because I think thinking together, working together, building a community is worth way more than whatever Paul VanderKlay can get out of it. Because even though I just listened to a little bit of a Jonathan Haidt video about, again, he's going off about what he does usually with the social media and all that is true and I agree with it all, yet, I, if you can't, if you, I'm not going to let the good be, I'm not going to let the good be the enemy of the perfect. And so part of what I think we've seen is, well, yeah, there's trade-offs with all of this, but we should do it. So again, back to the thread. Let's see, where are all my, the way Twitter works is kind of a pain. There's a voyeur, and actually MJ made this comment in a video, and MJ is perhaps one of the more both insightful and annoying commenters, which usually goes together. You know, when Jordan Peterson says, you don't know real things until, way to go, you don't know real things until you sort of bump into them and MJ is like that. And, you know, of course, he sees one of the more annoying commenters, but I read his comments and I think about them and usually has some degree of truth to them. And so I try to take that. And as I, as I mentioned, I'm not going to, I don't think the, this, this movie Vengeance in 2022 by BJ Novak, which in many ways is all about, it's virtually not alone via podcasting. And it's all about sort of this purient, voyeuristic aspect to podcasting and telling stories and sharing stories. And, and that is in the Randall's conversation too. But the thing is, in terms of us, there's always these edges and you have to work through them. And so there's always danger with these Randall's conversations of, of oversharing or over disclosure. And just recently, relatively, I took down and of course, most people will never notice when I take things down. And I never take them down for my own reasons. I usually take them down because there's a, there's some, there's some other disclosure that it's not a bad disclosure. It's just, it shouldn't be on the open web right now. And it's usually the person comes back to me later, a year or two after and say, Hey, I'm looking for a job or hey, I've, you know, I've started something and I don't really want just my story up there on the internet. And I happily take it down. Now, happily, part of me is a little sad. Another part of me knows that most people won't, those that back catalog is not well watched. Something like 90% of the views of any YouTube video, generally speaking, come within the first 48 hours and definitely within the first week of that video. And as I watch analytics, I can see that that's the case. So most of the, the Randall's backlog back catalog is ignored. And even the conversation that I posted this morning with more along TV, who's the Twitch streamer. You know, that only has four or 500 con that only has four or 500 views. And so there's sort of a natural, there's sort of a natural, I'm going to use this word guardedly. There's sort of a natural retardation to the analytics and Randall's conversations. Most people won't click on to watch Randall's conversation except for the really hardcore people here. Now, yesterday I started making a video about the guy who developed Patreon has a really interesting video on South by Southwest that one of you sent to me. I might make a video on it, but he talks about true fans and talks about Patreon and all of this. Talks about community. I think that's 70% right, but I want to play in the 30% that's wrong. So the Randall's conversations have changed. And another part of the reason that they've changed is because we're not in the same moment we were in 2018 and 2019. In 2018 and 2019, 2017, 2016, people were discovering Jordan Peterson. They were watching his videos. In many ways they were being exercised from the spirit of nihilistic depression. And so when they would come on, their freedom was raw. And there was a power to those conversations. We're not in the same place anymore. And so there isn't the same rawness to those conversations. They're not the same transparency, the same openness. It's these things mature. It's sort of like when you first become a Christian. Yeah, that's right. Algo is watching what we watch and they share between us. There's a, there's when you first become a Christian, you see this all the time with converts. They're just on fire. And there's something really beautiful and powerful about that reality, but it can't last. Nature's first green is gold, her hardest you to hold. And so there's a maturing and a mellowing and common sense pulling back because you realize that in those white, hot new days of something, it's all there and it's all amazing and it's all incredible. But it's also sort of like infatuation. Part of the reason that you are infatuated with someone is you don't see them. You're just projecting on them and you're projecting so madly all of your needs and just little bits of their person sort of come together and you fall head over heels in love. And it actually takes years for a much deeper love to form where you can actually see them and they can actually see you and you've got your scars and you've got your wounds and you figure out. Luke, there's a real hotness to you, Luke. There really is a real hotness to you. That's right. Yeah, we're paying the indulgences. Maybe I'll have to rename this the indulgence podcast. So, So yeah, so there's a lot going on. So if you have any comments about the Randall's conversations about how you think they've changed, come in now. And I dropped the link, it's pinned. And if you've got something to say with respect to that, if you can, maybe in the comments, if you can say in all caps, let's say comment. And then I can post that up and talk about it if you don't want to actually come in the stream. But if you want to come in the stream and talk about the Randall's conversations coming now. And if there's not a lot of take on this, then I'm going to move on to the next topic. And what I've done is I've created all these little banners for all these little banners for the different topics that I talk on it. And so again, I'm continuing to sort of for me, YouTube and social media in general is for play. That's what it really is for. It's for play. So ducks eat bread. They do. They like it. They like it. Ducks eat bread. So I don't see anybody coming in. Any other comments about the Randall's comments? Ah, comment. Good. I'm a curmudgeon who hates change. Yeah, Phlebas had, Phlebas made a comment in the Twitter. He says, I'm always slightly annoyed when PVK talks to people with even a small amount of status. The vibe has changed a bit. And that's true. That's exactly right. And that's when everything was new, when everything was new. So we got a couple of guys and here we have one of the original Randall's, Chad the alcoholic. What do you say about the Randall's conversations, Chad? I love them. I just love all the different things. So the Randall's that you're doing with the Twitch guy, that was still a Randall's to me. And so even though you're like, you're ratcheting up a little bit on the, as far as like maybe so-called status, but let's face it, nobody knows who these people are. There's still Randall's. So I'd love that you're taking that pattern up because I think that's how it, listen, the way that I see this is, and this is why I've been going out to these different spots. I'm trying to kind of mess with Algo a little bit. I want other people to find us, people who may need what we're talking about, who may need that. I don't mean to be presumptuous or egotistical about that because I didn't know I needed this until I found it. So what I would say too is if, who is this child? Is that Job's child? Yeah, there's two of them, sorry. I'm talking to one behind the two babies. Job is the original Randall. Yeah, this is all your fault, Paul. Bye, Job and I. I didn't tell me I would lose this much sleep. I'm so tired. I actually wouldn't, I wouldn't be doing any of this stuff if it wasn't really for Job and Paul's conversations, to be quite honest with you. Yeah. So Chad, why did you start doing Randall's conversations? Because you will basically want to go out and forage more? Touch that. Well, yeah, so going out into the flotillas, that is trying to bring other people in, maybe Algo will push us out to them, whatever. But the reason why I do Randall's conversations on my channel is because I really love listening to people's stories. They're just so much better than anything else. They are. They really are. And it's a really, go ahead. I'm really hoping that more people just email me at ChadTheAlcoholic at Gmail and I'll get you in there. It's just going to take a while, that's all, because they filled it up pretty quick. I had to take Wednesday off on my birthday. I'm sorry. Okay. But that's when I do all the, all the filming is on Wednesdays at 6pm Central. Okay. I feel your pain, Chad. I feel your pain. All right, Dale, what, what, what say you? Oh, I've been watching, I probably watched 90% of your Randall's conversations since you get, you began. It's just fun listening to people's stories. I think it's the same reason you do them, is just fun listening to the stories. And the one guy that I'm going to stick in, stick out in the mind is the one guy who went through multiple cults type stuff during his life. I was like, Whoa, there's somebody I've never met before. Nick. Yeah, he's. Yeah, that was, that was wild. He was up in, he lives up in Washington state now. I bumped into him up there. He came to an event and it was so good to talk to him. I really have to, now that I'm getting, now that I'm getting a little bit better organized, I really have to reach out to some of these old time Randall's and do some new updates. But this is all part of me trying to deal with the crazy life that I live. So I wedge, wedge new Randall's like me in their occasionally. All right. All right. That sounds good. That sounds good, Dale. Go ahead. Joe. What's that? How old is Joe? I am 41. 41. So you're, you had started a family late too, I see. So yeah, that was, we didn't expect to have kids anymore. That kind of showed up unexpected still. And then there was another one. So it's beautiful. So good. Yeah, it's pretty great at times. It's hard, but it's, there's, there's no better way. Alan, what's say you? Yeah. Hey, can you hear me? I hear you. Great. Yeah. I mean, I'm very passionately on the pro Randall's convo side. I think, I mean, even just as a way of showing people how to behave. And I mean, so many of the most powerful teaching devices are people just acting it out. And I think that the way, you know, people say, oh, we're so nice to each other here in the corner. It's like, well, we're not made up of special people. We're made up of people who are learning how to treat each other. And so, yeah, it's, you know, it might not get the most views or clicks or comments, but I think the modeling randos behavior is the best way to, you know, exercise the demons of like the worst parts of the Internet, which is to hate and assume the worst and to treat other people like they're not human. So I'm very, very pro randos. All right. All right. All right, Joe, do you have anything definitive to say as you are in many ways, the quintessential rando? I missed the original question. Well, so so Phil Nickerson, he he made a splash with me because he decided he was going to watch all of the randos conversation. So he went through the playlist and he testifies that this was actually a big part of his coming back to the church and to the faith is watching all of those randos conversations. So when he asked the question on Twitter, have the randos conversations changed? Are they less personal and more thinky talky over the last few years? Really depends on the dynamic between the both people. I mean, it tends to be two. Sometimes there have been three. There have been conversations that have been more thinky talky and some of them. I mean, what was that person you had on recently? Food truck Emily? Yeah, that wasn't. There was thinky talky, but also personal in there. Yeah. I mean, the problem is having two kids, you don't get to watch so many randos conversations. So again, I think that when I see a new rando conversation pop up, I always kind of want to watch it, because especially if there's a little teaser like you're really gaming that system. We all know it. But I'm trying to do teasers because otherwise people don't watch them. And I hear from people, they say, if you don't do a clip, I don't watch it because I don't know why I should watch it. And that's fair. But that's also something off the. It's fair. I get that. But it's also a bit of the charm. Like you're ready to just go watch that. You don't know this person. You haven't seen a teaser. It's going to be really boring. You don't know. Sorry, what is it? Is the fire truck leaving? My kids talking to me in Dutch and responding in English is dysfunctional families. But anyway, so to answer your question. I don't think they've changed. I think they were always really different depending on the person. I mean, I'm glad you're still doing them, honestly, and I'm glad there are still many requests. I mean, like I heard Lucas, you said Lucas is having a random conversation with you. I'm really curious to hear that one. I mean, I've met Lucas a couple of times. So if you and yeah, there's still lots more that I don't know. I mean, I'm repeating myself, but you just never know what you're going to get. It's kind of going to force comfy that way. Yeah. And so with Lucas, he basically had done sort of a random conversation with Karen Wong. And so I didn't do that with him. And so part of it, too, is so like right now in the in the in the chat, people are, you know, they're they're oh, we want to see this person who want to see that person. And then they're not really a pure Randall's conversation because they're already a known thing in the corner. So then it's a so this stuff is just always changing. And I it's just so that's actually what I came on to talk about. But I guess I mean, Sam, if you want to take them all my thunder, go ahead. I was just going to say I am in favor of recent a semi frequent amount of high status conversations for you calling our median high status like whatever vocal distance or Gavin Orland would count as high status. And I think that they add something and they are sort of a way of branching out to other flotillas that are out there and not every first conversation needs to be perfect. And that's OK. I know you like to have relationship with people, but relationships can't start from nothing. Right. You can't have a relationship without starting at a point of having nothing. So don't let perfection and relationship be the enemy of starting somewhere. OK, OK. I just want to beat on the same drum I've been beating on since the very first beginning, which is Jethro. It's the reason I started doing the just chatting is because what Chad is doing is what needs to be happening with the Randall's, which is Christian. A lot of people are doing it. Well, I'm glad. I mean, I there's a reason I opened up my stream yard account to so many people. Right. And frankly, what also needs to happen is partly what I've been doing, which is more. I have more conversations off my channel than I have on my channel. And that is a huge part of actually making community is you need to be talking to people and keeping up maintaining the relationships. You know, every time someone leaves my server, I check why they left their server. Some of them, it's because they're family. Right. And they're they're going to be more offline. Hey, Exodus off my off my server for for Lent. A plus, you're deconstructing. Maybe you need to have a private conversation with me. So goes back to Jethro. I I hope when I say Jethro, it's it's clear enough to everyone. But what I'm talking about, I am afraid that it's not. I watched the Beverly Hillbillies. I know all about Jethro Bodine. Luke, Luke, what say you? Yeah, I love the Randall's. I think what Jacob just said is excellent. I I was just talking to somebody this morning about the value or they were saying to me the value of having off screen unrecorded conversations, because I think that's a huge part of the dojo of the corner. And I was developing friendships, developing trust, relationship. And, you know, not everybody can just jump on to a just chatting or just jump onto a screen and have a public conversation where you can be vulnerable and transparent because the whole corner thing is weird. I had a orthodox men's gathering last night and I have this guy in there who I'm really good friends with, who I'm he's starting to get into Bejoe and I'm talking to him about the corner. And it's just hard to communicate what it is to somebody who hasn't been participating in it, because it's I don't know. It's a it's a weird thing. Like it's even like Chad says, it's different than other flotillas. It's really it is based in the Randall's. And I think it's really the differences is it's really person centric with ideas and intellectual conversation attack attached. It's really about people. Yeah. If I could just jump in here for a second. You know, I mean, yeah, yeah, we'll leave him for later. He's not a true rando. But to Luke's point, like I went to the Jordan Peterson thing. He spoke in New York City, not the thing. He spoke in New York City and I went and someone that I met at Chino introduced me to someone he met at the end of the year. Introduced me to someone he met at the Symbolic World Conference and we never met in person, but he texted me out of the blue. Hey, are you do you happen to be at the Peterson thing? And I also was with a friend who I only know through church, not through online. And we all know pageau. So we were just talking. And it wound up being like literally we had never met before me in this guy that I was introduced to. And the point just being of like, yes, it's hard to explain. 100 percent. I struggle with it all the time. But like I'm starting to see like, oh, my friend who has no idea what the corner is talk to this guy who was only introduced to me through someone I met at Chino. And the guy he's introducing me to doesn't really know PVK, but knows pageau. And my friend who doesn't know also knows PVK, who I only know through physical church. I'm not saying it's perfect, but you can start to like Tesla. You can start to like get the constellations of like, oh, these same patterns. And and then the guy who I'd introduced to had never spoken to before. Just by talking to him, I'm like, oh, I think you'd actually and I didn't do this just to proselytize. But I'm like, I think you'd actually really like my church and just come to like a book club night or I do a movie night at church where I secretly slip in pageau and symbols. Don't tell anybody in the group. But, you know, I agree. And it really, really is tough. But like now I just it feels like it's getting more real because like what a weird thing. Literally, this guy I've never met before in my life. Only Corey introduced me to text me. Oh, are you at the Peterson thing? I say yes. I'm with a friend who also knows pageau. And like then it just, you know, and no, even outside of all that, good things can come up. But then you try and reverse explain like, oh, well, why did this relationship come up? Come together? Why is this good thing happening? It's like, well, we happen to be in the same place and I had his number and he knew and my friend happened to show up at the same time. And it's going to be hyper complex to explain all those, you know, and I only, you know, there's so many like things that had to come together for that to happen. So I know that was long, but like it just felt like a real like, oh, Instantia, like it's coming together. The thing is happening like, you know, this friend who doesn't know PVK, this person I've never met in person, this person who just knows symbolism, but doesn't know this. They're all talking. They're all coming together, you know, intersection with real in-person church, et cetera. So, yeah, Cairo moments, you know. Yeah. Any any last thoughts on this topic? Because then I'm going to move on to the first video of the week, which were the first video on the list, which were the gender pioneers and Ross Douthat's piece on does the left have sexual boundaries? And so I'm going to jump into that. I haven't decided if I should clear you all out here and have new come in or is that what is that what I should do? I think so. Depends if there are people working behind the scenes or not. There aren't any better. You can clear us all out and then let us back in just to give a visual sign that we've changed subjects. All right, I'll do that. Any last things on the randos? All right. Clearing you out. I'm trying to figure out. So, OK, so I got my banner. My next banner. Does the left have sexual boundaries? Why not? And I don't know if any of you saw that video with that. This arose out of a out of a out of a different form that I participate in. And in that form, it's not too hard to guess what form it was. But there's just this ongoing fierce battle over same sex marriage. And one of the one of the questions was, does the left have sexual boundaries? And someone then in that for in that forum and he gave permission to let people go out of the forum to talk about this from his from his thread. He said, you know, go and find your five. This was a person that's on the left of the debate in this group. Go and find your five most liberal friends and ask them beyond consenting adults. They didn't even say consenting adults. They just said consent beyond consent. Are there such things as immoral, immoral acts? And what was interesting is that some people did try this and a lot of people said, well, when I asked the question, people looked at me like it was a trap. And so that got into my mind. The idea that there's something in sort of this liberationist ethos that says, you know, you can't have boundaries. And actually, there was a video that the that Malcolm and Simone over on based camp had did had done about this topic, which I really want to come back to and watch and do a little work on and maybe talk to them about some time. Because I think I think people are on to something when they're when they're noticing that liberationism has to imagine wide open frontiers and any kind of what feels like a priori boundary is therefore illegitimate. So then it led me to the the thought, well, then how are and then Ross Douthat's point where he said, you know, there was me too. But basically, and then there's all this fascination with polyamory and all of these things. And he said, but what you get from what you get from people who have said gone out into that world and come back from it are usually horror stories. And, you know, which is so then I thought about the 19th century and these mountain men. But of course, doubt that was responding to Andrew Huberman's the write up about him. And OK, men aren't supposed to do this because of men do this. They'll surely do it wrong because they're men. So women should do this. But, you know, and and then I thought, well, how do regular people who are living this way, how do they how do they do their pioneering? And I thought, oh, it's authenticity because I hear that all the time. Well, I would go and do that, but it doesn't feel real to me. It doesn't feel it doesn't feel right to me. And so I thought, huh, so that was a pretty so I had written this on this forum. And actually, a lot of the people to the left of that debate on the forum, they're a little suspicious of it because for some people in the Christian Forum Church, I am a traitor because I used to be a reliable lefty. And now suddenly I am I am a traitor to the cause. And and so there's people that are a little little annoyed by me and don't trust me because I haven't, you know, especially when I got a YouTube channel because I should use my channel to promote. What they want promoted and I won't. And but I at the same time, I'm trying to get a sense of what are the dynamics in this. And so I thought, yeah, it's this whole thing about progressivism and authenticity that sort of come together. And what it's left people with are are is a lot of trauma at the same time. That doesn't sort of leave the right off the hook or the traditionalists off the hook because almost all everyone who is sort of light it lit out for the territory used to be in the traditional camp. And there were issues. And so there's a reason they decided to go out and explore. And so, yeah, yeah. So that's that's the topic. And so if anybody wants to jump in here and talk about that, I've got two remainders in the and and and the fact that they remained will surprise none of us or that that both of them have opinions on this topic probably will surprise none of us. But I don't know if you guys watch the video or the summary was enough. But what are your thoughts? I think that sort of like that parasitic storytelling idea where the left constantly when it wants to tell a story has to first set up the old regime to tear it down. Right. That's sort of Peugeot's point is that even when the left is completely in charge, they need their boogeyman around. And they if the boogeyman isn't stepping up to the plate, then they'll construct a straw man boogeyman for their purposes. I think that the left views themselves as not just wanting to explore, but needing sort of a rival to contend with. And now that the left has virtually uncontested triumph over seemingly the sexual conversation for the moment, although I suspect that that will change relatively soon, relatively quickly. They are left wondering what to do, and they're tearing down these boundaries and the fruits of their labors are coming back at them in the form of the transition or whatever. And that it's starting to look pretty ugly. And I think really kind of what they need, they need like it is probably for the best that there's someone questioning the status quo at any given time. But it is not the last job to be the maintainer of the status quo. And they're kind of left with that bill at the moment. And they don't know what to do. And they're terrible at that job. And now all of a sudden they look like prudes every once in a while, which is their least favorite thing. The least favorite thing is to look like a prude. Right. And so I don't know, I think they need to give the task back to the conservatives, realize that the conservatives have a job and a role and it has a purpose and they have a purpose. And so things are just upside down and weird at the moment. All right. Jacob. You're muted. This is a very immature and incomplete conversation that is really important. And like, I kind of feel like your video Sex Lives of the Patriarchs is is like foundational. And so, like, frankly, I didn't stick around to make a comment on this because, like, I had I don't know if you watched the discussion I had with Kale Zeldin on Abigail Shrier's book. No, I haven't yet. Where he mentions where he mentioned your video. This topic is just so huge. There just isn't hasn't been enough processing for for us to like do a simple analysis. Okay. All right. Good. Chad. Hi. Well, my intuition about. So, I'm going to talk about this kind of adjacently like, I would say if you're going to ask this question, or do this experiment. Do not do it at work. Because I ended up having this, and I'm serious. I ended up. This was back in 2020. I was working with a couple people one of them was a male the other was female. We were, we were talking about. She was at some, some protest rep but have you ever heard of communism or, or the Soviet Union and this and that. And then I started talking about Billie Eilish and what the what the press was doing to Billie Eilish because they're sexualizing her because she was wearing like a bra and stuff and I, and I was just like, well, I mean, it just seems like if you wear a bra on stage, of course you're going to you mean she was just wearing a broad me because of the 60s it was the other way around. Up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up. Yeah. and it was a whole. It was terrible but that was all just like having a conversation that had nothing to do with sex really and um that was very terrible. So if you're gonna have you're breaking up. Chad, I'm gonna move on. I'm gonna move on to the other Jacob even Cameraman TV. That's just had a people that you work with so that you don't get called into the office for such things. Because if they don't like you in the office... Oh, alright. Lots of good stuff there in fragments. We will study it like the lost scrolls of ancient Greek civilization. So what's your take on it? Did you see the video? Didn't see the video. I just liked the topic so I jumped on. I figured our standards weren't super high here that I needed to do a lot of background research. I hope that's the case. Jacob's standards are very high so when Jacob's here he elevates the standards. Okay, I'll try to not fail to live up to them too badly. We're talking about sexual authenticity and... Why does the left struggle to have sexual boundaries that are sort of a priori? Why does the left struggle to have sexual boundaries that are a priori? Doing this is wrong. Paul, this is Jordan Peterson's whole thing. The left struggles with boundaries. He hammers on that constantly. So it's nothing new. I could get a little thinky talky here. Which is I think leftism is the autocatalytic process of self-digestion of Western culture. It's like what happens when you get something that exists and it starts to digest itself. Any vector along which you can make progress or you can change things is the direction where you get rewarded for making progress. So you sort of are just taking advantage of any weakness in your culture's foundation to see if you can try something new and have people pay attention to you for it. I think Robin DiAngelo's book about white fragility is bad for the world. But she wrote it because she got paid to write it and lots of status for writing it. The same thing within the realms of sexual experimentation. If you can make something that works and gets popular, why not? Something like that. All right. Andrew, I'm not going to let you just eat breakfast here on the live stream. If you have something to say, you have to say it. I know Jacob is here and so you're used to just eating breakfast with Jacob. But that's not what this channel is for. Jacob has a channel that you can eat breakfast with him. What do you have to say, Andrew? Do you have anything to say? You got to unmute first too, by the way. You know, I kind of just came on here not knowing what the topic is. Really? I was surprised. We're talking about sexual ethic or something. I don't know, man. Well, I've got some. I think it's a little Jacob. It's like innately, there's something exciting about the idea that there's no rules. And I think everybody wants to try that out until they run into like why that stopped working. And like that's when people get religion or like try to shape up, you know, and some people never do or do too late. I was 35 when I realized that like, you know, the way I was living was never going to result in the love and deep connection that I wanted someday. I'm like, wait a second. I'm 35 now. I'm like, oh, I want to settle down and be married and have a family like someday. But I'm 35 and I just broke up with someone after three years. When's someday going to happen? Yeah. And it's like someday is not now. Someday might not. I'm starting to run out some days. Yeah. And then I just tweeted today about I met a girl at a local church and her boyfriend broke up with her because he said he's not sure what he wants out of life. And he's 43. Yeah. And I'm like, dude, you better hurry up. It's like, you know, you're going to die soon. You're 23. Like you better figure out what you want out of life. Yeah. So I think when the fire starts to burn, that's when we take our hand out of it. And it's just some of us have fire-paying tolerances and others. Nate Hile is going crazy. And Nate, he might be at work and not be able to come in and defend because I'd love to get the other side. And we're not going to get it from Hank. That much I know. Hank, what do you have to say? Well, I've come to lower the standards. If Jacob has raised the standards, I have come to lower them. Standards? What are those? I did watch it. I think that the hedonism of the 70s was commonly called the me generation. And we were the first generation that parents were divorcing. And it had a profound effect. And part of that profound effect was objectification. Right. You know, now a woman is an object of my desires and no longer a person. And it's had a horrible, horrible effect on our society. And I think that, you know, I grew up in a generation where I remember my father looking at me when I went out on a date with a young lady and said, if you do not treat her like a lady and something happens, you don't have to worry about her father. Okay. But he came from a generation, right, that was a little different. I think that when we talk about it, I was a late bloomer. I didn't get married until I was 30. For my generation, that was late. And the thing you learn in marriage is it's all like playing jazz. There is no written outline of how you're going to go about this thing. And so when you think you got a plan, there is no plan. Okay. God has a nasty habit of taking your plans and laughing at you. And I think that the most important thing is that it's about a commitment. Do you just make a commitment? And I think that you talk to my friends who never made the commitment or didn't make it properly, they're very unhappy. And happiness doesn't mean perfection. It doesn't mean that each day is a dream. And there's time for, I know my wife probably every other day wonders why she married me. And I sort of wonder why she married me too. But I think that this idea that the grass is greener, that the sex will be better, that's the physicality. And it's all like, nah, just, you know, there's a time where you just, you got to get out on the basketball court and shoot. And the guy may throw the ball back at your face, but you know what? You get up and you shoot again and you just keep on going. Yeah. And I think that's the best thing. I think it's worked out well. I think when we degrade each other, what you're seeing, that home math that I watched was amazing. You can't degrade one gender over another. You know, I tell you every day I go home and I tell Kate how much I love her, how much she means to me. If she were to die, I probably would be devastated for a long, long time. We've built a life together. We're so in, you can't separate it out. And I tell you what, the wonder of that, now that I've gone through it for 35 years, I wouldn't trade my position for all the money that you could give me or all the fame or all the wealth or anything else. It's a blessing. All right. All right. From Hank, I got two more. So did I raise or lower the standards, Paul? You said pretty much exactly what I thought you were going to say. But not everybody else would know. Paul? Yes, hi, Jacob. Just quickly, two things to be paying attention to, which I don't think people are paying enough attention to. The CAS report in England and with JK Rowling, it's really important stuff that's going to change the contours of this conversation. The CAS report? Yes. So the National Health Service commissioned a pediatrician to do an independent report on what's going on with trans-identified kids. And that report just came out. It took four years to put it together. And it's causing a huge sea change in how things are going to be done. OK, all right. Thank you, Jacob. Mark? Hi, Paul. How are you? Not too bad. Doing well, thank you. I guess the topic that fascinates me, which is maybe connected to this, is the influence of 4chan and Tumblr on the sexual ethic. What was sort of working within those two social media platforms? So 4chan was very quickly pornified and so was Tumblr very quickly pornified. And the impact then that had on the young people within those platforms. So 4chan, there's quite a lot about 4chan. Tumblr was mentioned in the JK Rowling, which trials a JK Rowling podcast. And then Louise Perry had a conversation with the lady Helen, I can't remember her second name, who wrote the book about trans in relation to fan fiction on Tumblr. And I'm no expert, but just looking at it, what people were able to do within those platforms was push the boundaries of the sexual ethic in a virtual setting and sort of explore things. Also, there was probably bad actors within those platforms feeding junk in and influence a lot of young people in an early stage of the formation. So like a good example of how that kind of explodes out into the real world is Twilight, where there was a piece of fan fiction that was done with Twilight. And it was a bit like, I guess, BDSM. And then that piece of fan fiction was taken and published as Fifty Shades of Grey. And then that explodes out from fan fiction into the real world. So that's just one tiny example. And then these communities like the fan fiction communities on Tumblr and what was going on in 4chan. What enables people to kind of formulate ideas in their mind and then potentially take those ideas from that platform and then take them into the real world. So it'd be interesting to sort of understand the impact of those two platforms. This is maybe very general. I understand that 4chan moved to the right from being like it's just an open platform and then Tumblr moved to the left. But in a bad way, they both pornified a certain generation, I think. And just the impact of that and just the fact that nobody tweaked on to regulate that as well and pull those in. I think that's had my gut tells me no scientific data, but your gut would tell you those those platforms have had untold damage on young people. Yeah, yeah, that makes sense. Makes sense. Yeah. All right. Dale, what say you? I think one of the issues that they don't have many boundaries is nothing but sort of the definition of the left today versus conservatism is that they don't have any background to make reference to of what's allowed for everybody. And what's not. No, is there they're trying to think of today without a background. What is what are the boundaries? So that if you also ask them to break it down, what do you think is acceptable for yourself? What do you think is acceptable law? And what do you think is acceptable for other people? You come up with three different answers. Yeah. Well, I think, you know, and this libertarians used to be sort of considered conservatives, but sort of this libertarian ethos and impulse has kind of pervaded everything. And so that's where I get into this authenticity compass. Because when I talk to people, normal people, not in the corner, not on YouTube, when I talk to people, what people tend to say is it has to feel authentic to me. And I think, huh, this is after a hundred years of psychology and sociology, whether it's been fundamentally materialistic, where a psychologist, a psychologist would say, well, you are the product of all of your past experiences and your authenticity spectrum is simply the sum total of this. And this is this is this is not a Christian position necessarily. And but but what's amazing is that this religious cult of the secret sacred self reemerged in this. And so I'm going to go out and I'm going to go frontiering with my authenticity thing. And I think that gets back to what you were saying, Jacob Camomile, that you part of what we lost in the culture were the idea that fences and boundaries are given to the youth to give them at least a place to start. And we know that sometimes you don't always have things don't always work out well, but at least you've got a better than nothing thing. And sort of what we've done with authenticity is we've said, well, just go out and and do what feels right to you. Do what really feels right to you is not a great standard. So, yeah, I think there's if I may, you're a lot of work fall. OK, I think there's sort of a lie about the kind of thing we are that's implicit in like libertarian hedonism, like the dominant libertarian hedonism that you see on like Reddit, Tumblr, 4chan, all these other places that have had a huge effect on like the wider culture as well, which is something like you are your appetites. We become identified with our appetites. So we treat sexuality as like a tasting menu where you go and you try out every kind of thing, either in fantasy or in real life that you think you might want. And then if I like something, then that becomes my identity. That's who I am. It's like I went to like I went to a restaurant with a big tasting menu and I tried out chocolate ice cream, vanilla ice cream, strawberry ice cream, alien ice cream. And I decided that like whatever I like best, that's who I am. And then I need to reformulate my entire life around that. And then but then like on the Internet, there's like all this weird porn that's like not even that's not even like realistic. Like there's some men that decide that their identity and who they want to be is like they have a fantasy about having sex with giant women, like over 15 feet tall or something. This is like a mild one, right? This is just like that sounds like a nightmare. This is like one kind of thing that exists. And but it doesn't exist, right? It's like not real. Or there's there's men that like I'm sorry to get you. I know the whole I've been I've been on 4chan. I you know, I lived I've been in Pride Parade. You know, I've been around the block. So I know these things. But there's there's men that like only can can can get excited to women, images of women that are like made out of green slime. Like their thing is like slime women and like this doesn't even exist, right? You can't marry a slime woman. And but this is what they've come to become warped as. And like, is this who you are? Is this authenticity or is there like a deeper level of authenticity that respects reality that respects your connection to other people and you're embedding in a culture and a civilization and to like some sort of like productive way of being that stretches into the future and connects to the past? Because your ancestors, you know, didn't have fantasies of 15 foot tall women. And that's all or or maybe they did. And they just didn't reproduce because they couldn't find any. There's a 4chan green text meme that I think deconstructs it well, which says, you know, before the Internet, you know, I want to have sex with toasters. Friend tells you you're an idiot. You move on after the Internet. I want to have sex with toasters. You find a community of a thousand people that want to have sex with toasters. You become a sex with toasters guy and you go to sex with toasters conventions. But like that appetite has been completely warped from its original purpose. Is that who you are? We are. Good point. All right, look, I want to just say something quick. You're Paul. I love you. You know, I love you. Your secret, sacred self stuff drives me insane. I but that's different from your white stone name. Yeah, integration. When you hear authenticity, just hear integration. Unity of the multiplicity. Your eye is one. That's I think that's the best. That's the way to steal man authenticity because the kind of authenticity that's the hedonistic libertarian freedom without constraint is insanity. That's the freedom. That's not freedom. What people that say authenticity that way are authentic authenticity bullshitters like that's that's all fake. All right. There's Luke. Now, Jess, I just want to say that the boundaries is is what makes sex sexy. If you don't have if you don't have the boundaries, then then there's no excitement. And that's what that's what. So so when when you have the libertarian freedom and you don't have the boundaries anymore, people start getting bored and then they have to invent slime women and all that. And then I think I think the thing with authenticity that people to try to tie that in is that is that if something inside of you is so authentic that you have to cross a boundary in order to like act it out or be yourself, then then that must be like your yourself is is has it is more real than the boundary. And so they want to exert this. It's not always self-importance, but sometimes it will come out self-importance or pride or whatever. But it could also just be like, I just want to be real, you know, or but like I want to be an actual person and not just someone, you know, you hear him talking these terms that confined in a box or whatever. So by transgressing, it sort of proves a point that I that I'm real and I have like this thing inside of me. Yeah, I think I think you're right in that. You know, Luke and I maybe Luke and I need to have a whole separate conversation on why he hates the secret, sacred self, which is what I talk about. But I think it's actually I think you're right here because the transgression helps make the secret, sacred self feel real, because the key about the secret, sacred self, it has to feel enough other from me that there's a boundary that across a transformation that is done to me so that I feel like I am evolving into the truth. So I think there's some interesting dynamics in that. All right. Anything anything else on this topic before we get to Jordan Peterson and Daniel Dennett? I hopped on again because I had the thought. Did you want to apologize for the 15 foot women and the toaster sex? I tried. The toaster sex is the one that just the 15 foot women. That's just weird. The slide. That's just weird. But toasters like I know what toasters are like. Who would think this? That I think that one was a meme making fun of like all the weird sex that was like more common. Please don't tell me that there are people out there. But you know, there's people that can only have sex wearing like fursuits, right? That's like that's just common. Like furries, right? It's not that common because I haven't I haven't bumped into it in the wild. But now again, my sample would be small. And you know, part of the difficulty with the Internet. So I just talked to someone who was telling me that his son who is goes to a public school, he's known to be a Christian. And so what people will do is that they'll take a phone and they will, you know, put some kind of really transgressive porn on it and just like put it in front of his face to show him. And so then he was telling me the kind of stuff he gets showed. It's like I've never dreamed of most of these things and I would rather live my life never having had the net never having had the thing appear before me. So I'm not I'm not blaming you, Jacob. But it's but that's it. That's an issue that we have going that the Internet and this sort of transgression ism. You know, we just need to continually be shocked by another transgression. And and and the further out that those transgressive boundaries go, the more awful it gets and the more satanic it gets. But it's an interesting one, Paul. Just last week, I think on Netflix, there was a series called the Anti Social Network. So it focuses on on 4chan. It's it's like touch, but it plots 4chan from its beginnings right to the almost the present day. But what you're describing is basically what they said in the in the documentary. There was this awful stuff going on in 4chan, but it was confined to a certain extent. Nobody knew what 4chan was. But basically what's happened in the last 10 years since 4chan started is all that awfulness and 4chan has exploded out into the real world. And basically the conclusion, one of the conclusions of the documentary was that 4chanified the world, just the awfulness that was going on in there. Just as you described, people just in a school showing awful images. It's it's quite it's it's it's about an hour and a half. It's probably worth it worth a watch and just the impact on 4chan has had. That's a game they used to play on B, which is like, you know, try to see who can gross out everybody else. Image. But like part of the the reason why I had the thought I had was actually about so Mr. Beast is this very popular YouTuber and he has one of his buddies that works out with works and does videos with him. He came out, he got married, he had a kid. He's probably like 26, 27 years old. And then he came out as trans when his kid was three months old or something. And people were going through his Twitter and his old tweets and they're like, oh, this guy is into a lot of was into a lot of weird porn. And he was into a lot of anime porn and tie, which has a lot of these the weirder tropes. And, you know, to me, it looks like when someone comes out as trans in their mid 20s, like a lot of times it's through this rabbit hole of weird porn that they fall down. And this has a real effect on the world. Like, where is this coming from with all these gender wars and people, you know, experimenting with their gender identity and their sexuality? And it creates an inability to have a relationship to because you the real human woman, usually it's the men who are more pornified. Not always, but a real human woman is never the same thing as you've been as an anime girl or as these other images that you've been exposed to as you go down a weird rabbit hole. So it becomes it's actually a very isolating thing to to fall down one of these. These authenticity holes. Let's call them. That's good authenticity hole. That's good. I mean, it the thing that continues to boggle my mind is that after 100 years of naturalism. This, I mean, we are now surprised that human beings are formed by their experience. We had 100 years of a religion that says human beings are simply the sum of their genetics and experience. And now we are shocked that giving people enormous amounts of transgressive experience leads to destruction. It's like this would be the this would be the one thing that that religion should at least give to us that we should be careful about how we form people. But the opposite has happened. I mean, it's it's a it's a completely insane thing when you understand what's at the heart of that religion. Nobody that's ever believed in the malleability complete malleability of human nature has had like been a positive program for like where to lead that. I agree with that. Yeah. Yeah. So it's what their new Soviet man was one that had like no scruples that would kill you know, on command and things like that. Like that's who they chose to make the you know, Alan says this is a constant topic of conversation in the corner. And, you know, this could be a topic of an entire thing. And the topic between the men and the women of the corner is very interesting. And I, as sort of a marquee member of the corner, often get very interesting comments from a range of women with respect to this. And that's I'd love at some point to host a conversation of women on this topic. But part of it is here that I think this the same point that Jess was making that and it connects to the Randall's conversation that there's something very. There's there's some things we do in this corner are just a little too disclosing for a lot of women and understandably so. And so figuring out how to how to navigate all those things and also just it's also legitimate to have a male only space. Now, this isn't the male only space, but it tends to be a male dominated space. So it's hard to know. So yeah. Yeah. Paul, I'll say goodbye. Thanks for the time. All right, Mark. It's great to see you again. Yeah. Take care. Cheers. All right. On to the next topic. This should be this should be an interesting one. The Jordan Peterson Daniel Dennett conversation. Now I have done. I have done now two videos on that. And it's I was this morning I was watching the Daily Wire exclusive portion, which was lovely. It was really nice to get to know Daniel Dennett. And it made me think about Randall's conversations. And thank you, Mandy. Thank you for for commenting on that. That's that's helpful input. It's it to me again. We are just seeing, you know, that there are a lot of interesting comments in the second video. Like, you know, when I knew that for both of those videos, I knew that the titles would draw fire. But the but the fact is, and then and then a lot of people in the second video were sort of doubting the premise of the title, which is. But if you watch that video, Daniel Dennett starts know it's science all the way down. And then just sort of patiently keeps bringing things. No, it's civilization. You need civilization as a boundary. Oh, and then China. OK, you need law. And it just yeah, it was it was a surprising video. It was a surprising conversation. I think it shows how far the discourse has evolved. Watching Alex O'Connor regularly has showed how far this has changed. Glenn Scrivner did an excellent video on Alex O'Connor's appearance on trigonometry recently where Alex O'Connor sort of almost tends takes the theistic chair, versus Constantine Kissin, who is playing all of the authenticity cards. The real surprise to that to me in that video was I didn't have time to make it because I'm doing all these other conversations. The real surprise in that video was Alex O'Connor continues to get more and more sort of a Platonist, maybe sometimes in some moments. And Constantine Kissin, who's supposedly like a new conservative, so he's with Jordan Peterson on the trail in terms of a bunch of the headers for a bunch of the videos. Constantine Kissin just exposes himself to be a complete, just a just expressive individualist. And all right, so if you want to come in and you want to talk about the Bennett-Jordan Peterson conversation, I'd love to hear your take. Or you can, I know some people are noting that they thought it was boring, etc., etc. If you had, so you can include any other recent Jordan Peterson conversations on your commentary. So I've talked a lot about this. I don't know that I have a lot more to say about it because, again, I took the conversation, I sort of chopped it up and I watched the different segments and then I thought about the structure of how the conversation progressed. And then I sort of walked it backwards through the conversation. There were some other little interesting elements of it. But I remember my first watch of the conversation was Daniel Dennett sort of gave up the keys to the kingdom and didn't realize he was doing it. So, all right, I got a message in. So, yeah, if nobody wants to come in and talk about that, well, nobody wants to or nobody can. So, oh, oh, oh, Dale's got ideas. What do you think of the conversation, Dale? I haven't even moved the screen over yet. Dale's got ideas. Sorry, you've got to meet your. I got you. You didn't give me time. It was too quick. Anyway, I watched that video too and two things really struck me on. One, Jordan was on his sort of best behavior, respectful with Daniel. Yes, he was showing him a lot, a lot of deference. So he would throw out the question and then throw out another thing, but he never phrased anything as an argumentation type structure. It was always just a very polite question. The other thing that struck me is that anybody who's been listening to you and Jordan for quite a while, you know, just wax the table with him instantly. I mean, he left hole after hole after hole of no foundational axiom support for all his arguments. Those are the two that just really jumped out at me on that video. It was like, man, it's like listening to a bad Sam Harris. What do you think? I only saw your recap of it. And yeah, I mean, when figures like Dennett get flustered and you see it all the time, you tweeted like not tweeted. You mentioned his comment about, oh, in any civilized society, the trust, you know, obviously we trust each other. Like, I'm not even saying like, oh, there's blood. We blood in the water. We great way to let's rip them to shreds. It's like anytime someone learns the scientific method, be like, OK, you're reading a study. You didn't do the study. You're reading it. You have to trust this other person, even if it's pure. Oh, well, we know someone commented under one of my comments. Oh, we have peer peer review. And they said in a respectful way. But I'm just like, yeah, that's just more other people. Like, that's just more. You're just adding more layer, which you can say like, oh, the confidence intervals are getting higher and higher. And, you know, like and the margins are, you know, but it's just like you're just adding more people. You didn't do the experiment. So that's just I don't mean to like it just OK. You did a study. It's peer reviewed. I have X amount of confidence in that. I like this journal. I don't like this journal. Blah, blah, blah. But that's just part of the science that really can't fully be captured by the title of science, which is fine. Every, you know, things are nested in each other. But as someone who's somewhat of a layman on this topic, it just seems so obvious. Yeah, like there's the scientific method when I read the study, you know, someone doing an experiment and then telling me about it is not I didn't do science. I just read a study that someone else did. And I have trust because we have a society that like has high trust and peer review and journals. But it just seems like such a like obvious. And then, of course, then it's getting like, well, any civilized society, I'm just like, whoa, whoa, we're using big words all of us. And then getting very, you know, high and mighty all of a sudden. But, yeah, that's just my the point I wanted to jump in and make. So is is four years ago, this would have been a big conversation today. It's a snoozer. Does that basically show that at least in many circles? And the four horsemen, they're just they're just done. They're just done. Yeah, I that's that's my read that you watch them and it's like that new atheism. It doesn't mean it doesn't mean atheism is dead. And it doesn't mean I mean, one of the one of the big missteps that I see Christians always make is like, we want it's like, no, this it's it's just that this whole. This whole Church of Science is is really looking shabby and has kind of been exposed for what it is. So just what say you? I thought it was interesting, like when Peterson would walk through in that very careful way that he would characterize the conversation. But but he would walk through something like the the the myth that undergirded the Egyptian civilization. You know, he goes through that. And then and then, you know, Daniel Dennett's like, yeah, I'd agree with that. And and there but he's like, I don't call that religion. I would call that whatever. And he would just call it something else. And and so there was like this agreement, but Daniel Dennett would never sort of concede the definitional ground of what religion was. It was something that sort of for Dennett at least went undefined. And he just sort of axiomatically was like, that's bad. So obviously, if you explain something to me and it was good and it made sense, which Peterson did seem like regularly in that interview, Daniel Dennett would just say, yeah, that's science or that's secularism or that's just civilization. You know, he would he would just say things and in agreement. And I thought the agreement was well, it was it was significant. I felt like it was significant because I would expect Daniel Dennett to kind of, you know, I mean, he is an older man now. Maybe back in the day, he would have been a little more spry and be able to, I don't know, be a little bit more energetic about these things. But but I expected him to like argue a little bit more with Peterson about stuff. Has. So Duke Edinburgh, who I don't I don't recognize the I don't recognize Duke Edinburgh at all. And Kale mentions the book is coming out. Have has all of this sort of lost its edge. I mean, and Peterson included because, you know, this was this was an argument made by David Fuller, David Fuller. Well, so one of the things one of the conversations, those subconversations I had this week was, you know, Peterson's influence and influence. And influence just by virtue of the word, we sort of imagine just sort of a a discrete scale that it's plus or minus that you can talk about that you really can't because there's lots of different kinds of influence. And so I think on one hand, Peterson seems to have really lined up some very interesting arguments that make it very difficult to just dismiss religion as wooey stuff or supernatural stuff. And but yet Peterson isn't often heard in in other areas. So how does this conversation sort of what does this conversation tell us about not only who Daniel Dennett is and the and the status of new atheism, but also even Jordan Peterson? Maybe it's a bad question, Graze. You want to you want to say something before everybody just ignores the rest of my question? Well, I remember, remember, if you will, Jordan Peterson is one of the four horsemen of meaning from his apocalypse of meaning conversation with John Zepesio, John Verbeck and Bishop Robert Barron. Yes. And that was like, I don't know, a failed branding attempt for the upper echelon of the corner, perhaps. Or maybe or maybe just a video title. But but a failed branding attempt. Yeah, I'm sure they would have loved that to have taken wing. Like for people to write up, write it up like, oh, look, the new the new Ford horseman. But anyway, the important thing is I think you guys are missing a wonderful opportunity. You're you're here on the on top of the fourth wall with Pastor Paul Van de Klay and you're you're you're demonstrating a behind the fourth wall behavior card for this appearance is the nine of hearts. You see, the thing is, what we get is we get Jordan Peterson taking all of his best ideas and putting them gently in front of an opponent. And you can cut Daniel Dennett out of that entire thing and like, think with Jordan Peterson. You can like, OK, well, and that's what I did on my lovely highlights. Then it Peterson highlights thing on the Griswold Graham channel. Thank you very much. Not to lose it, not to pass up a chance to promote the channel. So all right. Well, what do you think? What do you think about what Gris said or what I said? I mean, as far as Peterson's influencer, is it Wayne? Like, you know, it's sort of like the long. All of his content that he talks about seems like it was done in his Maps of Meaning seminars, and he's gotten better at saying it and he's like got better at presenting them and these kinds of things. But I don't know if. Like the Peterson has really expanded on anything significantly. I don't know. It seems like we're like from Maps of Meaning, we're kind of all sort of. Talking through the implications of it, I guess. I think I'm looking forward to his new book. He's. Did you read his last one, the 12 more rules? No, I didn't. I didn't. I've heard it's better than the first 12 rules, but I. I think he's a better speaker than a better than than writer, for one thing. I think his best. It's interesting that what I thought his two best his two best works were his classroom lectures. And then his Genesis series. His classroom lectures. And then his Genesis series. The. The gen the Exodus seminar was supposed to be a precursor to a standalone Exodus series and I wondered how that would be. Now he's his. We who wrestle with God series is a. Is a what you know again he's doing that traveling show thing, which doesn't really come to California anymore, which is I'd really love to know the reason for that. I'm sure there's reasons because California is a big audience. And but but we don't get number one we don't get the Jordan Peterson, the discipline of the Jordan Peterson lecturer. And I think that discipline that he had of having to take obviously what is a vast amount of well thought through material and make it digestible to an undergraduate college audience. That discipline produced something really good, much better than the book maps of meaning, which was an academic technical work, which was also sort of tortured in terms of how it was written as what he said I went through every sentence, yada yada yada. So that discipline and I think also the discipline of being a clinician was really helpful because in both of those cases you tune yourself to your audience and that kind of discipline really forces some things into you and. And I think part of the difficulty with a book is it doesn't have the discipline of the audience to be right there and it also doesn't have the. And then the touring, which should ideally give a degree of discipline for a general audience, but not like a college lecture, because in that room of 30 or 40 undergrads, you can see, are they dozing off, are they because they're dragging themselves into class. And so I think part of what has not served Jordan Peterson has been his loss of some platforms that I think really honed him and disciplined him in a way that his new situation doesn't afford. Yeah, I think that's right Paul on some level because the, you know, it's why I'm, you know, my like for just talk about me here for a second sorry but I have a point, you know, it's like, I teach every day like I'm in front of, you know, 151617 kids and, you know, there is no more unforgiving of an audience on one hand, right then then a 15 or 16 year old kid who's I'm talking about Homer or Dante or whatever I'm talking about. But on the other hand, like they they know me, like I know them and that the body language portion of it is whole is very much underrated. And boy did you learn that in the middle of the whole covert thing, because all of a sudden I am two dimensional versus three dimensional and four you know, and four dimensional to cook Graham right I mean there's there's something true to that. But I would say, I think that the touring is is it is an attempt to substitute for that. And it's not the same thing but I do think it works and I think it's why those things are ultimately more effective than than his YouTube, then his sort of his either his one on one conversations or even that kind of roundtable situation that I don't particularly care for which I'm a little surprised by. And then, so, so, so you know that is what because so the writing, you know, I think you're right he's a teacher, I mean, and I really do believe as a teacher, and there's that close twin of being a teacher and being a therapist. Yeah, they're, they're very very similar that's it's like, they're on sort of the same parts of the, of the, of the game, so to speak. And I, as far as the den it stuff is concerned. I mean, I've been sort of listening very closely to the way that he's talking about his new book and the way that he talks about his new book. I think he genuinely believes that he has the silver arrow that he is going to pierce. You know he's gonna. What is the thing in DND where the only the silver works against I think vampires or something like, I really believe he thinks he's got the silver tipped arrow that is going to sort of pierce the heart of new atheism for good and I think with all of these conversations he's having, especially with the dent thing. I think it's set up I think he's playing a long game. Again, I could be wrong. I have no idea and like whatever if it works it works great. I don't particularly need it, but I think his audience does. And so when he get when he has these conversations with the dead or or or Harris or these guys, he's not having it for us. He's not like he I mean we're we're sort of on team Peterson, roughly speaking, he's having it for all those young boys, especially right that listen to the den it's of the world. And you know I think he's trying to do an end around, because he has seen the despair. The way that he cries about this is when he reemerged right remember how he cried. And he said it profoundly when he says man, boys just need such a small little bit of a dose of heroism, you know and be called to their better self, you know a little bit of encouragement. And so to me, I think he's trying to. He's trying to kill that that spirit of new atheism, and he's setting these people up. Yeah, yeah, no, that's good. That's good. That's really helpful. The last three conversations of Peterson I watched I felt like Peterson was three different people, so I watched the one with he was like Dale explained, very sort of polite. Yes, putting his arguments for the best he can. And I thought he did a great job of laying everything out. Then there was the conversation with McGill Chris was the other one that I watched. And it seemed like he was trying to just explain to McGill Chris where the edge of his thinking was and hoping McGill Chris could sort of like, help him along. Like like he was because, yeah, and Paul, you talked about your frustration with that conversation. And then, then the third one, which I just watched yesterday or maybe it was this morning. No, I listened to it this morning. It was the one with the climate scientist guy, and and he just sort of asked questions and tried to restate what the guy was saying, like summarize things and so I felt like there was like three different people. Jess, and then there's the fourth one right remember the conversation with destiny. Oh yeah, yeah, yeah. So think about what he's doing here he's really, he's in a weird sort of way he's not even having a conversation with the person he's having a conversation with. He's doing a performance. Right. In, you know, Paul, you know I've been telling you about this for years but this this this weird get up that he's close. I'm like the denim guy okay all that sort of fun stuff aside. He's, he's playing a role. He's playing a role, right, and he's, he's, he's, he's, this is K fabe. Right. And I love K fabe so full disclosure I believe in LARPing I believe in, in performativity and all that sort of stuff, but I think he's having the conversations for his audience. It's the same reason why people are in a rush to have, you know, somebody like in Andrew Tate on their, their, their channel or their stream. I don't think it's about sucking up to Andrew Tate, I think it's trying to get it Andrew Tate audience, it's trying to get it destiny's audience is trying to get it Daniel then its audience. That's what he's doing. Yeah. But but I think Jess's point that he's trying to get at these audiences towards different ends. And I think it's, it's a really interesting question. What ends is he actually pursuing with this. I think Jordan's title of his new book sort of says where he's been at for the last seven years. And make that just the framework which Jordan looks through. And he's suddenly trying to apply that through all of history through all the biblical text, that type of thing and I think that's Jordan's journey a lot of times when I see him arguing, especially with especially with people he really respects, I see him wrestling with himself on the question trying to make sure he has it fit in. I'm not sure what his motivations are exactly but I typically see him generally try and do these other people's ideas match with mine. Yeah, yeah, I think that's true. Interesting notes has been really good. It's been really helpful. I gotta run I'll see you boys. All right, anything else on the on Peterson or Peterson Dennett. All right, now I'm going to go to, I'm going to go to the other or the next, which is now it's a little unfair because it's a no wait no ads and I've only done one little clip but I also integrated a clip. My conversation with vocal. Oh, there was one thing I was going to say about the Peterson thing that I didn't that I didn't say. So, if you look at. Oh, come on. This is. So if you go to the Jordan Peter so if you're logged into daily wire and you go to the Jordan Peterson thing. He has a good number of his lectures from the beyond order tour, all the way to his last one which was the one here in Wheatland, California, which was the one that I was at. We're not seeing that. And I suspect they're all recorded. I don't think that they would not record them. Because I think they're too important to not record. But it's going to be interesting. Just in terms of leaving a body of work. What, what that will mean. Alright, so back to the next one. I'm just going to make some, some comments about this and that and see if there's anything that anybody wants to pick up on. I know it's not out on the full channel yet it's a no wait no ads, you know, a bunch of you have seen it already. Yeah, really enjoyed my conversation with with with vocal distance, and it was interesting. He really wanted to get approached me if a while ago, wanting to do another conversation and again like I said I'm trying to catch up with, with my backlog and so I was able to get him in. And I thought it was a good conversation. I know he's a controversial person in the corner and controversy along the woke and and unwoke lines and so I thought it was. I thought it was excellent. And then also the whole math. And that's what math came about because we have a mutual acquaintance, and that acquaintance said would you like to talk to him and I thought sure I'd love to talk to him because I'm really curious about who he is and what he's doing and I again I thought it was a was a really good conversation So both of those conversations are going to come out to the full channel next week they're in no wait no ads right now if you really really can't wait. But I thought they were they were both good and I'll again I'll, I've got another video that's got a little clip along with some other stuff that I put in of the whole math conversation and that's coming. All right, so there's just a couple of things about that. And again I think probably not enough people have have seen much from it, but. All right, so general general conversation if anybody wants to come in and talk about whatever you want to talk about the water is fine, so it can be I should. Oh, okay. Talk about. Oh, I got you in right away sorry Dale I was fast this time. I just, I just wanted to introduce you to my pet squirrel. Oh my word. I got a two week old squirrel in the house. Eight weeks ago, drops it under the table now I got three kids 1210 and eight that squirrel was totally unharmed. So, what do you do you start feeding the squirrel for for two months to go let it to release him into the wild, where is he. He's here somewhere there is. He's seemingly tame. He, he's still totally squirrel he's not scared of you at all, I would absolutely not want to have him as a pet I got scratches all over my hands from every time I feed him. But he's not scared but he's a little bit skittish I mean it wouldn't surprise me if also he'll jump on the top of my monitor or something they can jump like three feet already. But I just wanted to show you squirrel. So what have you learned about squirrels. What do you think. I'm going to get your hands scratched. YouTube. No, no, no. Where did you learn about squirrels what have you learned about. Oh, um, the only. They will never be a good bet that's that's an absolute do not have a squirrel as a pet. His name is lucky for obvious reason. This this guy has I mean it's like, if it wouldn't be for three quit kids this squirrel would already died at the bottom of the garbage pail because it was Ash Wednesday we had to go to church, just before the dog brings it in I drop them at the bottom of the garbage. So now we're coming back from Ash Wednesday, and we hear a squirrel peeping in the garage. So I was like, Oh man, now what do I do I got three kids 1210 and eight what are you gonna do just you know kill the squirrel can't happen. Can't do that. Can't do that. Yeah, do that. So you start reading and the things you got to do is first you put a heating pad on because he was ice cold I thought he was dead when I first picked him up. He was ice cold. So, I put a heating pad underneath a little, we got rodents like we had three rats in a huge cage at home as friends so I had a big cage for later on that popped up the bottom of them. You put a heating pad on them, warm them up, then go buy the pedal light that you used to buy for your kids when they were throwing up all the time getting dehydrated you give them that he warms up starts perking up, and then he started getting shrink and just feeding my puppy. They make a formula just for orphan puppies, you grab one millimeter syringes and just start feeding them that for like 5% of his weight so he started out like 50 grams and now he's like 350. Are you keeping him in a container or something or just got free rule of the house. Well, a rat kid a good rat cage no he doesn't, he doesn't run the house at all he's he's in a big cage or a rat cage is about two and a half foot by four foot by six foot. High. Okay, but it's too complete. It's actually four stories but it's separated by two stories. So we just blocked off the bottom one and that's the best the rats territory for a couple months. But now I can go up there I open the cage and say come here he walks right into my hand to get fed. I mean he's not skittish skittish of you at all. He's skittish of my two dogs. I got I got understandably so I got a video of him standing on a little piece of wood by two dogs looking them and my cat looking at them all the same time it's girls get sitting there. Anyway, wow. So this is this is lucky. That's all. Well named well named. Okay, you found yourself a good home. I don't remember the video you were talking about in the members only so. All right. All right. So how to nurse a squirrel. There we go. So Mark has a question. We have a wall in the house we call the guest wall or any guest we have can paint anything they want. I can render I recommend this for anyone wife's idea. That's, that's pretty good. That's pretty good. Was that your question mark. Otherwise, Mark, if you want to come on if you want to jump you've got the link so anybody with the link can jump in right now and we will entertain your we will entertain your thought. Otherwise, I'll close the screen. If the stream is if the stream is done. We only have we only have 10 minutes. Maybe I'll drop a little bit of branding because we got we got chastised by the gris for for the fourth wall approaches are that's where that's where the alignment is between griffins and griffins. That's where that's where the alignment is between Grim and I. Okay, so what is bringing down the fourth wall project. Well terrible spell. And part of that spell. Humans have a campfire circuitry. For whatever reason, probably because it. So like the television engages that. And like that's when your tribal elders are passing on information and stuff so like those things are hijacked and make you everybody feel like their audience. And like you'll like if you watch characters and series that do break the fourth wall and that's, that's what the fourth wall I'm referencing. The wall that behind which you are audience and not a human. Okay. Hashtag paintball for Jesus at Grim Grizz hashtag break the fourth wall. You do like the fourth wall that doesn't exist. Break the fourth wall a little bit. You really helped me break the fourth wall. You know, it's just people's. Good poetry is definitely it's asking it's definitely always trying to break the fourth wall always tried as grim gris says to break the fourth wall to the degree that I can. Oh, we had we had we had we had two people in and out and now here's Ron How are you doing Ron. Hi Paul how are you. I'm doing fine. How are you doing. I'm at work. I'm on the clock. Don't tell anybody. I'm paper picking today on campus. All right. So I just wanted to say hi. You just I think everyone. I just want to let you my opinion is if there's ever a zombie apocalypse. You guys are in trouble because they're going to love your brains. All right. Mark, how are you. Yeah, I just want to ask how do you on back on the Peterson Danit thing and I think Kale mentioned that he's doing battle with guys like Danitz for the kids who might be influenced by Danit. But the fact is is I think the kids are probably listening more to people like. Like Pine Creek and his his ilk and not. What's the other Alex O'Connor who I think are much sharper. Atheists who would probably give Jordan a run for his money maybe just because they're young. I don't know. I'm often overwhelmed by the young minds we have in the TLC. So how do you think Jordan would hold up there in terms of his project against those interlocutors. I think I think we like to imagine that two people on a stage in chairs or on a screen are going to somehow solve some of this stuff for people. It's not that it's disconnected and doesn't work and nothing happens, but I can I can Alex O'Connor Jordan Peterson is going to have a conversation with Alex O'Connor at some point that's going to happen. Alex, what's more interesting to me is watching. You know, so I've seen a fair amount of Alex O'Connor over the last six months just watching Alex and a number of different settings talk because I think actually you learn much more about their worldview. Watching that because it's it's again. I think it's part of sort of the modernist fallacy that it's just sort of like this. There's a the there's a you can't really we don't really live in the plane of the monarchical vision. So somebody left a comment in the video where he's basically talking about science and it's like that kind of it's pretty basically what Alan was saying to how. Well, once your science gets so absolutely pure, it's unattainable. It's it's like certain ideas about infallibility and revelation. It's like, OK, well, maybe the relevant revelations pure. But once you interact with it, you've now sullied it. So so I don't know. I don't know where I don't know where it's going. I think the I like what Jess said about the different modes. And I think Peterson, I didn't think the mode with destiny. I don't know. Maybe maybe Kale is also right that that's about Destiny's audience more than destiny because I didn't see that as a terribly productive conversation. I thought both went in there and what they didn't want to do is have their audience say, oh, look, you got totally owned. You let destiny say this and this and this and you didn't contest him. So, you know, I played the conversation with Vash and many people like that conversation. They say, oh, Paul did very well. There are a group of people in the corner that say that was a terrible conversation because you let Vash get away with murder. And my point is, how are you going to stop vouch from saying what he's going to say? You know, what exactly is the standard you want to drive them off the stage? You want to humiliate them? And so what what I think we're seeing is that this game of having conversations with us is much more complex and nuanced than the marquee suggests. If that makes sense. Yeah, no, it's it's I just I just feel like I think I guess I was responding more to Kale's point that he thought that Jordan is doing battle for the kids. And I think then it then it's he's just a little he's a little too dusty for the kids. I mean, he's just a little threadbare, you know, I think that really tough. Guys out there are really, I mean, kind of career asshats like Pine Creek, Doug, you know, and he but he's a very effective asshat. Right. I mean, he he he because he's so relentlessly rude. And so he gets his point through with at a level of clarity that I think someone even like Alex O'Connor can't even if what he creates is ultimately a less effective argument. Yeah, Alex O'Connor is a vastly smarter person than Pine Creek. But in terms of bare knuckle street fighting atheism, Pine Creek is very effective. And that would be my concern is saying, and I don't know Jordan, how well Jordan would hold up to that or not. I don't know how well we hold up to that. If anything, or maybe somebody like more like Luke, Luke Thompson would probably respond better to Pine Creek than someone like Jordan. If you want to watch a fun Pine Creek. Well, this is this is a good comment by Moralond. Rudeness and dunking works well in younger audiences, but I think a lot of people get tired of it. I think that's true. So the audience is very much a thing. If you want to watch a fun Pine Creek conversation. So I often play dog barks music at the beginning and the end of this and there's the link to his channel on his channel. He has conversations with Pine Creek and they're absolutely hilarious. Also, so another guy here did a randos conversation with dog bark and it's on his channel. James R. Henry and you'd probably never be able to find it. But so he gets into dog barks life and it's just so much fun watching Pine Creek talk to someone like dog bark because it's just like. Exactly. Yeah. All right. Well, thank you, Paul. All right. Thanks, Mark. All right, Stephen, you wanted to get on a little bit. Just had a question for you, Paul. It seems like everybody is being asked to deconstruct their priors in a lot of these conversations, even didn't or there are everybody. Nobody's right now is immune from their priors being deconstructed. And one thing that brought it up was the Candace Owen Shapiro. Israel Palestine thing. Because there were some things that we didn't even know were on the horizon that were about to be deconstructed. And you had the triumphant Bailey wire conservative juggernaut. And now it's their turn almost or Shapiro types to be deconstructed. So my question to you, I have paid zero. I paid zero attention to that whole thing because I'm not really in any way interested in either bench. I didn't even know what they're fighting about. Well, for me, the phenomenon is just the fact that things that you weren't allowed to deconstruct are now being deconstructed and there's nothing they can do about it. But my question to you is what is what is the place that's going to be that people are going to build and not be deconstructed? I think that's what your project is amongst others is what's going to be left. The last thing that's not deconstructed or what's going to. I don't know. Everything's weird right now because the other question I had is what institution and what person in popular life is free from that phenomenon? That the guy like I know people personally that like they're stout people. They're they're people. But it's like there's a guy that you can rely on that you don't you could deconstruct. But we don't do that with with with this guy. I don't know what that is in our society. What institution is left or what person's left that we go. We don't deconstruct that. Well, it could be that what what happens is that institutions and personas finally just don't exist. And it could be a version of, let's say, Nate Heil anarchism, where I mean, part of what's interesting with Dog Bark talking to this atheist is. It's sort of like having an argument with Dale's squirrel. It's not going to. And I think it's it's that kind of secure faith that people find attractive. Now, you can sort of raise it up and say, well, these are my objections to it. That's fine. You know, I've got plenty of objections to my own beliefs, but I've lived with those objections long enough that they're kind of like the squirrel over there. It's like, yeah, it's over there. But I'm not I'm not going to change because I know what that is and I know what I am and I've made my choice and I'm going to live with it. And whether or not you can agree or disagree with my choice, that's fine. But it's neither here nor there when it comes to how I live or behave. So. That's I think I think the. You know, so when we see Ben Shapiro or Candace Owens or Jordan Peterson or Daniel Dennett, we are seeing a now we're going to get really postmodern. We are seeing a representation of them on a screen. And there's truth in that representation. But part of what the Internet is doing is is revealing the fact that. Jordan Peterson is three dimensional in a way that his books, his lectures, all of these things can never be. And that's sort of what's nice about the exclusive Daily Wire conversation with Daniel Dennett, which would find out that he liked to play with an erector set and he wanted to be an engineer. And and I think that's part of the reason that the TLC and the Randall's conversations are getting traction is because we are seeing in three dimensionality. And let's say the first personness or the personalness that all of this other stuff that is that entire debate up here is all in the third person. And we have now adopted a certain degree of skepticism with respect to everything up there. Now, the truth is, you can't live without this and you can't live without this. And what modernity said is that this means nothing and it's only this. And it's like, no, no, it's just not true. And so now what we learn is that actually life is lived in community between in the middle and much more in the second person. And that's sort of where I see the conversation heading towards. And that's part of your project is just the relational aspect. Right. Exactly. And that's a lot of what is just challenging in general is making people believe what they know is already true. But if you go out and garden with your family in the backyard and turn off the Internet, there's your balm for what ails you. But it's not as fun or sexy. And and so there there were a question in there about the meta modernity conversation with Brendan Dempsey. And there was a good I didn't get a chance to respond to it on Twitter or might make a video about it. But I mean, the so Brendan Dempsey is trying to figure out, OK, how can we sort of get beyond the modernist postmodernist impasse with respect to Christianity? And and people are trying to locate, let's say, meta modernity up in the aspects that are all in the third person. So this is what we're going to do with with Biblism and history in the Bible. And so we're going to have all of these meta meta modernity is going to have we're going to be able to frame the dogmas and doctrines and perspectives of meta modernity. And that's what it will be. And I think, no, that's exactly wrong. Meta modernity is going to be extremely chaotic. And this is going to this is going to really disrupt confessional systems in churches. And so when I you know, one of the most interesting conversations recently and one of Luke's live streams was this question of orthodoxy. And and I when I look at a lot of the people going to orthodoxy now, I see a lot of meta modernity in that. OK, I'm not it's not necessarily my profession, but it's my practice. And but then, of course, Sam is basically calling BS on a bunch of this. It's like, no, orthodoxy actually does have structure. Yeah, but it's in other ways, it's sort of super pre modern. And in some ways, we're talking about, let's say, Catholicism before Luther. Carlos Irie makes a good argument that Luther forced Catholicism to change in many respects. So I'm reading through Carlos Ery's other book on they flew. And it's just fascinating because, you know, from an evidentialist perspective, it seems absolutely wrong to be skeptical about, let's say, Joseph of Cupertino's levitations. They seem to happen to the dude all the time. And and to just be a stupid materialistic levitation doesn't happen. Therefore, they never happened. If C.S. Lewis debunked this a long time ago, he says, that's not really what evidence is and how it works. So that Joseph of Cupertino was levitating so often that it became a serious problem, even in the very interesting milieu Protestant Catholic debates that were happening that they had to try and imprison him. But every time they tried to imprison him, he would keep levitating and people would sort of keep sneaking people into watch him leave the ground. I mean, it's a crazy story. But but to say it never happened. No, there's just way too much evidence. What we're really struggling with is we can't fit that into our structure. So the Catholics wanted to say, see, Luther's wrong. And the Protestants wanted to say, see, it's of the devil, which is exactly what some people in the Inquisition were saying. In other words, we're having problems with the structure. And so certain people who have gone into orthodoxy, let's say someone like Paul Kings North, seems to be he's got a very high tolerance for chaos in his theological system. And so for him, orthodoxy sort of works because unlike Protestants that are tied into their confessionalism, well, they're more tied into the liturgy and they're more tied into the apostolic succession. They're more tied into these other structures, which are pre-modern. Now, does that mean that suddenly Protestant isms is going to go away? Just like, no, because as Mike talked with vocal distance, Pentecostals are super this way, too. And Protestants, as Sam was making the point in that live stream, they're also super this way. So what we're seeing is basically the tension between the first and the third person and we're renegotiating it. And that's actually where the meta-modernity is. Not so much, oh, these are the dogmas of meta-modern Christianity. No, it's really resistant to creating third-person abstract dogmas. And again, people are going to say, well, what about the creeds? Yeah, what about the creeds? Because the creeds are this way. And then when you listen to someone like, you know, Father DeYoung or some of these other orthodox saying, well, the creeds that actually wasn't Father DeYoung, it was Jeremy in that same thing. He said, well, once you write something down and that's what we're dealing with. But the thing is you can't actually have an institution or a structure or even a significantly scaled community without using those tools that ossify. And so to me, that's exactly where we're at. And I think it makes sense to a lot of people in the corner, because actually what we're doing in the corner is this is exactly the stuff we're playing with. So there's a little ramp. All right. I gotta go. All right. Thanks, Stephen. All right. Last word comes from the corner citizen. Hey, Paul. Yeah, I was just watching your talk with HMath. And one of the things that struck me, it was great convo with him. Also, if anybody knows Owen Cyclops, I got very similar vibes between Owen Cyclops and him. Yeah, but the whole spiritualism and his news and conspiracies are everywhere. Oh, absolutely. He's a more focused left brain version of that. Owen Cyclops seems very creative, not as industrious. And then HMath seems the opposite. So I got a very similar vibe. But the thing I wanted to talk about was HMath was like, oh, you know, I have experience with really short term relationships and now sort of like I have experience with some of this stuff. But I don't really have this long game mapped out, so I can't really put out content on it. I'm like, limits your like you because the end of the story is going to inform the beginning of the story and you're like you're not step functioning. And I'm like, I appreciate a lot what he says, but I'm just like, now we're getting to the actual problem. And it just it's very frustrating because I'm looking, you know, I feel like this is where people start to get super Eastern super. Well, you'll just accept all things and no answers and nothing matters. And oh, your wife left you and you have nine children. Well, the spirit of the age is to accept. I'm just like, there's a reason why people are listening to not the church. There's a reason why when you tell me the spirits and wow, that sounds really tough. I mean, if anybody tells me one more time, that sounds difficult. That sounds tough. I just punch myself in the face like don't tell me don't tell me it's difficult. What? Excuse me. I'm the one experiencing it. I'm you know, and it's just like, oh, wow. They assume you just wanted to be heard. You just wanted to feel heard. I know there's a there's a level of there's a level we're getting cloyed by the therapeutic right now. We really are. Yeah. And I think like it goes into the the propositional in that, yeah, then you need to say things are good or bad. You need to say that you have to do something or not do something. H math is telling guys to do things, even define what you want. He doesn't even it doesn't even have to be as direct, but it can be define what you want and make steps and get feedback so you can become that thing. And that's actually actionable. And the irony is that I think basically what you're breeding with even the cloying sort of I'm listening I'm hearing is just breeding. Well, now I know there is no answer. There's no fire alarm to pull so that I need to become what H math is saying. I need to become as big and over menchie as possible so that anyone I'm in relationship with will never want to cross me because I'm offering all I have all the sticks and all the carrots. I'm so excellent that if you my friend, I can give you anything you want. And if you're on my enemy, I can hit you as many with as many sticks as I can. And even H math even had a video where he had his like girlfriend on it. And she's like, and he's like, she's a he's having her walk through the system where she's like, I had a thought that I actually was attracted to this guy who wasn't H math. But then I realized that liking H math is actually good and leaving and abandoning for dream dream men who aren't real is bad. And I'm like, OK, that's fine to walk your girlfriend through this thought process of how you logically make that decision. But you're never always going to be big enough that you're always the answer. Eventually, you get hit by the car and you're a paraplegic. And it's actually like, oh, that male nurse who's attending to you got really big biceps. You know, it's just like it's frustrating because in the one hand, yeah, OK, I'm going to ascend and, you know, and I'm going to try and be big, be big to scare off other grizzly bears, stand on your your hind legs and look big and strong. But at the same time, you can't build the structure that makes your wife not want to leave you for the big bicep male nurse step function wise. You can't do it individually, you know, by definition. And so it's just it has to be. So I know I'm on a rant. Chris, get that. Now you're going to be old math. You're going to have to change your name. So the the bottom, this was a long rant, but the point is being of it's very when you try to talk about, OK, we need containers, we need groups. And yeah, enough. I'm getting enough. I'm getting reversed on my Foxman has turned the tables on you, my friend. Oh, not good, folks. Well, there may be that's a good place to land the ball. And so thank you. Thank you, Alan. Thank you, everyone who came in. And I haven't done the choo choo train yet. I haven't gotten that into the system here. So maybe drop a little Freddie and Charles J. That's pretty deep. That's my old name. I'm going to be a little bit of a little bit of a little bit of a little bit of a little bit of a little bit of a little bit of a little bit of a little bit of a little bit of a little bit of a little bit of a little bit of a little bit of a little bit of a little bit of a little bit of a little bit of a little bit of a little bit of a little bit of a little bit of a little bit of a little bit of a little bit of a little bit of a little bit of a little bit of a little bit of a little bit of a little bit of a little bit of a little bit of a little bit of a little bit of a little bit of a little bit of a little bit of a little bit of a little bit of a little bit of a little bit of a little bit of a little bit of a little bit of a little bit of a little bit of a A!!! Ah well where are ya? where are you? got me? Oh boy Yeah, walk with me, Lord, walk with me. Walk with me, Lord, walk with me. All that love is Jesus' journey. Walk with me, Lord, walk with me. Walk with my mama, walk with me. Walk with me too, walk with me. And walk with me too. Jesus' journey. I want Jesus to walk with me. Walk with me, Lord, hold my hand. Hold my hand, Lord, hold my hand. All that love is Jesus' journey. Hold my hand, Lord, hold my hand. Walk with me, walk with me. Walk with my mama, walk with me. Walk with me, Lord, walk with me. Jesus' journey. I want Jesus to walk with me. Sing along, baby. I want Jesus to walk with me. Walk with me, Lord, walk with me. Jesus' journey. And walk with me, Lord, walk with me. Walk with me, Lord, walk with me. I want Jesus to walk with me. Walk with me, walk with me. David, a little shepherd boy. You made him a great king. I know David shouted for joy. He walked with David. He's a little shepherd boy. You made him a great king. David shouted for joy. That's right. Oh, yeah. So walk with me, Lord, walk with me. Walk with me, Lord, walk with me. All that love is Jesus' journey. Walk with me, Lord, walk with me. You gotta walk with me, Lord. Yeah! Rocking great, brother. Oh, yeah. Yeah!