https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=WF6y6UH7nCY

 Hi, this is Paul and this is Rough Draft for Sunday where I walked through the current status of my sermon for Sunday. Last week we looked at Jonah chapter 1 and 2. We talked a little bit about Northrop Frye's narrative diagram of pretty much every story in the Bible and the Bible itself. We looked a little bit at Joseph Campbell's monomyth or the hero's journey and we looked at this with respect to Noah and we asked the question, Is Noah the hero of the story? Now the story continues in chapter 3. At the end of chapter 2, quite famously, the Lord spoke to the fish and it vomited Jonah out upon the dry land. Now one of the things that we often gloss over are the details. Now notice that the Lord spoke to the fish and the Lord has been speaking to Jonah. So right away in the story, there's a little bit of parallelism and questions about, well, the fish obeys the Lord. Well, what about Jonah? Well, Jonah, then the word of the Lord came to Jonah a second time saying, Arise, go to Nineveh, that great city, and call out against it the message that I tell you. And Jonah began to go into the city, going a day's journey, after he called out, began to go into the city, going a day's journey. And he called out, yet forty days, and Nineveh shall be overthrown. And the people of Nineveh believed God. They called for a fast and put on sackcloth from the greatest to the least of them. Now, believed here is an interesting word because it's obvious what it means in context, but it's interesting because it brings us back to Jonah. The fish obeyed God. Jonah, the first time disobeyed God. Did Jonah believe God? Is Jonah's issue really one of belief? Now, it's quite interesting. I'm not going to get into the whole very debated question for a very long time about, is this parable? Is this story should, let's set that all aside there because the story doesn't raise those issues. But there's a lot of questions. Well, you know, so let's say you project this into a realistic frame at least, so whether parable or not parable, why would these Ninevites believe a prophet? Well, it's very interesting that the Hebrew prophets were a little bit different from the prophets and we have prophets from those other civilizations in terms of the kinds of things that they majored in. The other prophets usually majored in indictments usually about cultic matters left undone. And so, and I've mentioned this in previous videos, most of the prophets and in Babylon and Nineveh had, you know, made indictments against the people or the king because they have failed to build a temple sufficient to whatever God's glory or they have failed to be faithful in the sacrifices. The Hebrew God had a far fuller view of things and actually have this covenant which was, which went quite a bit into people's lives and went quite a bit into into how they should behave and how this God of them wanted life to be in the world, not only with respect to relationship with this God, which the other the other prophets were focusing on when they focused on cultic matters, but with respect to the life of the people and the overall value of the community and the way that people related to one another. Now if you get into the question of well, what how how deeply have we in the west been impacted by the the Bible, the the Old and the New Testament, this is another example of it that this that that we ourselves even in secularity, we ourselves see the the importance of the relationship to one another. Whereas in the ancient world the gods, yeah, you can treat everybody like crap, but as long as you pay your taxes, you know, then then you'll be okay with me. But but not for but not for the Hebrew God. Now we might say well, why would the the Ninevites believe God? Well, well actually as as John Walton here points out the text only indicates that the Ninevites believe the message of impending doom that Jonah delivered. And then he goes on to give other parallel examples. And then he goes on to give other parallel examples and that the Ninevites would likely have confirmed this with other divine, with other divination procedures. And this of course gets a little bit complicated because we know how the Hebrews felt about these these unsubscribed to divination procedures. But if you read the book of Kings and book of Samuel these kinds of things seem to have continued to go on even though they were specifically against the law. But you should also note in the book of Jonah that earlier in the story the pagan sailors practiced divination and the lot turned to Jonah. Now now what I'm not doing now is endorsing all of these divination procedures, but this is consistent within the frame of the story that we might imagine that Jonah goes into the city, pronounces destruction and the king then, you know, calls out his wise men, you know something that you might read for example in the book of in the book of in the book of Daniel where you'll find these kinds of things. And and so Jonah's prophecy gets confirmed even by the the pagan divinizers. And so well, then suddenly the king goes on a full court press. Now the Ninevites again wouldn't necessarily ask why they were being destroyed, but the literature indicates in Mesopotamia that they knew this all the time. They didn't think they they had to be told the gods didn't need to justify their actions to the people. And as you can see in in this one in this one prophecy from in Elamentation over the fall of the city of Ur, sin the pagan deity of the city asked why it was overthrown and the answer given by Enlil the head of the pantheon basically says the gods have their judgment, can't be turned back. All you people out there, you little people out there, you just ants before the bulldozer. I'm sorry. You have nothing to say in the matter. Well, the word of the king reached Ninevah and he rose to it from his throne and removed his robe and covered himself with sackcloth and sat in ashes and he issued a proclamation and published it through Ninevah. By the decree of the king and his nobles let neither man nor beast herd nor flock taste anything. Let them not feed or drink water, but let man and beast be covered with sackcloth and let them call out mightily to god. Let everyone turn from his evil way and from the violence that is in his hands. Who knows? God may turn and relent and turn from his fierce anger so that we may not perish. And so the king of Ninevah not unlike the pagan sailors that we saw last week is in many ways acting appropriately. And so now once again, we're invited the contrast. Last week we saw the contrast between the pagan sailors and Jonah and Jonah who is the prophet of the lord from god's chosen people didn't look so good. And now we see the king and Jonah and and the king like the pagan sailors seems to act appropriately to the word of the lord. Unlike again Jonah, god's chosen person, they have god's chosen people for this mission. And then one of the most interesting verses in the story, which I rendered in three different english translations the asv, which is the newest when the lord saw what they did how they turned from their evil way god relented of the disaster that he had said he would do to them and he did not do it. Now I remember first translating this from hebrew when I was in seminary. This is one of the first hebrew books we read in hebrew because it's a nice short compact book with a limited vocabulary and I was reading along and and the the kjv renters this renters this translation and god saw their works that they turned from their evil ways and god repented of the evil that he had said he would do unto them and he did not do it. What? God repented of evil? What what does that mean? So you go to a jewish translation that doesn't have all of the machinery at least of christian theology, but you'll have jewish theology probably built in through the the biases and assumptions of the translators there. God saw what they did how they would turn back from their evil ways and god renounced the punishment he had planned to bring upon them. But this word this this word that is used the origin of the root seems to reflect the idea of breathing deeply hence the physical displays of one's feeling usually sorrow compassion and comfort and that begins to account for this this strange translation and and the translation even has us imagine god seeing their repentance probably yet knowing farewell as does Jonah that today they're going to put on sackcloth and ashes and today they're going to get all religious and today they're going to be all serious and even in the moment sincere about it but they're ninnivites and they're going to go back and they're going to do the heinous things that ninnivites are going to do but god yet sees their act of contrition and breathes deeply and turns from his path to the other way around. But what does this do for our theology? What does this do for for our assumptions about what god should and shouldn't do? What does this do for? For all of the the scaffolding that we have placed around god in terms of all of the theology that we have developed so that we can decide what god will do does this does this bend jonas theology? You know the king james Translates a nipple of you know repent 38 times and and but this is mostly used of god's actions people turn That's the word that shub is what is used now. There's no vowels and nhm Which you know the vowels are different and I won't go there in terms of hebrew language, but but unlike Man who are under the conviction of sin feels genuine remorse and sorrow god is free of sin Yet the scriptures inform us that god repents and actually this is the only place that this happens in genesis 6 when there's the flood And and exodus 32 and judges 2 and samuel 15 god turns and and so the king well Didn't have a bad idea Now this displeased jona Now this displeased jona Greatly and you would imagine well shouldn't jona feel like you know Validated and vindicated as his prophetic role and now he didn't really go there to be an evangelist because well We're gonna find out now. He he did not want this to happen. He was counting on These horrible ninnibites continuing to be horrible ninnibites He prayed to the lord saying oh lord Isn't this just what I said when I was still in my own country Well, the editors of the book left that out didn't they? They're they're telling this story so that we can have Dramatic build up. Well, what's at the core of the story? The core of the story is still jona It's jona and god And who is god and how jona feels about god? Oh lord, isn't this just what I said when I was still in my own country that is why I fled beforehand to tarseus This is why I was fleeing from your face and your face showed up as a tempest For I know That you are compassionate and gracious god Wait, this is this is the god of the old testament. This is the this is the god of israel This is the god that gets all this bad pr About oh he's he's a he's a difficult character and he's really something And jona's saying No, he's too soft Slow to anger and abounding in kindness repenting from evil he's about to do against people who deserve evil Please lord take my life or I would rather die I Remember how he wanted the sailors to throw him in not willing to take action now he wants god To do him in he doesn't want to deal with this god anymore. Now we're talking we're reading an old testament book where Ideas about the afterlife are not terribly well developed yet But he's trying to flee from god's presence. What is the story about? He he does not want to be with god He wants away from this god why because in jona's world Jonah is the judge over heaven and earth and jona is the arbiter and jona should be large and in charge and if Jonah had fire and brimstone and lightning and flood and earthquakes and tsunamis Jonah has no question about what he would do to Nineveh. His problem is with god Is he the hero has he changed is he really the master of both worlds? Jonah's issue is that he's not master of any world but his own judgments And here's the thing We sit in moral judgment over god And and we do it all the time and and and we do it from our armchairs and and we do it in our minds and Then you might say well we ought not to do this and yeah I we'd certainly better be careful of it, but This isn't new Then the lord said the outcry against saddam and gamora is so great and their sin is so grievous that I will go down And see if what they have done is as bad as the outcry that has reached me This was god tells abraham abraham And so the men turned away and went towards saddam, but abraham remained standing before the lord Then abraham I think actually it's reversed I should I should uh, hang on I gotta I gotta I gotta do a little bit more work here Oh nuts, sometimes this cursive. There we go You might notice that I switched around the vert I was switched around the word order in verse 22 and I did so because this little text note that I Put down there you can find that text note in the neb translation But the um, there's this big debate over verse 22 who's standing before whom because this is a an interesting passage because abraham in a sense takes the role of the judge and says Then abraham approached him and said will you sweep away the righteous with the wicked? and and so Here's an interesting thing where where god? God never renounces his position He can't He can't cede it to us But but like a like a father with a son Like a parent with a child Engages in conversation with us about these things and And so god does this with jona and and so what this book? Well, what is this book about? This book is about Everything that matters this book is about moral judgment This is book is about doing right and and this book is about Us complaining against god because we think we know the way this world should run and god isn't cooperating I'm using the leb which uses yahweh and so the lord and yahweh said is it right for you to be angry Notice god's posture toads job job What was all of this story about you going to ninova and being overturned and was it about the ninovites? Surely is that more important than than little joe? Or little jona Well, I don't know is it depends where you're standing and who's in the focus Jonah's pretty important to jona ninova is pretty important to the ninovites The sailors are pretty important to the sailors. Look at how this book works at different levels And jona went out of the city and sat down east of the city and made for himself a shelter there And he sat under it in the shade waiting to see what would happen with the city So jona's kind of like the king of ninova, but what is what is jona looking for the king of ninova is looking for release from justice Jonah's looking for justice but Is justice what we think it is? What kinds of judges are we? Well, let's introduce a new situation So yaway god appointed a plant and he made it grow over jona to be a shade over his head To save him from his discomfort Notice the words to save him from his discomfort There's a lot of salvation salvation belongs to the lord, right? So so god is now saving jona from his discomfort and jona was very glad about the plant Jonah's at the center of his little world here and and he loves this little plant and and now suddenly Jonah's judgments are different But now god is the bringer of all things here those of you watching the jordan peterson stuff. This is this is god number one Who is the bringer of all things but also god number two? Someone who talks to us someone we can debate with So god appointed a worm at daybreak the next day and it attacked the plant and it withered And when the sun rose god appointed a scorching east wind and the sun beat down on jona's head and he grew faint Well, what about jona's judgments now? And he asked that he would die. Isn't that what he asked for before? And said my death is better than my life What kind of a judge is jona? Is this the kind of Person we want judging the world. Is this the kind of person who should judge over ninova? What is this book about is jona the hero? So god said to jona is it right for you to be angry about the plant Remember, he just asked this question before is it right? For you to want this city destroyed And he said it is right for me to be angry about the plant Remember what's going on here c.s. Lewis says that the door to hell is locked from the inside Oh, what does this mean? Does this mean there is no hell? Or does this mean that hell is something we choose freely? that When it comes right down to it We either want god And want god to be god or we want to be god Well, that's a choice But yawai said You are troubled about the plant For which you did not labor nor cause it to grow Oh little self-centered Piece of the universe Little imagined center of the universe it grew up in a night and it perished in a night And should I not be concerned about ninova the great city in which there are more than 120 000 people Who do not know right from left plus many animals? Oh, it's going to get good now Except the book ends and it ends on a question. Well, why does it end on a question? Well, maybe this is the question maybe this Maybe this is the question we need to answer Now I normally hear two complaints. I hear a good god would not tolerate this much evil in the world. He's soft and negligent This is Jonah's complaint When I hear others say the god of the bible shouldn't be so picky about other people's behavior This is something we usually say When other people's behavior aren't bothering us If it's bothering us well, suddenly we want god on our side and we want god to bring it To bring the fire and brimstone and hail and condemnation And and it's most often when we're not suffering from anything that We kind of have an easy We kind of have an easy We kind of have an easy what's my word? Kind of have an easy mercy Towards others When life is going nice for us, but when life is bad We want the other way We want god to use his power to mirror our values and our judgments But we hate the thought of others having power over us All this talk about power today, they're using power. They're using power as if no one should have power. Oh, no We want power to be used by us, which means We want to be the arbiters of the universe we want to be god Jonah wants deliverance from his miseries But he wants misery for his enemies. This goes back a long ways. Plato's republic begins They're trying to define justice. It's actually not quite Justice as we have in english. It's justice and righteousness. They're trying to they're trying to decide what goodness is they're trying to figure out What it means to be a a moral human being what it means to be righteous what it means to make judgments What it means to pass judgment on the world? And so and and what is it that justice gives and to whom? Socrates is leading them in a dialogue if socrates We are to be guided by all the analogies and preceding instances then justice is the art which gives good to friends and evil to enemies This is our answer But who is god and why is Jonah angry? He's the god who relents the god who repents The god who repents The god who listens, but but god can't keep doing this. No, and he won't We like this when we see ourselves as needing relief from justice, but not our enemies Who suffers when god relents god does God sees our suffering god sees other suffering. This is all about These balances of suffering injustice and all of the issues that never leave us What does this look like? What story could capture such an ideal? How could we ever imagine god wouldn't exclude himself from suffering but himself come and become our victim? Because any god with credibility Would have to say that There's a quote from a tim keller sermon believe it or not albert camus understood this This amazing piece of writing camus Says almost the exact same words here Christ the god man suffers too evil and death can no longer be entirely entirely imputed to him Since he suffers and dies the night on galgotha is so important because the divinity because the divinity Ostensibly abandons its traditional privilege And lived through through to the end despair included the agony of death So god leaves jona with a question it's interestingly enough very similar to the question that the Jesus most famous parable the parable of the prodigal son Also ends with and the parable of the prodigal son deals with exactly the same situation As the book of jona in many ways in luke 15 jesus tells the story of two brothers one is rebellious and the other Dutiful and you notice throughout the story of jona we've got jona in contrast with the pagan sailors jona in contrast with a pagan king Who is righteous? In the end The question is for the dutiful brother And the decision whether he will join the party at the end of the story or he will may remain The god of judgment where he himself stands outside and judges god with all the other evildoers What's that a definition of it's a definition of hell So who are you in the story is jonah hero what is jonah's issue You Issyria will destroy israel babalon Will destroy it will destroy ninova Who inherits the earth? Who can suffer like god to participate in the reconciliation of god? This is a story about heaven and hell this is a story about finally Can you stand god? Or will you remain judge over all the earth? And your neighbors and their animals Who finally participates in the great party at the end of the story? Who wants to be there? Jonah the elder brother you