https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=q5emdCNulQI

 Hi, this is Paul. This is the Friday morning Bridges of Meaning Discord question and answer, but it's going to be a little bit different. The very few of you who might check out the Living Stones livestream on Sunday morning might have noticed that over the last month or so there have been interruptions in the stream. This is because for reasons Rick and I continue to work on, we have been noticing that there have been issues with Google's servers with both uploading and live streaming. I don't know if that's a server in Northern California. Rick talked to me about it on Sunday because Rick knows all this server stuff. Basically, we're having difficulty with maintaining a steady stream. Sounds like an old man with prostate problems. We're having difficulty maintaining a steady stream. So we are, oh let's see, I've got to make sure. I don't even know that for sure. It says I'm live. Four people are watching. Okay, good. So we're having issues with the stream. As those of you who have been following the development of sort of the new cutting edge of this little corner online community, which has been the just chatting networks, Jacob started it and his channel, Grisle Country has picked it up. A number of other people are picking it up. That's sort of a new thing. Now this doesn't really replace Bridges of Meaning Discord. It's alongside of it. My goal in all of this has always been to help develop an ecosystem that is not monolithic. It's not just John Van Donk and his Estuary. It's not just Bridges of Meaning Discord. It's not just chatting. It's not sort of a monolithic thing at which Paul VanderKlay is the head and all of you are beneath me. It's much more of an ecosystem where there are different niches where, because a big part of the difficulty and opportunity of the internet is in fact to create a lot of niches. And once you have a lot of niches, the real struggle then is to then figure out the networking of those niches. So actually currently I think Grisle Country is doing their live stream right now and Luke on his elliptical trainer, on his treadmill is running that. Luke and Jess are in there. I saw that a little earlier. I participated this morning on one on Jacob's channel, where we talked about Kanye. I think I'm going to clip that and post that to my main channel because it was just an outstanding little conversation. But some people are like, well, what about Bridges of Meaning? Are you abandoning them? No, I'm not abandoning them. I might not be able to give them as much attention. It's sort of like when you have one child, that one child is sort of the focus of everything. But then when you have a second child, the first child is going to have to get used to the fact that there are more around the table and more in the family. And I think that the possibility then is for growth. Now, video is pausing a bit, huh? Okay. Video skipping now. Odd. Oh, that's nice. Way to go, Streamyard. You were my hope to getting a nice steady stream. Again, I can't say that and not think of... I pastor a church with a lot of old people. And so, with old women, hot flashes come up. And with old men, prostate talk comes up. So I'm used to all that. So that's... Yeah, keep me... It works on my phone, works. Oh, boy. Let me... Sorry for the delay here. Let me just take a look at the quality of the stream. Okay. I seem to be live. And yeah, quality looks a little... Yeah. Yeah. Okay. Yeah. So we've been having difficulty with YouTube, like I said. And we first noticed it because Rick was complaining about YouTube and Vmix not talking well together. And I had been noticing for a couple of months that even though we have a terrific fiber connection here at Living Stones, and I've got one in my house too, when I upload videos, sometimes I'll hit a server. And even though I should... It's not uncommon to get double or even sometimes triple digit upload speeds to YouTube, which if you're uploading three or five or seven gigabyte files, which is not uncommon for me, to have them need to go for hours because you're only uploading at two or three megabits per second. And so we've sort of figured out how to test. No, I'm not going to post the link to YouTube from StreamYard. I did post a link into the short questions for PVK in the Bridges of Meaning section. And I put the link... Or did I put the link for this? Let me put the... I think I put the link... I think I put the Discord link. Yeah. I put the Discord link into the notes here. So we'll see how this goes. I'll start by answering questions. And if some of you... I think we can have up to nine people sort of in the on deck area in StreamYard. So if some of you want to participate in, you can stream to multiple platforms. Yep, I know that. Like that genius Jacob does. Yeah. I'm considering streaming to Facebook and Twitter and some of these other platforms too, eventually. So StreamYard, as that genius Jacob has showed us, is really a powerful platform and has a lot of functionality. There are some reasons though why I've not been recording my videos in StreamYard because Vmix... Not Vmix, but OBS does give me certain capacities and other also hardware interfaces that I are more easily control about in OBS than StreamYard. So all that technical jargon. So in other words, we've been having upload streaming issues and uploading issues for me with YouTube, which have been really a pain in the neck. And so that's again, why we're not live streaming from Living Stones today. And Rick is in his bunker and undisclosed. Jacob, are you getting paid by StreamYard? I'm starting to be concerned that you're being paid by StreamYard. The more paranoid members of my consciousness congress are yelling in the back row. So yeah, so that's why we're doing this. Rick is not at Living Stones right now. He's in his bunker in an undisclosed location monitoring the chat and monitoring the stream. Don't cross the stream. See, this is why I never looked at the chatting thing in Bridges of Meaning Discord when I was doing the Q&A, because I watch these guys and they make me laugh. Basically, they distract me. So I'll try to stay focused. So I see a few people are populating into the room on StreamYard. And again, I'm going to just leave you in that room for a while as I try to work through some questions. And then especially if I see that your question, I'm talking about your question, I'll probably let you in and that way we can talk more about your question. Part of why I've done Q&A through Discord is because I want to find better ways to have conversations using these tools. And I think part of, in many ways, for those of you who weren't around in sort of the early days of Bridges of Meaning Discord, when we were doing the open studio and a lot of the voice chat rooms and a lot of that, all of this is sort of experimenting with these tools to find good ways to connect and communicate and build community with these tools, even online community. And so I think the just chatting practice is doing that. And we're seem to getting a schedule with other people, other channels coming on with just chatting. And so a bunch of things happening in there. And so this is in some ways sort of a crossover between the StreamYard world and the Discord world and try and piece them together. So I am going to bring in, let's see, now I don't have my office quite set up so that when I read it, my head will be facing the wrong way. You might have noticed that, that I'm still working out my directionality in my new office set up. So I'm actually going to be sort of looking the wrong way. But I like some of the options that we get with StreamYard for playing around with. That's the beauty of StreamYard. It's well developed, it's refined. So I know I'm maybe causing seizures for some of you by doing this, but let's give this a try. So I did my last Q&A October 21 and Hey Paul, I've been watching your recent broadcast and there is this childish, hopeful sliver I position in my personal manifold. And it says, pasta Paul, can the internet save the twins? I will just leave that out there for the internet to decide. Quentin asks, I'm watching Peterson's neuroscience meets psychology video with Huberman now. I got into trouble with Michaela when I was noticing that they were, they were switching out thumbnails and titles. And those of you who just noticed the last couple of days, I do sometimes change thumbnails and titles within the first day or two, or maybe later. That is an interesting YouTube practice of changing thumbnails and titles. And you can do it for a variety of reasons. Often I'll do it because when I upload the video, I'll have one idea for a title. And then after sleeping on it, I don't like the title, or I think I have a better idea for the title. And so I'll change it. And same thing with upload. Sometimes I'll get input from, let's say, a rando or something that they don't like the title. And so then I'll consider changing that too. So yeah, so I got it. So I was kind of riffing on Twitter. They changed the title of that video, the title and thumbnail, like four or five times during the day. And I was kind of kept pointing it out, screenshotting it and pointing it out on Twitter. And, and I ticked off Michaela and she told me to chill, which I thought was hilarious. You know, I haven't, I haven't met Michaela some, I haven't met Michaela yet, but I really look forward to meeting Michaela because from everything that I've heard, she's, she's quite a force of nature. And in some ways, you know, when she sort of started, there was a lot of question about why is Jordan letting his daughter run this thing, but she's really, in terms of what I've heard about the negotiations with Daily Wire, she's, she says, it sounds like if you need a manager, talk to Michaela because she'll get you the contract you want. So yeah, low, low and agreeableness like her mom. But yeah, really fun. So anyway, back, I just distracted myself. Around the 54 minute mark, they get into the great conversation about assessing errors and the miracle of presumption of innocence, to quote Peterson. To what degree is this miracle a lynchman for the success of modernity and civilization? Threads of Tom Holland's dominion appear. P.S. soon after they begin to talk about the resurrection of self and losing. I didn't watch that video all the way to the 54 minute mark. The video was really helpful because I didn't know who Huberman was, and now I can't seem to not see him at the Thanksgiving party that we had with some of our neighbors. One of the young men, this big Huberman fan, big fan of his podcast. I'd never heard of him, but he's kind of a big deal. And I've watched some of his appearances on some shows and found them. So Quentin, I can't really answer your question, but I will probably swing back to that video and go to the 54 minute mark. Those of you, there's a good number of you who feed me ideas. And I really, I really appreciate feeding me links and ideas. And when you can, you know, you leave me a timestamp because a lot of these videos are two, three hours long and I don't have that many hours a day to sort of go through content. And so if there's something you want me to see in a long video, a timestamp always helps. So, all right. Chad the alcoholic, I've got a potential solution to the on rent problem. Would you host an episode of Jeopardy, this little corner style or shepherdy, if you will, I'll try to put it together, all the questions and answer, but I think it would solve the on-ramp problem. Thanks, fellas. So Chad has the on-ramp problem settled. So yeah, I think this little corner version of Jeopardy would be an outrageous amount of fun. So yeah, make that happen, Chad. The only thing getting in the way of doing this is inside of us. And those of you who watch Friday morning nameless, if you're not watching Chad's channel, Friday morning nameless, you're missing out on a lot of fun. I, that's various things sort of come up to the top of my YouTube feed. You know, if you're watching something a lot lately, it'll sort of colonize the algorithm. And right now Chad's channel is kind of at the top of my algorithm. Every morning I get up and I want to see what Chad has done. And I got quite worried, Chad, when I saw that, for those of you who don't know, Chad does his video editing on his smartphone, which is an amazing skill. And he told me once how he did it. He should do just a tutorial video on how he does his channel. Because here's this guy, he's laying tile, he's smoking through his little COVID blue mask. He's, I don't know how Chad gets everything done that he does. Well, I guess partly I do know because Chad, of course, is an alcoholic and almost all the alcoholics I know are addictive personalities. And once they grab onto something, they don't let go. So anyway, you will find some of Chad's videos where his directions to work pop up in the video, which means he is multitasking. He is driving to work. He is making videos for his channel. And he is getting directions from his smartphone all at the same time. That is a multitasking beast. So Chad, props. So yeah, make the Jeopardy thing happen, man. T.S. Apostolous, what about making YouTube shirts to draw outsiders new people in? Some kind of design redesign going on to compete with TikTok. That is a very interesting idea. I actually posted a little tiny video to Twitter yesterday, which was about a minute and 25 seconds where I took Sam and Jacob's talk about this little corner basically fulfilling the little bit of a promise that we saw from Pang Burn in sort of the sort of peak wave one. Every time I mention short videos or do short videos, Burn Power chides me on Twitter to stay away from shorts because, and those of you who know Burn can totally understand why Burn sees shorts and YouTube shorts and TikTok as the devil. And Burn has a point. Whenever I pull up shorts, I had TikTok on my phone once or twice and I took it off. And and every time Samsung says put on TikTok, it's like, I ain't doing it. That looks like, I mean, if cocaine isn't bad enough, cocaine is to the internet like crack is to TikTok. There you go. You can clip that out there, Chad. Cocaine is to the internet as crack is to TikTok. But I have been thinking about doing some shorts of usually whimsical things. Part of the crack nature of shorts and TikTok is they're taking all of the brainstem hijacking elements of videos and concentrating them and putting them in a stream where you just, it's just hit, hit, hit, hit, hit, hit, hit, hit, and that's why it's like crack. So if I do anything with shorts, I want it to be anti-crack. And so in fact, I was going to take some nature scenes and just turn that into shorts. So here's a, here's a nature scene of babbling brook. That can be a short. I was thinking about answering specific comments on my videos in shorts because it's, it's often the case that I, I'll get a comment and I want to respond to it. And as with my senior suboya comment about sedimentary, some of these comments are, again, I'm Grim Grizz's vision is happening. It's totally coming true because we are thinking together and we are smarter together and we're doing this in a way of, of distributed cognition. And so I, my project is very much about that. And there is therefore a place for very short things. One of the things that I've learned over my few years on Twitter now is that if you can, Twitter has many of the same issues. Again, if, if cocaine is to blogging, Twitter is crack. And obviously you'll see this is sort of a concentration metaphor. The comments are sort of analogous therefore to shorts or TikTok, because even though Mark, I love your meaty comments, but any comment that you have to really kind of hit see more is, has a point of diminishing returns because too long didn't read it is a real thing. So what Twitter taught me was the power of brevity and, and, and not only. And so again, if, if Twitter is like comments, the way I'm using sub space, sub stack is like cocaine or the internet. Those of you who can sort of line these things up and follow them in your head. In other words, what I've been doing with my sub stack is taking my tweets because the 280 characters forces discipline on me. And then it forces discipline in terms of not having these huge paragraph sentences, like I often do when I write because I'm way too ADHD. And so it's just bang, bang, bang, bang. And so then I stack them up and put them on sub stack and then put the sub stack out instead of sort of a thread reader on Twitter. So there's a lot to this length dynamic. And I can see where use of YouTube shorts can be something that helps people get into this channel. I think there is a place for it, but as with just about everything here, um, you know, some people say that the internet never would have started without pornography and that pornography has been sort of an engine of innovation on the internet. And I think there's truth to that, but that illustration also holds to the fact that in almost every case, the innovative cutting edge is corrupting and corrosive. And, but yet there is in fact innovation and refinement and goodness on the other side of the corrupting and corrosive thing. So yeah, um, great, great question. Pineapple pizza. I think, uh, responding to what about YouTube shorts? Oh, he is, he's answering the question. Oh, a couple of answers to the question. I think so. That's what PVK, um, hopes Vander clip is though it's more like his quick reference of frequent clips and making things more digestible. That's exactly right. I started the clips channel because my content was so long and I thought, well, sometimes I should make clips of things, but I abandoned that pretty quickly because it didn't seem to work. And then for a while I was playing around with teasers on a couple of the convo conversations and short clips of that. And I just played around with that a little bit with some of the clips intermingling with the Scott Adams stuff on, um, that I posted yesterday. And what I've, how I'm using Vander clips now is that it's usually for other people's content that when I find something on the internet that I want to sort of pull out for quick reference, I'll throw it up on Vander clips and the channel isn't monetized. There are no thumbnails except the automatic YouTube ones. And I just throw things up there. What's been interesting is to see how the YouTube AI is interacting with the Vander clips channels. And I made brief mention of that yesterday in the shorter video. I did the third video that I posted yesterday, but this, in terms of, there was a very interesting little conversation, I think on Jacob's channel about AI and we're going to have to continue to think and talk and digest the AI questions together. But, um, it's just been interesting watching the rise of the YouTube AI because it is, it is there and it is, it is developing. Uh, pineapple pizza continues. I think that, I think that's a good idea going along with the shorter written text to make things more digestible. Listening to this Thunder Bay again, and PVK talks about how he's the chef that makes things digestible. That's, that's very true. I think that's, I think that's right. We'll try this one, this view again. So, um, okay, not on pizza only t-shirts, Anselman says. Apostolous, but normally it would be clips of PVK's actual videos, Wisdom Nuggets. We talked about that in the Chicagoland estuary. Two hour videos are a barrier to entry and the, um, and the Vander clips aren't actually clips of the video. It's a bit confusing to a new person. I guess my point is to play with the algorithm with shorts. Now thinking clips can also need to be more of a repository for interesting, relevant clips. Thinking out loud, that's what we're all doing. Good. I guess the YouTube clippings of anyone's channel is the start, though limited to one segment. Part of what's again, part of why I watch Chad's Friday morning nameless is because, so here's something that I've learned while doing a YouTube channel. Some people have by virtue of their work, Chad lays tile. So he's there, there, quite a few tradesmen who watch our videos, painters, tile layers, truck drivers. They have a desire and capacity for an enormous amount of content. And now they're not looking at it. So sometimes Chad's on the just, just like with the, like, like I was exploring with the, um, the, the open studio in Bridges of Meaning, Chad and others are using just chatting for that too. So Chad will be there working on his tile. He'll turn around. He'll take a smoke. He'll say something, but he's listening and engaging. Part of this distributed cognition for us in this network that we're developing in terms of all of our little, our little ecosystems is different people have different functions in that. And what Chad is doing as a trades person who he clearly has, if you watch his Friday morning nameless channel, he clearly has a voluminous memory of pop culture stuff. In other words, you know, he, he integrated a Wayne's world thing. He integrated, he integrates movies in this, which is, um, which is really quite impressive when I watch what he's doing with Friday morning nameless. So he's, he's, he, he is able to watch and keep track of more of the content that most of us have. Those of you who have been in this corner in a while have noticed that we've gotten way beyond the point where any one of us can actually follow all of the content being created. You know, even more than just the, um, the, the chatter being created, there's, we're creating tons of content between, so sort of the, the three biggest channels, um, Peugeot's channel, Vervecky's channel, my channels, and then some of the other sort of early secondary channels, Rando's, United, Karen Wong's channel, Sevilla's channel. Um, and I'm going to forget people, this is a problem with lists. And then we have now, you know, some of the smaller channels are coming up into their own. Grail Country is, is getting towards a thousand subs. Karen's over two thousand subs. Um, I think Grim Grizz and Jacob will be, will ease, will, I think both of them will easily get over a thousand subs in 2023. Uh, that's going to be a big deal for Grizz because he's going to be able to monetize then, which should be really something to watch. So there's, there's a ton going on right now and this whole ecosystem is developing. And what that means is that there are more things than any of us can watch. And each of us has our own amount of things that we can watch and our own unique segments of interest. And so what's key, and of course, Grim has had a handle on a lot of this stuff before a lot of us have, is this, this reaping and weaving pattern. So I've tried to do some of that with my channel because my channel's a little bit bigger. When I share some of the stuff that I gained from other channels and put it on my channel, some of you will watch Grim Grizz or Jacob or Chad or, or, or Nate Heil over at Grail Country or Luke, and many of you know the characters or on Randall's United and you'll say, they're not my cup of tea. You'll like Grim, you won't like Jacob. Jacob, I loved Grim, I hate it. Something like this. And Transfigured, yeah, Transfigured already has 1500 subs. So that's the problem with lists. So I'm sorry, Sam, I'm sorry. So what's happening is that in fact, we are growing. Now, I know some of you, when you've watched growth, like I subbed to Jordan Peterson when he was like 300K. So I'm not down there with some of those University of Toronto students that subbed with him when he was still in three digits or four digits or even five digits. So I, I got into Jordan Peterson and it was about 300K. So I'm about at that level. What we've seen is that the internet has this amazing capacity for rapid growth. That's a power, but it comes with huge downsides that we've seen in, in watching what happened with Jordan Peterson. I don't want that for me. In fact, those of you who remember the very early days of my channel, the videos are still up there. You can find them, that one video. When I hit 2000 subs, I, I, I almost wanted to turn the whole thing off because this stuff is destabilizing. We're not made for this. That gets into the whole evolutionary about evolutionary psychology thing, but I'll throw that to the side. So what I've said all along with this channel is I want us to have the right rate of growth. And I think actually we've been doing that. I think we've had a healthy rate of growth here. My channel often grows between two and 400 new subs a month. That is not a fast rate of growth at all for a YouTube channel. You can pull up, there are certain tools that you can pull up. And I've done this before to see how other channels grow. I remember when Daily Wis- when Rebel Wisdom was growing and Jonathan's channel and Jordan's channel, I was sort of tracking how these channels were growing, at what rates they were growing. And I'm very comfortable with our rate of growth in this little corner of the internet. And I think part of that is because, part of that is because I'm seeing, so bridges of meaning grew and I could very- I mean bridges of meanings numbers, it went 1,000, 2,000, 3,000 people who subscribed to it. But then I always noticed that even though you might've had 3,000 people that subscribed to it at one point, only between 100 and 300 people were sort of active in it. That gives you a sense of, given the current configuration, what the capacity of a Discord server as bridges of meaning was set up to be, what the capacity of that Discord server was. Now, I'm sure there are far larger Discord servers doing different things. There's all sorts of variables in this kind of thing. And so one of the things that I saw was that in many ways, bridges of meaning sort of hit its max, its capacity. That's not a bad thing because my, the room behind me, the church sanctuary, it has a capacity. That's not a bad thing. If we tore down this building, we wouldn't read it, need it right now, because we only have, you know, two or three dozen in there on a Sunday morning at a time. But if we tore down this building at a thousand seat auditorium, that's its capacity, but all the dynamics in that room are different. So what happened was, bridges of meaning went and via the administration and those who were running it, we had exiles, and those exiles would come back to me and say, Paul, could you get me back on the bridges of meaning Discord? It'd be like, you did something to get kicked off, whether, you know, whether Joey thought you weren't good for the conversation or you came in there in a bad mood and started saying things and doing things that weren't right. Yeah, you could get kicked off. And then there were the exiles and I would tell the exiles, start your own Discord server. So, so Grim Grizz had his own Discord server. Jacob eventually had his own Discord server on and on and on and on. But, but so then Jacob sort of broke through with just chatting and Jacob had his vision of Trinity Broadcast Network, me as Paul Krautz, Jacob as a blue haired Jewish lady. And I said, man, I don't know about that, but what's actually, what's actually creating now is, is something really cool. So in the just chatting groups where there are limits, you know, often there's one or two or four or six good conversations develop. And of course, conversations are sort of the camel's nose into relationships. And that's the key. That's what all of this is about. Creating generative relationships. Here I'm dialoguing and I should be, I should be in this screen. Creating generative relationships between each other. That's what this is about. And so what we're doing in this ecosystem is we're interacting with the machine world and with YouTube and Streamlabs and Discord and Twitter and Voxer. That's always been a player out there and all of these things. And we're figuring out how in fact we can colonize these tools and create community with them and what the capacities and limits of these communities are. So that's, that's what we're up to. Listening to Tehazi today, sparks an idea. PVK says, how is Sunday School is a chance to discuss this little corner concepts with normies. Maybe Ryan Lewis search tool can filter only those episodes and mine explanatory clips. Interesting. Gregory Witcher, pastor, would you consider the following clip a psychotechnology? I'm not going to click on that right now. So it's really hard for me to answer questions that say, pastor and war and peace on page 235. Such and such Russian prayer. I just can't answer those questions. They just can't do it in the moment. Grim Grizz, which is number one again? Agentic, Arenic. Which is number two again? Number one is Arenic. Number two is Agentic. And why the potty training numbers? Well, let's say God is Arenic. I said, why did I use numbers one and two? God number one and God number two. What I, my description of this is these have been cubbies on my workbench. And so when I watched Jordan and Sam talk about God, I took Jordan. Well, there's the number one. Sam, there's the number two. We talked about imminent and transcended. We talked about general revelation and special revelation. And so I just keep putting things in and out of those cubbies on my workbench. And that's why number one and number two, that's why the potty training language. Grim Grizz is a mimetic genius. He is. And I know some people think he's dangerous. And he is. Because anything powerful is dangerous. And Grim Grizz is powerful. And that means he's also dangerous. So yeah. And I think I'm thrilled to have him in this little corner of the internet. It seems like PVK is not a Van Tillion. Is this correct? I've never read Ventil as such. I do by virtue of my Dutch Calvinist roots have a lot of affinity to presuppositionalism. So that's the big category, presuppositionalists. Ventil is one kind. Ventil, of course, comes out of the CRC and the Dutch Calvinists. There's a very interesting relationship between the history of Westminster East. So there's Westminster Seminary East and then later there's Westminster Seminary West. And those are two separate threads and streams. Westminster East in Philadelphia grew out of the split of Old Princeton. Old Princeton had that battle with liberalism. And basically the conservatives lost and founded Westminster East. But Westminster East has always been different from Westminster West in various ways. Horton is from Westminster West. The problem with doing these live streams is sometimes I have to sneeze and stuff. And the problem with muting and unmuting my mic is that when I forget to unmute my mic, I get those in YouTube. All right. David Walker, what would you say to the idea that church comes before Bible in importance? I'm really wrestling with this question because I get completely upset opposing answers from my Protestant family and my Orthodox friends. Of course, of course you do. Because this is the limitation of answers. And when I mean answers, I mean verbal, I mean sentences and paragraphs and longer. The reality gets worked out in real life. And if you put Bible in importance ahead of church, you get Protestantism. And if you get church in importance ahead of Bible, you get Orthodoxy and Catholicism. But it's a really hard question. And there are strengths and there are strengths and weaknesses on both sides. Now, if you sort of line up Word of God, Body of Christ, that's the difficulty. And the truth is we are going to have Protestants and we are going to have Orthodox. So I'm going to clip. So on the Just Chatting this morning on Jacob's channel, got into a really wonderful conversation about Kanye, which led to a really wonderful conversation about where we're at in terms of religion and family in this culture. And a woman that's been participating in some of those streams and Just Chatting streams, she gave a speech which is just worthy of a clip. It was just, you know, Gavin said, you know, I got tears running down my eyes. I was just, you know, going like this, couldn't stop going like this. It was amazing. So I'm going to clip that out and I'm going to put it on my channel today, hopefully. Fridays are always really busy days for me because I usually do these live streams and I've got my rough draft. And then if I'm really good, I'll make a video for Monday. Although I do have some randos. I've got at least one more randos chat in the can that I can put out. So yeah, so there's a lot of good stuff being generated. While Bill Hickok, howdy partner. I was wondering what you said about all that hustling and fussing over yonder. What a cowboy got to do to find himself in line with creators and such. This old cowpoke needs a wife and a stable residence. Well, while Bill, so in terms of the wife part, we've been getting more and more women participating in estuary. We've been getting more and more women participating in this little corner. More and more women are coming up for randos chats. More and more women are coming in for just chatting. I think it's so you have mountain men and they're almost all men. So I'm going to use a front, an American frontier metaphor here. You have mountain men who go out alone. Then you have pioneers and of the mountain men, only one in a hundred, maybe one in a hundred are women. Of the pioneers, maybe one in ten are women. Of the settlers, maybe one in two are women and then families are developed. So we're sort of, we've left mountain man stage and we're in pioneer stage and we're moving towards settler stage. And so there again, there are upsides and downsides with that. This has been an all a mostly male space, which I think has been awesome. Why? Because men need their spaces too. Number one. Number two, the kind of women in male spaces. Yeah, they're like, so some of those women are like mountain men. Sherry comes to mind. Sherry, or is she a pioneer or a settler? I don't know, but Sherry goes out and blazes trails. Some women are pioneers. Andrea comes to mind. Andrea's a pioneer. And then some women are settlers. And I think we're in that space. And so every stage has its upside. Every stage has its downside. Enjoy the stage you're in. There's a little bit of life wisdom for you. And it has to do with aging as well. So enjoy the stage you're in. And so now we're mostly a male space. More and more women are coming in. At some point, more and more women will come in. And the church has been wrestling with these balances for a long time. So there's a woman in my church who, a lot of state workers in my church historically, because we're in Sacramento, there's a woman in my church that was responsible for running an office in a state bureaucracy. And she always made sure she had 50, 50 men and women in her office. And the people that were working under her sort of discerned the pattern. And so like when a man would retire or quit, so some of the women would come up and say, are you going to hire a man or a woman? And she said, what do you think? Well, you're going to hire a man. Why? Because we just lost a man. And they figured out she was keeping the balance. Because she said, you know what? When you have two men and too many men and not enough women, gets out of whack. You have too many women and not enough men, gets out of whack. And so, yeah, she had a point. She had a point. All right. Eric Young. Ooh, he's in here. So Eric, get ready. I'm going to pull you into the room. Eric Young, what is your opinion on the resurgence of bail in the current climate? Valenciaga, who I never heard of until Kanye. Valenciaga scandals have shaken the culture in strange ways. Even atheists I know who normally dismiss this kind of conspiracy are starting to question the crazy origin of all of this stuff. Is this just Twitter hype or do you suspect other principalities are going to make themselves known like this? Eric, I see that you're muted, but you're in the room. If you want to participate. Oh, there you are. All right. So say a little bit more about your question. Okay. I just have noticed a lot of people who are not normally involved in these kinds of ideas have really taken notice of this kind of Valenciaga scandal and they're really struggling with like, is this a global conspiracy of pedophiles? Is this just, you know, a crazy artist or, you know, is something supernatural going on here? And I just, I'm seeing more of this conversation echo out into places I haven't seen before. So I, and the little clip that I did this morning about the Kanye thing, I noted that, you know, if you, Peugeot is, Jonathan Peugeot is really helpful with this stuff because what fools show are the limits and the transgressions and what transgressors, what transgressors reveal are what transgress or where the lines of transgression are. And so, no, I think as, as the cultures, as the culture's structure breaks down, we are going to have to see those lines of transgression where the walls used to be. And what Kanye is doing as sort of the fool who, I mean, again, Kanye married the queen of the temple of attention. That was Kim Kardashian. Kanye has really managed to hit that, that kingly fool tension archetype. He was the king. He's also the fool. And so now he's in a fool phase. And so, and so I think you're onto something that as, as we have made transgressing a central value of the culture, you take down those walls and now suddenly, oh, without the walls, what do we have? We have, we, we begin to see what was hidden. We begin to see the transgressions and now we're shocked. You know, one of the things that, that I think about is Jesus statement about, you know, everything that's, everything that's hidden will be disclosed. Everything that's hidden will be shown. And we're very much in, in that sense, we're very much in an apocalyptic phase right now. And things are being revealed. And yeah, the, the telos of certain transgressive, of certain transgressive spirits are being shown to the world. And we don't like what we're seeing. And so then what that means is that walls get rebuilt. So you go from this tearing down phase into this building up phase. And that's very much where we're at. Yeah. And I'm just starting to, I guess it's synchronistic or just seeing more and more people talk about this. And just in, in not this little corner of the internet, but I'm surprised by Arbery Marcus. I know that Jonathan Pagio had a conversation with him just recently, and he just published like nine hours worth of video with one conversation of somebody. And they're all just diving into this, this topic of like, there's a meta crisis, we're heading towards some sort of collapse. People are seeing conspiracies. They're seeing crazy shit everywhere. So excuse me. But they're, they don't know what to do. And they, they're, they're getting very pessimistic. And they're talking about how we re-inspire a new story, a new story of value for that kind of reawakening what I see as Christianity, but in a culture that doesn't know what that is right now. I think it's, I think it's helpful to remember that these phases come around regularly. We very much were in one in the, so you have the sixties and the rise of the counterculture, then you have the seventies where in a sense, all of that rise came into fruition. And then in the eighties, there was sort of a pulling back. And just because we're in a phase where there's tearing down and building up, it doesn't mean the tearing down will go all the way to the bottom, which is a really helpful thing because sometimes there's a tearing down phase. It's sort of, you know, Chad keeps talking about, you know, 12 steppers and hitting bottom. Different people have different, there are different levels of bottom. One level of bottom is your wife leaves. Another level of bottom is you lose your house. Another level of bottom is you're living outside, living stones. Another level of the, the final bottom in some ways is the grave. So let's hope that we're in a, as I said this morning on the stream, we are, you know, what's happening with Kanye and his anti-Semitism and the racism and all of this, we're doing this in words and not in blood right now. Yeah. That's good. Let's keep doing it with words and not blood. And let's when it, on one hand, when you see the Balenciaga stuff and you pull back, it's like, okay, the fact is we pulled back with horror. That says we still have something in us that says, oh no, we're not going there. We're, we're not going to replay anti-Semitism. We're not going to replay, Jim Crow. We're not going to replay, you know, child, child pornography and, and abusive children. We're not going to replay those things. So that's good. Let's decide not to replay them and let's rebuild some walls. And, but I think many generations have to, that's a process that many generations have to go through. You don't know, you don't know how horrible things can become until you taste a little bit of that horror. Yeah. And this reminds me a lot of what Jordan and Jonathan have been doing in their, you know, their conversation together a lot and seeing Jonathan keeps bringing up this idea of the, the new, the new Jerusalem. And as we always focus on revelation as like the horrors, the crazy images, the terror of the apocalypse, but he, he is right to call to attention that after all of that, the, the new Jerusalem, that whatever the promise that is, is going to be better and make all of that worth it in some way. And, you know, you can really start to imagine like the technologies we have now for as bad as things are and how abused people are because of them. If we somehow got a new story and we refocused on, on, on, on our values, we could really create some, something magical with, with these new abilities. And, you know, it gives me hope. And I feel like a lot of even people in this corner are kind of pessimistic about the future and I hope we get more hopeful. Maybe that's why we need more women. Well, I know women are funny on that, but, but, but I think you're right. And, and I think the helpful thing to remember is these kind of cycles are very normal. And if you read through history with a lot of attention, you know, for example, before the French revolution, there was a revival of, of interest in church and religion and Catholic before the French revolution. And so you kind of had an uptick and then you had a big drop. And then, so one of the videos coming out, one of the randos conversation I had with is, is John from the discord server. And, you know, you, you see these ups and downs and every culture and civilization has their own ones and they go up and down. And, you know, Jacob asks, what's bottom? Well, there are a variety of bottoms. And obviously the, the Holocaust was a really deep bottom, but we found it. And, you know, as was on in Jordan's Exodus seminar, we learned something. And then the Nuremberg trials that there is a moral reality to the universe. And we discovered that and we instantiated some of that read the 1948 United Nations declaration of human rights. It's a, it's a, it's a good document and it's profound. So, but, but we, part of humanity is that individually and together we do cycle and we do have to hit bottoms. And if, if we are blessed, our bottoms won't be too deep. Yeah. I'm just interested that there's a lot of, a lot of things in our bottoms that because we don't have a sense of history anymore that people aren't aware of. And so things emerge and they're shocked by them. And if you have a knowledge of history, you're, you're not that shocked by them. And it speaks to the level of the education system has failed us that people don't have, you know, a knowledge of just a few decades ago, let alone a few centuries ago. So, so what is in our history and what is possible for our futures, good or bad, you know, people are, are really shocked by it right now because they're so uninformed. Yep. Yep. No, that's true. That's true. Well, thank you, Eric. It was a great question. So thanks for being willing to jump in. No problem. Thank you very much for having me. All right. Good. Well, this is fun. I like, and this is, this is an example of, it was difficult to do with discord, but it's a little easier with stream yards because I, I do want to be able to bring people in if they have a question, you know, again, the little text of the question is just this big, but, and so I'd like to, I'd like to hear them and it's really fun to bring their face into the conversation if they're available and, and do that. So this is fun. This is going good. All right. Let's see back to the questions. Quirti, Quirtiop. Quirtiop. Hi, Paul. In what ways are you a cautionary tale? That is a great question. Do you have any hot takes you'd like to share? In what ways am I a cautionary tale? I can think of some ways that I'm not going to share on the internet right now. There are times that I've just, I've just made a whole bunch of you curious and some of you paranoid. Some people have noted that I am in fact, I have in fact some trollish tendencies to me. In what ways are you, that's a great question. In what ways are you a cautionary tale? I'm going to, I'm going to keep stewing on that question. It's a great question. I'm sure, I'm sure Jacob, Jacob knows in what ways I'm a cautionary tale and we'll probably write them in the comment section. Cautionary tales are always about either failures or limits or failures to the best of your ability. So I'm going to, I'm going to keep stewing on that or limits or failures to live up to a potential. And I don't know that yet because I do have the sense that, so Rod who you're all getting to know a little bit better through the, through the marriage crisis videos, Rod, Rod very early on has been a really helpful counselor to me in that Rod has a tremendous amount of experience in business. He's a tremendous entrepreneur. He's gathered through his experience in life, a tremendous amount of wisdom and early on he basically said, no you should, you're, what you're really doing is, is, is sort of developing an internet church and in some ways a new denomination and I kind of pulled back and said I'm, I'm too old to start thinking about doing that and he really chastised me and I've thought a lot about that chastisement. Rod has chastised me in some very, in some very good ways a number of times over the years and you know one of those chastisement kind of lent me to go, go and say the word estuary on the internet which has caused what it has caused so far. So I think, I think someday there will be cautionary tales written about me, about ways that I have failed to hit the mark, about shortcomings that I've had and whatever, whatever contribution I can make to the world was less than because of my fear, my sins, my transgressions. Yeah so I, and I think you know it's easier to spot cautionary tales than others. You know I think Jordan, you know there's some elements of cautionary tale to Jordan even though you know we don't quite know his potential yet. So that's a great question and it's you know in some ways the best questions are the hardest to answer but they're not stumpers as such but they're just sort of, they draw you back and they make you really ponder what's good and what's right. So all right, uh-oh, uh-oh, people, people get ready, get ready, here it comes. Here it comes from navigating patterns himself, the man, the legend, my friend, Mark LeFaber. I know it comes as a tremendous shock that he's here on the stream. One, one can hardly do it just chatting without having Mark show up someplace somehow but here he is now to read his question Go ahead Mark. Oh I have to read it? Oh this is a whole new protocol. Pastor Paul, this is, this is Mark LeFaber from the YouTube channel Navigating Patterns, which is about the cultural cognitive grammar. And one that I neglected to mention in terms of the YouTube channels in this little corner. I'm sorry Mark, that's the problem. That's fine, I'm not going to complain at all. I'm perfectly happy that you allow me an audience. So do you think there's a danger in tolerance allowing to go evil unchallenged? Because I see this as a big problem with what we're going through now, living hidden, not judging, right, over caring to those who can't handle it and it seems like a danger. And there's a C.S. Lewis quote actually that I have up about, the devil doesn't really care if you ignore him or over focus on him. And I think the tolerance is the ignoring part. And this was brought to my attention. So this is like something that I've been hearing a lot of and that's why I wanted your thoughts on it in particular. I think that's very true. Now it's a really difficult dynamic because on one hand, Hassatan, Satan, is an accuser. And if all you become is an accuser pointing out the transgressions and evils of others, you become Satan. On the other hand, the Hebrew prophets majored in intolerance of evil in Israel. And so that's exactly right. There is a danger in tolerating evil or not challenging it, not pointing it out. There's also a danger in doing nothing but majoring in pointing it out and figuring out. Now, you know, there's, it's one of these dynamics and I know you prefer the term sort of collaborative processing instead of cooperative processing. So like with many things, I mean, wisdom is about in many, many respects, wisdom is about figuring out when to do what and how much and that there's no end to. You know, it's why, you know, the two proverbs that are seen completely contradictory are right next to each other because it's like, and it's exactly about this point, you know, correct an evil man or, you know, don't bother correcting the evil man. And it's exactly on this point that those two proverbs are exactly right next to each other. So I don't know. What do you think? How do you find that balance, Mark? That's a tricky question. Well, I think at first, and this is really the thing I'm highlighting, like a lot of people I've noticed with Brett Weinstein recently, when he went off the rails, just like Sam Harris did to some extent with weird conspiracy theories, right? Discernment is the first step. And we seem to want to wrap all the steps together. But what we're lacking when we're failing to engage with the idea of judgment is we're first lacking discernment. You have to discern the good from the evil, which means you have to aim at the good. And you sort of pointed at it. So one of the reasons why I don't like opponent processing is because opposition means competition. It means there's a fight. There's some sort of tension. And there's no reason to post it in the negative. You can say cooperative processing. There's still that tension, but it's resolved through a positive affect. And so that's one of the ways that I resolve this. I look at what people are saying or listen to what people are saying or maybe both, right? And then I try to adjust it. I mean, that's what my channel is about to some extent. Listen, you think you know what these terms are. You think you know how they're being used. Do you? Because a lot of times people say something and they mean something very different from what they're actually saying. And again, this came out with, I mean, if you haven't seen, I couldn't watch the whole thing. It was Brett Weinstein and Robert Wright. And I don't really like Robert Wright, but man, like that hour, that first hour, I just, I couldn't do it anymore because I'm watching Brett, who I have a lot of respect for, do crazy things, actual crazy things. He's not in the moment. He's saying, no, no, that's not what I'm doing while he's doing it. And Robert's saying, no, no, you're doing it again. And Brett's going, no, no, I'm not doing that. You're not listening to me. And it's like, no, we heard you perfectly well, Brett, right? And so the first step to correcting that is what Robert's doing. And like I said, I don't even like Robert that much, which is like first, you've got to notice it. And if the other person can't notice it, that's fine. You know, you can only go so far, but you have to have that positive affect to things. Right. And so why don't I support written R? I love John's work. I use it all the time. Right. Well, because I don't think that has a positive affect. I don't think there's any chance of it. So that those are the things that I do. I look for opportunities like opponent processing, say, no, no, it's cooperative processing. Let's make it friendly. Let's not make it. Let's not make it about war. And the other thing that occurred to me was with the earlier question. I think one of the problems we have is that when we fail to speak up and say, no, I don't think that's right or no, I'm a little worried about that or aren't you worried that this is going to go off the rails that it leads to war? Because as these walls drop, right, we're talking about, oh, these boundaries are going away and all will be revealed. Now, all of a sudden we have a problem that we could have avoided. And all. And the reason why we wanted to avoid it was to avoid either being shamed or shaming others. And I think, well, do I want war or do I want a little bit of shaming and hurt feelings? Right. It's the same sort of calculation. Do I want this to get to the point of the Holocaust or do I want to stop it before that? Right. To your earlier point. Like, yeah, this could get a lot worse. We could be hitting each other over whatever Kanye is saying this week, which I can't possibly pay attention to because it's, but what do I do? I don't pay attention to Kanye. Not that I ignore him entirely because I did listen to some of the Lex Friedman talk, right. But not the whole thing. Because once I had the gist, I'm like, you know what? More of this is not going to be better. Like more of Bret Weinstein and Robert Wright past the hour mark. And I had to do it in three stages. The first 20 minutes were too much. And then I did another 20 minutes and then I did another 20 minutes over three days. Right. Because I am pacing myself with this stuff. But then when people come to me and they say, well, what do you think about this, you know, no judgment thing? It's like, well, we need judgment to avoid war. Right. We need anger as a signal. Right. We need these signals in the world. And if you're living hidden and you're not talking about evil, Satan's like, woohoo, I can do what I want. So there's a way in which giving him too much attention is bad and giving him not enough attention allows him to basically manifest in plain sight, but under the radar. Because we're not acknowledging this. And I got quite emotional this morning when Ethan was pointing this out to me. Because in some sense, that's the problem I've been dealing with. Right. I get my house stolen from me. Everybody involved will not ever entertain the idea that people are deliberately doing the bad thing that is happening. The bad thing to everybody, oh yeah, this is bad. Absolutely. But it's not deliberate. No, no, it was, it was absolutely deliberate. It's evil in the world. And the same with my lawsuit now. It's the same situation. Bad people did bad things. And Chris Peck got was a video from quite a while back about this, where this poor girl was raped, I think in a church or something, or by a church member, whatever. And somebody told her at one point, what happened to you was evil. And that opened her life up and made it and made her or suffering bearable in some sense, because somebody acknowledged the evil. And so doing this is very good, right? Or it can be very good. Calling it out, acknowledging that it exists, you know, not trying to get around it, but actually saying, no, no, no, there's evil in the world. And it might be here. And you could be wrong. But you're better off being wrong about it than not saying anything at all and letting it go unchecked. And that's sort of my concern. Okay. And I think that's great. And again, back to the idea of when to do it, when to not. I could have all throughout what you talked said, you should have used this word. No, you made the, I mean, and then you can't have a conversation. And so there's always this balance of figuring out, you know, it's like, so you see this in diplomacy, I've been watching, I'm almost through now the fourth season of Borgen, which I don't know if any of you have watched Borgen, it's on YouTube, not science, it's not on YouTube, it's on Netflix. It's a Danish, it's a Danish show. And it's really, it's amazingly well done. It's very well written. It's very good. So one of the questions was, how do you deal with the Chinese? So do you say, I'm not going to deal with anybody who treats the the Uyghurs like that. Okay, so closed door to the Chinese, you can do that. Or you're going to say, okay, there's the Uyghurs. And then there's the there's the social credit system. That's I'm not dealing with anybody with the social credit. I mean, with a with a human being with a nation with any complex dynamic, there are going to be many, many, many, many, many points to point out, you can take it to that level, you take it to a deeper level to say, I'm not going to talk to anyone who uses electricity, because electricity has destroyed the environment. So I'm not going to talk to anybody who uses electricity. Right. Right. Exactly. And so that's part of what's in this in that you have to pick your battles. And all of that, you know, wisdom is about looking at the whole landscape and saying, All right, I, I'm not gonna, I will talk to Mark, even though he let's see what what sin of marks can I get give me a sin mark that I can I can point out of yours. I have there are so many Paul, you want me to pick just one? Just one. How about my fancy language? Okay, I will, I will, I will not talk to Mark because of his fancy language. But no, I will, I will not point out the fancy language. I will not point out the way Mark's fancy language is destroying the commons of the English language, I will wade into the evil of Mark's fancy language and still have a conversation with him. And that this is always the trade offs that we're working with. So and, and then to the degree that when you make that trade off, when you post that point, that says, I'm not going to talk to anyone who's let's say a Holocaust denier, I'm not going to talk to a Holocaust denier, I'm not even going to go there. Well, now you have in a sense identified yourself. It's a perfectly legitimate identity. But now that means that there are whole ranges of people that in a sense, you can't reach and and the Gospels are in fact a lesson in this because again and again and again, people challenge Jesus and said, you shouldn't talk to tax collectors, you shouldn't talk to prostitutes. And of course, they're all on a spectrum. And you shouldn't talk to Jews who don't comply with these rules. And so cancel culture has always been with us. And so when Jesus, I mean, in fact, the whole chapter of Luke 15, where Jesus is criticized, he makes the point about the good shepherd who leaves the 99 in the field, not in the pen in the field where they're in danger of wolves and everything and goes and looks for the one and everybody looks at Jesus says, you're irresponsible with the 99. Jesus kind of looks at him back and says, there's a woman she swept the house clean in order to find the one the lost coin. And then he tells the story of the prodigal son, because and I don't think anybody has as good a handle on that parable as Kenneth Bailey, because he's written a number of books about the prodigal son. And he makes the point out that the village thought that the father of the prodigal son was irresponsible for bringing that worthless piece of trash who tanked the economy of that community. And he said, I don't care. He's my son. I'm going to go get him. And this is there's something deeply Christ like about that. Well, yet Christ denounced many evils. So it's a dynamic. Right. Right. And I think more what Ethan's pointing towards is the attitude in this that people seem to be using tolerance as an unlimited universal and a good. And it's not. And I think my explanation was, well, yeah, they don't want to be judged. And they don't want the burden of judging and tolerance is the perfect scapegoat to use to say, well, now I don't have to judge people and I don't have to be judged. And look, I had this problem living with the hippies. If you think it's dirty, you clean it. What? No, you had no hair. Were they intolerant of baldness? Those? No, I wasn't bald back then. I still had a little bit of hair. My hairline like way up here. Even when I was young, I was like 17. I think my hairline was up here. There's very few pictures with me without a hat because, yeah, there was no there was never a chance of hair even from a young age. But look, you've got to keep that beard and do a Christmas party and dress up as Santa. So you have to that has to happen. I asked that we need the wisdom today. Good. We need the wisdom beard. We need the wisdom beard to help us make these decisions about how tolerant we should be and when we should stop being tolerant. Amen. Amen. We have found agreement. Yes. Thank you, Paul. Thank you, Mark. All right. See, this is fun. I like pulling people into the room and having a conversation. This is this is great fun. So if you've got a question in here and you want to come in, just the link is in the the stream yard. Maybe when I get through the questions, if we have more time, which it looks like we will, I'll put the link into the stream here and then some of you can pop on and we can we can just chat all the way to the end of the hour. Or if you have things you want to say, OK, Chad, the alcoholic now, now, Chad, I saw that I saw your Friday morning nameless with that conversation just streaming with Sam's idea for the twenty twenty four Chicago event. And I was going to yesterday make a I was going to make a clip from that. And in fact, the little video I made for the little video I made for Twitter where I had because when when when Sam was talking about the potential of this little corner for hosting for basically taking the idea that Pangburn had and doing it better. Yeah, I'm I'm I think that's exactly right. And, you know, so Vendonk is working on and Vendonk is working on a an event in May of twenty twenty three in Southern California with myself and Peugeot and Vervecky. The three of us have agreed to that again. So that's going to be like Thunder Bay. We're going to try to take our learnings from Thunder Bay. Unfortunately, Catherine can't get into America yet. So apparently you can't get into America if you don't have a vaccination. So so we'd really love to see Catherine and Eamon get to get to Southern California in May. Hopefully that can happen. But we're going to have an event in May in Southern California. We're working on that right now. Hopefully it'll come to fruition. But then Sam has designs and I just had West Side Story. Something's coming, something good. And so I I made a mash up of West Side Story and Chad's Friday Morning Nameless video and I posted it on Twitter and like nobody saw it. So I don't know if Elon blocked my my my video mash up in in the Chad the Alcoholic style. So, yeah, I'll yeah, you better believe if there's an event in Chicago in twenty twenty four. Chicago has a huge opportunity because it's Chicago is great to get to from anywhere in the United States. And I know events in the United States are not always easy for others to get to because of covid restrictions or visa issues or what have you. So we'll have to continue to have these events all around the world. Jamie C asks, we're studying or we're leading a Bible study that that happens to be largely people coming out of new age beliefs. Well, that's interesting. Let me let me pull the only problem with me running this instead of Rick is that I have to pay attention. I don't know what Mr. Burgles is about. Yeah, doing it better than Pangburn. Absolutely. But we've got Rick and Joey and I should probably give a few more people administrative powers in the comments section. I think Anselman has them. So back to Jamie's question, what books of the Bible would you suggest for helping them become more spiritually discerning? There's a lust for the supernatural that we want to help them turn into a healthy love for the person of Christ and the kingdom of God. If you want to study a book in the New Testament that forces you to sort of go back over the Bible recognizing evil, study the book of study, study almost anything in the Johanine Corpus. Well, that's those are fancy biblical studies words. What's in the Johanine Corpus? Gospel of John, first John, second John, third John and Revelation because all of those books emphasize. So Chad, not Chad, Mark just pointed out the dynamics of tolerance and tolerance is a tremendously powerful and important thing. But as Mark pointed out, it has its limits because if it's all tolerance, that's not good. And part of what's happening in this dynamic is so if you jump into the private chat and you want to get in on a question, type me in the private chat thing in the comments here. Discernment in some ways triggers the antithesis. What do I mean by that? Those fancy theological words. So the antithesis is black and white, right and wrong. You never get rid of that. There are times when the antithesis should be at the top of your salient's hierarchies and when the antithesis is at the top of your salient's hierarchy, then tolerance is low. There are other times when tolerance should be towards the top and the antithesis is low. And again, that's wisdom helps you know the context and helps you do that. And the Johanine Corpus in the New Testament is very high in antithesis. The Pauline Corpus, which you know, for example, is a very high antithesis. The Pauline Corpus, which you know, for real reasons sort of drives Jacob crazy, the Pauline Corpus is high in in in some ways can be high in tolerance. The difficulty with the antithesis, which tolerance manages better, is diversity. Because when the antithetical is foremost, you need to make, oh I don't know, does someone need to do something about this Mr. Burgles? Put user on timeout. Yeah, I'm gonna do that. There you go. He's on a timeout Mr. Burgles. I don't know what you're doing in the comment section, but if you keep doing it, you're gonna get blocked. Slow-mo would be good. Okay, sorry for the technical distraction. When the antithetical is up on the hierarchy, you have to make decisions about everything. And what happens to human beings is sort of like a DDS attack. Now I'm using tech speech. A DDS attack is when you bombard a server with too many requests and it blocks up the server. And that can happen to people who are high in the antithetical. Everything is black and white, right and wrong. And as long as they keep their world simple, people have noted that when the antithetical is high, everything sort of gets flattened into the simple. Because there's a limited amount of decisions we can make about black and white, right and wrong. And that's part of the reason why then the tolerance goes up the hierarchy. Because I can't point out all of the problems of this or that. I just have to choose. And that's when you get into this relevance realization and selection. And what, as Mark pointed out, in some ways part of the problem with a lot of new age beliefs are that they're sort of hot house tomatoes. They flourish in a time of affluence and safety where we project that affluence and safety onto the spiritual realm. Oh, I think all spirits are lovely. And some of the rest of us say, well, that's naive. So things in the Gospel of John tend to focus on the antithetical. But the antithetical then has its own tripwires. And so you need the antithetical and you need the tolerance and the toleration. And they work together and via wisdom they go back and forth. Oh boy. Good point. Ethan, Ethan, Ethan comments. I'll let Rick and Joey handle it. I'll just take it off my view so I don't see it. Yeah, there we go. So that's so when you say, okay, Jesus is at the top of the hierarchy. Jesus, you can see Jesus does both. And part of why Jesus is at the top of the hierarchy is because Jesus on one hand can show more tolerance to more tolerance than we think he should or is responsible. In the dinner of the Pharisees, he allows the woman of ill repute to wash his feet with her tears and dry them with her hair. And people are scandalized. He eats with tax collectors and sinners. He invites himself over to Zacchaeus' house when the elders of the town were hoping they would have the privilege of hosting Jesus in Jericho. Jesus does that. Jesus can also be enormously antithetical. Read the Sermon on the Mount. Jesus can be enormously black and white. And so Jesus reigns over both of those realms and he demonstrates that in the gospel. What you often find with people is that they project onto Jesus either the antithetical or the toleration that they themselves inhabit. And so for many people, Jesus is a quivering mass of availability who never says anything, who never does any discernment or judging or anything like that. Well, that's because they are and they're projecting that onto Jesus. And culturally, we've seen that happen. Or the opposite, that Jesus is just the antithesis. A good judge is both. That's what a judge is. A judge discerns should this be dealt with as an antithesis, naming the evil, or should this be dealt with in the other way? All right. Exodus series, in-depth analysis or out-of-depth fart fiesta. Oh gosh. Um, I don't know that you can, that the style of what Peterson is doing does not lead itself to depth. If your goal is going to be to work through 20 chapters of the book of Exodus in eight two-hour sessions, you can't go that deep. Okay. But what you can do is open up some new territories. Now I haven't watched the third episode. I've watched the first two and I very much enjoyed the first two. I still haven't figured out how to interact with them. I know that Daily Wire was very, um, was, was very generous in saying, send us, you know, what you'd like to comment on and we'll give you permission. I haven't sent them anything yet to find out exactly what their limits are. I've noted that the trailer clicks and the teaser clips that Peterson have put out have been between two and four minutes each. That's not a lot. So, but, but if you have seven or eight people around a table and you're going to go through one or two or three chapters in a two-hour session, in terms of deep, the way I'm thinking about it, you can't go real deep. But what you can do is sort of a survey and a seminar. And in especially the second episode, they had a really good discussion about sort of Jewish versus Christian perspectives on God and evil. That was an outstanding conversation. And I learned a lot. So in that sense, you can't go deep. And in that sense, there can be sort of a, those of you who have been around evangelical prayers, you know, know what I'm saying when I talk about, let's say a popcorn prayer or something like that. Um, where it, you know, it's sort of salience hierarchy chain of train of thoughts, et cetera, et cetera. Um, yeah, it has that quality, but I, you know, I, I very much enjoyed it. I very much enjoyed it. So, and I, again, I want to figure out a way to interact with it on my channel. I already know how to interact with YouTube videos, but I also, I don't want to. And I, I suspect that if I would just start streaming 30 minutes of the Exodus seminar and doing my interstitial commentary on it, YouTube would take it down. And, um, and, and, and, you know, fair, fair enough. Daily Wire Plus paid a lot of money to gather all those people in there and they have a right to recoup that money. That's, I think it's, it's the, it's the nature of the thing. Now I hope that at some point they do release it, but we'll see. So I, I just haven't figured out it's both, I have a lot of ideas about how to interact with it, but those ideas both have to fit within the constraints of Daily Wire paywall and they have to fit within my time constraints. I even, I even thought about just running it in one window without recording, pausing the record and then noting where it is in the timestamp and then giving some commentary that doesn't violate the paywall. I don't know that it would be terribly satisfying video to watch. And I don't know that I have the free time to do it that way. So it's all these dynamics that it has to fit in. And, um, I'll, I'll have to, at some point I'll figure something out and something will come forward and we'll see. So that's where I'm at. But so far I've really enjoyed it and I'm looking forward to more and we'll see what comes. All right. Last question. Now, Jacob, it is in fact, I never thought of the fact that my Friday Q and A's put, puts Jacob in the Sabbath. And I know that as Jacob has said his, um, you know, different, different people have different levels, different guidelines for observance with respect to the Jewish Sabbath. So, um, yeah, but he did put a question in. Hi Paul. I'm struggling to become convinced of the existence of God, particularly, is that the, is that our Jacob? Particularly of the Christian story. For someone like me who is curious about going to church, that's definitely not Jacob, that our Jacob. Um, for someone like me who is curious about, um, about going to church, how would you suggest I go about finding a church or a doctor? And I struggle with trying to choose between things like Protestant orthodoxy, Catholicism, et cetera. Apologies if this has been answered before. It's a great question. It's answered regularly and I have absolutely no problem answering this question again and again and again and again, because it's a very important question. It's a great question. My advice is find a friend that you trust and start going to church with them to their church. Because number one, you don't have to go alone. Number two, you've got someone in so that you're not sort of the focus of the church, you know, the whole, all the attention, especially if it's a little church. Now it may be that within months or a year or so you figure out that this isn't the best church for you and the fit isn't right and it doesn't quite fit you. At that point, you will have learned enough about church culture and maybe made some friends that the people in that church would say, you know, this other church that we know, they might fit you better. Because at least in America, there's a fair number of people who would like to see you go to church and at least in, again, tolerant America, they'll say, well, maybe it's not the CRC or maybe it's not the orthodox church or maybe it's not the Catholic church or maybe it's another orthodox church or another Catholic church or another CRC church. And that way, let the community help you in this process. And the way to start doing that is with a friend. Now, if you have no friends who go to church, I would recommend making some friends who go to church. And you can do that in an estuary meeting, you can do that in a meetup, you may be able to do that at work. There's a lot of different ways to do that. So I would recommend doing something like that. All right. And the next question is someone in our stream. So here we are. Welcome. Hello. You want to read your question or shall I read it? Is the microphone working? Yeah, I can read it. Okay, go for it. If I wrangle my tabs right now, I apologize. Hello, Paul. What is the best way to introduce Christianity to curious and uneducated in the religious sphere pagans who know nothing about it except vague notions of Christmas is a good time for having a date night. Handing people Bibles obviously isn't going to work because they don't know what it is or how to go about reading it or what's going on. I mean, just open to Leviticus. And also suddenly going into a discussion of how their pre-consisting notions of spirits interact in the Christian metanarrative from like Genesis is probably, it doesn't work in group settings when somebody randomly starts asking about Christianity. So do you have any wisdom? I mean, your beard is further along the line than mine. So I've just got to ask, right? Well, the first thing is, in many ways, continue to work on yourself. Because the better Christian you are, the more I used to have a, I think I still have it before I reorganized my office. I threw it away. It's from the Willow Creek contagious Christians book. They had a little book on becoming a contagious Christian and it was full of seeker methodology and wisdom and stuff like that. But it made a lot of good points. And again, the first point, as I just said, work on your own level of potency as a Christian. That's the first thing. And part of that gaining wisdom in that will be patience. Because in this particular climate, people are generally speaking, again, your mileage will vary depending on what person you're dealing with. People are very allergic to promotion of an idea and a sense that someone is trying to colonize you. So most Christians rightly have a level of discernment and patience with respect to those kinds of things. So allow people to come to you. You know, that's a whole bunch of Christian cliches here. Let your light shine. And what I mean by that, again, these two things. On one hand, in the Sermon on the Mount, don't hide your light under a bushel. And the other, don't practice your righteousness before men. Both of those things are in the Sermon on the Mount. And what that means is figuring out the discernment of trying to do both. About being a Christian in front of your friends. And I think that really boils down to without self-righteousness. You don't have to tell everybody that you're going to church on Sunday. You don't have to pray very obviously in front of people. You don't have to do all those kinds of things. But be who you are in front of them. And when they have a... And when when the pattern of your life, because of your faith, begins to rub or conflict with the way of the world, and people notice that on one hand, you are persistent in your faith, and you're not judgmental, and you're winsome. And all of these things, people then begin to say, oh, he doesn't do this because he's a Christian. And then when they begin to see the value of it, that's sort of when things start to go up to the next level. It's really slow. It's really patient. And then also, I'd also say just be attentive to the Spirit of God, because there are also times and moments when you sort of reach out on a limb and do something way more overt, like, do you want to go to church with me on Sunday? Or would you mind if I pray with you? And sometimes you'll get turned down, but every now and then it'll work. I don't know, does any of that help? Right. Well, I'm trying to ask about probably, potentially North America, like a really weird situation, because I'm not interacting with people who have an idea of the Christian world do like whatsoever. My wife and I, just because of our Japanese-ness in Canada, it's like we end up hosting people all the time. And they'll oftentimes because the people that end up here are weird, so they're artists and whatnot. And so they'll be like, oh, you know, Christian art, I'm curious about this. I've been to churches just on my own and went to a cathedral. It was beautiful. But like, what is it? And usually the question that we get asked almost point blank, they're like, oh, you're Christians? What about the 8 million gods? Where does that go? And it's like, I'm not going to go into a diatribe about like, because I can't, again, if there's like eight people in the room, and one of them asks that, I can't spend like three hours. And I'm sure if it was one on one, and has happened before, we can just have a really long discussion. But it's not even like, could we convert people? It's like, that's not the category. I don't know how to say, right? Like, there's no certain disconnect in communication. It's being a witness. It's figuring out how to witness in the New Testament way, which isn't, see, witness has gotten connected with this is, here's the four spiritual laws. But what you're describing is, you're living out publicly, or verbally, your faith. Right. Because I mean, we're basically just aliens, right? Like, the prevailing social cultural norms are totally different. Every once in a while, just be like, Oh, it doesn't, it doesn't match. And then, you know, there's a struggle because we care about these people, and they're our friends, we know them. But it's like, you know, a lot of things are detrimental to themselves, and that we believe are bad. And it's like, we can't just be like, Hey, have you heard of Jesus? It's not gonna, not gonna fly. So I don't know, it's just kind of, it's difficult. My wife, particularly, really strong with it, but she's not here right now. So it's a work. It's a great question. And it's a, it's something that many, many, many of us live with all the time. And I would also say that I think one of the real benefits of sort of the apologetics that are out there is often to, with, because many of the objections come up regularly. And they're often the same objections, because the objections are floating around, just like the answers are. And so it's really good to sort of get accustomed to the objections and the answers, learn the answers that are sort of out there in the public domain that you can use, but then also continue to develop your own that really feel right to you. Because if they feel right to you, chances are they'll feel, there's better chance that they'll feel right to your friends. And then you're exactly right. You play this stuff all the time. And so now with our estuary groups, you know, one of the ongoing conversations is to what degree, VanderKlay really, to what degree is this estuary just a really super sneaky Christian evangelistic technique? And yeah, fair enough. That's certainly some of the hopes that I have for it. But there's always a balance in there that you know, it's an extreme example of that would be when the when the timeshare people say, we're going to give you this lovely vacation, but you have to sit through a two hour seminar. And I say, all right, I'll take that bet. I'll take three days in your place for two hours of my time. And so there's always these balances that you keep. But I think the heart of it is, um, number one, continue to work on your own potency as a Christian. Number two, pray for your friends. They don't have to even know you're praying for them, but pray for them. Number three, be as up as you can on the status of the public conversation between Christianity and the non-Christian world. Because chances are, if you're a little further along than your friends in some of these areas, you'll be able to give them some things to think about that they might not have thought about before. But and but I want to say, finally, it's important to remember, and this is where my Calvinism sort of comes to the fore. You can't make your friends Christians. And that's number one, where the prayer comes in, because it's finally God's work, only God can change their hearts. You certainly don't want to be an obstruction to them becoming Christian. But you stay in this faith-filled space of trusting God, of asking God to use you, of praying for those that you really want to see come into God's kingdom and keep leaning into that. So there's I don't think there's a you can find little tools like contagious Christians or four spiritual laws, and there's often wisdom in some of those things. But the culture is changing so fast, and every context is different, and every friend group is different. So with a group of artists, they're super intuitive. So I'd say, you know, you probably don't need to major on the verbal, the verbal front, because they're going to be picking up on all the symbolic clues anyway, because they're artists. Right. Yeah, I mean, up until this point, I basically just grabbed my like National Geographic book about Christian architecture, and then slapped that in front of people. And they're like, Whoa, right, because they like the graphic design. They get excited about the weight of the paper and all that, which is like, okay, you know. But is it appropriate for me to interact with the with like the people who are kind of discussing in the chat here? Yeah, as the chat got cleaned up? Good. Because yeah, go ahead, dressing me a little bit, because I've gotten through. Is there a new question in there? Yeah, that is. No, it's always asking me. Yeah, I'm gonna I'm gonna cut off the questions in the discord. And I'm going to go ahead and interact with some of those. And I'm going to do a couple things here and drop the link in there if people want to come in. So. Right. Okay. Well, so generally speaking, my my position, personally, is that I believe that the spirits are real. And that they're out there and that they do stuff. Like if you look at the the way that they interact with the world, it really maps very well onto what in Christianity we would call demons, particularly like the really popular gods, they like possess people and behave in ways that it's like pretty clear to me that that's what's going on. And so, you know, from my perspective, it's more like, well, how am I going to explain to you that these things that you believe might be blessed are in fact demonic? And I have the benefit of Buddhism, because the Buddhists, sorry about how specific this is, but Buddhists came into Japan and started trying to exercise all of the local gods, because they also were able to recognize the parasitic nature of quite a few of the mountain deities and whatnot. Now, some of them got like integrated and became enlightened or whatever, but like there is sort of a ground for discussing that. But it's just kind of slow, you know, and ever since I've started growing the beard, people ask me things like, hey, can you bless this for me? I heard you're a Christian, right? And it's like, okay, it's the wisdom power of the beard, right? But so that's kind of, that's that's where I am, you know, I grew up, my parents saw things, I've seen things, it's been crazy stuff that's been around. And so I wouldn't, you know, I have the, I suppose the benefit of not being like all of your gods are a figment of your imagination. But again, it's like, you know, when you're interacting with people who just grow up completely pagan, and everything around them is pagan, they don't think about it, they think they're secular. It's, it's just the air. And so if you ask, like, are you religious? The famous statistic for at least Japan is 90% individuals will say, No, we're not religious. And if you ask the religious institutions, 70% Shinto, 80% Buddhist, 10% Christian, like 3% other religions, and so it's way over 100%. And so if you ask the people who study religion, and who know religion and do the rituals, and map participation, and belief, they will say, Yeah, everyone's super religious here. And then if you ask the individuals, they're like, No, I'm not affiliated with a religion. I don't believe in that. I only participate in a massive ritual that invites the God into my house once a year, and offer money and pray sincerely to the gods. That's all I do. I don't believe in any of that stuff. So I know it's just kind of a weird place. And I'm just like, I'm super lost. I don't even have like a cat because again, like, are you are you saved? What does that even mean? It's not a category. What, what on earth? And again, there's no conception of like, a renewal of the heaven and earth. And the whole mythology, it's just kind of like, huge disconnect. And I don't have answers why I'm asking my white beard with the man. Communicate with people. Clearly, I'm struggling. So yeah, and my wife, particularly, she's a lot more quiet. She doesn't have a beard. So it's not Oops. Hello. You're in ori. How you doing? Good. What would you what you want to do? Do you want to engage with you? Or did you want to I'm sorry, I've never used stream yard before. So I didn't mean just to pop in here like this. I actually do have a question for you. But I'll let um, let this fellow finish first. Okay, okay. Oh, it won't end. So just just stop me here. You can inject me into the stream. I don't know how that works. But go for it. Oops. Sorry. I just have a question. And this is just kind of a theory I came up with. And I wanted to hear your opinion on it. Um, so I kind of come from the Michael Heizer School of Thinking towards the Bible. I know you're familiar with them. And his big thing is that basically the powers and principalities come the power at the Tower of Babel. That's his big, basically his push. So, um, my question is, is when I heard this, and then I saw your ever go a video about a year ago, it kind of just something clicked in my mind. And I've always wanted to ask you this. So in that story, that's assuming that Michael Heizer is right, and that's where they they come in to play. He guy goes down with them, and he confuses all the language. I've always wanted to ask, do you with that in mind, do you feel that the the confusing of the language isn't so much that I was suddenly speaking English, and you're suddenly speaking Spanish, but more of suddenly like how I believe in that video, you just they discussed how people are talking to each other, but they can't really understand each other anymore. Like I believe that was a point they made in that video. I've always want to know, do you feel that is, if this is true, that's a better interpretation of that story. And if that is true, if that is true, then are the powers and principalities just really doing their job? If like confusing the language even to this day is going on? Is that like their duty, if that makes sense? You kind of see my train of thought, I hope. Yeah, yeah, I'm not, I'm not super, I'm not super familiar with that aspect of Heizer's work. I've just looked at it. I tend to often look at his work just sort of tangentially as I drop in here and there. I wasn't, I wasn't aware of the emphasis that he places on the Tower of Babel in this, especially with respect to principalities and powers. It's an interesting thesis. I think as with a lot of elements like this in the Bible, part of what, where Peugeot has been helpful is that once you are, have your eyes open to the symbolic, you can draw many more connections here and there. And so the confusion of a language, as you said, isn't just confusion of English versus Spanish. It's a confusion at a deeper level of communication, but also, as you noted, hierarchy, where, because principalities and powers are basically the functionality of hierarchies. And of course, I mean, how better, what a better symbol for that than a tower. So yes, at a deeper level, it is, it is confusion of hierarchies and multiplicity of hierarchies. And once you have multiplicity of hierarchies, you're going to have tensions and conflicts between hierarchies that both enable and retard progress, collaboration, transformation. Does that make sense? There's a lot in that. That was very, like I said, I haven't, I haven't worked out this theory completely. It just, it just kind of popped in my head and I thought it was an interesting question. Yeah, it is an interesting question. And, and, and, you know, also behind that question is this, is this theodicy layer of why does God permit evil, continue to permit, did permit? Is it because this, this then gets into a very basic thing about who God is and his power. Is it because God is unable to handle evil or is it because God finally has, is going to use evil against itself. And in the second Exodus seminar, that's that conversation that they really drop into because Dennis Prager wades in hard and says, no, Israel is for our evil is for us to defeat. And the Christian perspective, because again of the crucifixion and the cross is God in fact is the one who finally defeats evil. He uses us sometimes, but there are also times in which God sort of, it's sort of the Christus Victor atonement where he, you know, he, he sort of brings evil, you know, it's sort of like in these karate movies or in the matrix when it's like, okay, evil, come here, come here. You want to take me on, take me on. And then everybody expects a, a confrontation like this. And Jesus basically says, come here, crucify me. And Satan figures he's one. And then Jesus says, okay, I am going to unfold the thief on the cross. I am going to be in the grave. And on the third day, I am going to completely invert the power of the Roman cross and make it my own because that is a, that is an amazing way of undoing evil. And it's actually in the matrix movies in a sense when they've got the sense that, that you, Agent Smith in the matrix trilogy keeps basically colonizing all of the other spirits. And then in a sense Neo then colonizes the Leo, then colonizes agent Smith. And, and that's, there's, there's very much a cruciform thing going on there. So I would have to say without, you know, being very cautious about that whole theodicy tripwire, cause I think we have to be super cautious with around theodicies. But really what happens on the cross is that Jesus is triumphant over evil and death, but he does this by actually using, I mean, cause the cross is used to destroy the power of evil. And it's, it's, it's astoundingly complex and it just sort of breaks our categories. And so in that sense, principalities and powers, although they may be corrupt, although they may be evil and do evil things, God can use these for his redemption. And that's, and that's the Christian perspective. I don't know if that's, if that's helpful. I know it was a little complex, I know. No, I'm like, I, like I said, I just wanted to throw that out there. It's just been on my mind and I wanted to hear what some other people had to think about it. All right. All right. Well, good, good. Hyper Calvinist alert. People do. Are you really a Calvinist, Paul? I don't know. I'll let you live in that ambiguity. And every now and then I say something and people are like, oh, he is a Calvinist. All right. We just have a couple more minutes. Any, any last questions from either of the two of you or in the comment section? Otherwise, we'll talk about sort of the hierarchy and babble and its relation to God reminded me of how in sort of the old Testament stories, we see angels behaving in ways that as humans, we would not approve of, like we don't appreciate it. Right. When King David goes out and sees the angel coming in with a sword to like smite Jerusalem for punishment of David, it's like horrifying. Yes. And there's of course, you know, the angel of death that's going out and doing the plagues and all these kinds of things. Yes. And then it seems like an angel, an evil spirit to Saul. For us modern people, we often will have this sort of idea that angels, if they're out there and operating in the hierarchy as God intends that they're always going to be kind of like, yay, angels. But like, if you go out into the forest and encounter, sorry again, it's probably just my inner pagan, but like if you encounter the angel of the forest, just because it's not a demon doesn't necessarily mean that you're going to have a fun time. I'm just not sure. Like, am I going off the like weird? No, no, you're right. You're right. And that's, you know, I asked, answered the question about the new age stuff. That's part of that problem. Oh, the angel of the forest will kill you. The angel of the forest will kill you. The angel of the tiger will kill you. We, a big problem with sort of facile new age spirituality is they completely misunderstand the power of the spiritual and our limitations, our naivete, our smallness, the power of the hurricane. You know, it's like, you know, people who've never lived through a hurricane, oh, it's a big wind storm. This will be exciting being in the hurricane. Talk to people who have survived hurricanes. I mean, really strong ones, direct hits. What they'll tell you is when that hurricane comes, I leave because I never want to be with my family grabbing a mattress, holding each other down, praying for the winds to end, not knowing what's going to fall on me. I never want to be there again. Okay. Now you know the spirit of the hurricane. Want to play with that? It's a lot of that. All right. I think we have reached our appointed time. Thanks to both of you. Thanks to everyone who had questions for me. I kind of liked this format. So, you know, even though the stream problems we're having at Living Stones is a huge pain in the neck, it's also an opportunity. And, you know, I've been really enjoying, I've been really enjoying what, you know, what we can do with this kind of stuff. So, yeah, very good. So thank you both. I'm going to end the stream and I appreciate you guys joining. Thank you for having me. All right.