https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=WdlMtQSKszc

 You know the drill. So here we go. I am recording. So tell me a little bit about yourself, Mary. Well, let's see. I live in Georgia. I'm a homeschooling grandmother. And I get into a little bit of that later on. I have nine grandkids. And my husband and I have one acre property that we're trying to do, use as productively as possible. We try and grow as much food as we can. We have chickens. And so we do a lot of that kind of stuff. And you know, it's just it's a lot of fun and it's a great education. And so that's sort of how we live. My husband's actually an engineer, so we couldn't possibly support ourselves off of our acre. But he has his income and then I have all the, you know, home economics stuff that I'm trying to get going on. So that's pretty much how we live. I really want to start off by telling you how much I love and appreciate what you're doing. Oh, thank you. And like I told you in the email, I'm going to give you a little love and you're just going to have to put up with it. So, you know, I started watching you almost I think from your very first video that you did about Jordan Peterson. I started watching you and I know I actually communicated with you early on with before you became rich and famous here with all your thousands of subscribers. And one of the things I would just want to tell you that one of the videos that touched my heart so much was the one where you talked about the defeated lobsters and your service to the people in the Dominican Republic. I think it was. Yeah. And you mentioned about how, you know, it's all well and fine Jordan Peterson talking about the hierarchies and climbing the climbing the hierarchies and the status and all that. And, you know, his a little bit of like stoicism that he has going on in his approach to things, but that there are these people that they are never going to climb the hierarchy. You know, they've either started off on the wrong so far down and maybe nutritional deficiencies in their mother before they were born. They may have mental handicaps and they have physical handicaps or combination with a social structure that's oppressive. And they're never going to get up that hierarchy, you know, and and Jordan Peterson, you know, he says, we don't know what to do about that. We don't know what to do about the fact that hierarchies dispossess people. Well, and you came right back and you said, well, Jesus knew what to do about it. He knows what to do with those people. He tells us how to treat them and he tells us, yes, we can't change the fact that hierarchies will just test people. But we have an approach in a way through Christianity of dealing with those people that are the defeated lobsters that really answers that. That issue. And I just love that. I mean, that that just moved me to tears. I thought that was just absolutely. And I do very much appreciate your openness about your sister's passing and the way you've shared about that, because I think that sets a great example of people to see the difference that faith in Christ really makes for us as Christians. I thought that was just that has just been really amazing. I love the way you communicate with people, because to me, you're setting an example for all of us Christians in how to listen to people and speak to people about our faith. You know, I think it's hysterical when somebody will say something to you and you go, oh, well, that's really a little bit of a heretical thing that you're saying. You'll just laugh. I must correct you right now. I think that's just terrific. I just love that. The point about, you know, you're dealing with your sister's passing, it opened up to me. I started thinking about the way you approached it as saying that how a death in the family or death of anyone close to us is in a way an education about the human condition. Yeah. You know, and I thought that was really good. And it prompted me to think about I actually I lost a daughter who was 22 years old in a car accident in 2005 on Thanksgiving morning. She was coming home from work. She had worked all night. She's coming home, apparently fell asleep at the wheel of her car. And she drove up under a park tractor trailer and was killed instantly. Oh, sorry. Oh, yeah. It was a very devastating thing for our family. But there's some things that I just I just really remember about about that event. Like my daughter in law, who was only a few years older than her and had already a couple of children. She she spent a couple of days in my house. And every time I would look at her, she would shake her head and she'd say, you never know. You never know. You just never know. And it was like I watched her processing in that way and realized why she's saying this over and over. It's because she's trying to absorb it deep into her soul. You know, and I could see that, you know, that process happening with her. And really, it was such one of the reasons it was such a great shock is her. My the daughter who passed her younger sister was in the Marines and was in Iraq. Of course, I was worried about the one in the war zone. And I lost the one that was living in my house less than a mile from my home. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. That was that was in itself kind of this weird sort of inversion of what you know of what my concerns were. Yeah. And then another thing that I noticed, my daughter had a lot of friends. She's very active in our parish with the youth group. There were hundreds of people at her funeral. One of the things that I observed was her her nieces and her friends and going into her room up into her bedroom and just sitting there crying together amongst all of her things. And then they would come down, you know, out of the bedroom with a t shirt or a sweater or a stuffed animal. And they say, is it OK if I have this? And, you know, I could have been like, no, don't touch her things, you know, leave it. But I realized why did they want those things? Because they were going to they were going to make them feel closer to her. Yeah. You know. And so I freely said, yes, you know, you can whatever you want, you can you can take. And, you know, just to give them that that little bit of comfort of just being able to hold close to them, something that belonged to her. And it reminded me of how we are, you know, I'm Catholic, how we are in the church with the relics of the saints. You know that these holy people have passed on before us. We still want to keep them close to us in the family of God. So we have, you know, their relics that we keep. And, you know, I just thought that I saw that connection. And then I know that, you know, you talked about how out of order it feels to lose a younger sibling. And some of the commenters in under your YouTube video about it made the same comment about how wrong it feels when someone who's younger than us or a child or younger sibling passes. And, you know, that I recognize that that's really how I felt. You know, my oldest daughter to her, it was like a combination of losing a younger sibling and losing a child in a way, because she had been nine years older. So she had been so, you know, helpful and, you know, taking care of the younger sibling, you know, over a period of many years. So for her, it was just so devastating. And I remember telling a friend of mine shortly after my daughter died about how it feels like the universe has turned upside down. And I said, you know, if I if I poured water into a pot and put it on the stove and turned the fire under it and then watched it turn to ice before my eyes, I couldn't have more of a sense of everything being backwards. Yeah, yeah. So, you know, everybody says that losing a child is the worst thing and everybody's right about that. You know, I certainly certainly feel for your your mother. I know that must be terribly, terribly hard on her. And it doesn't matter how old the child is, you know, if they go first. I remember this story about this this woman who was in her 90s and her son who was in his 70s died in the hospital and her laying up on on top of his body and crying my baby, my baby. Yeah, yeah, that that never the age doesn't really matter when it comes to that. No, no. So that's just some thoughts that I had of things that I kind of observed. Well, those are really helpful. Thank you. No, that's really helpful. And I, you know, part of the reason I want to part of part of what I want to do with this channel is exactly what we're doing here. So we can share these stories because it's I can't tell that story. You can. And that story should be told because there are there are many people out there who are suffering, who are suffering and they feel alone and they feel that nobody understands or knows or has been in their place. And it's not true. We're not alone in our suffering, but we did suffering. Grief makes us feel isolated. And it's a hard thing. It's a hard thing. So thank you for sharing that. I appreciate it. Well, I think sometimes we isolate ourselves in our grief. Like one one friend of mine was talking about, you know, the reaction of Americans to a death versus the reaction of people say in the in the East or in the Middle East or something. And how she said, you know, here we are, you know, went to the grave side and we're all standing there. You know, yes, there's some crying, but, you know, there's no extreme outpouring. No mourners motion. And and she said, whereas she said, you know, if this was if this was in some other countries, you'd be wailing over the death. That's right. I think that that in a way is part of, you know, we isolate ourselves by not wanting to engage with the engage with the emotions and let them out. So that's that's probably well, you're having trouble with that dog, aren't you? He's usually pretty quiet, but the but the the lawn guys just went out there and there's a bunch of leaves out there so it could get noisy. Hopefully it won't be too bad. But that's that's life. You know, yeah, yeah, your dog doesn't know anything, but he knows he knows his own his own instincts to bark at the intruders. And that's he's just protecting you, Paul. He's he means he means very well. And I could sit there and say, you know, these guys come every Wednesday and they do the same thing and you bark at them. You can't assimilate this. Well, not too easily. So the dog. Yeah. Well, let me tell you a little bit more about my background, because I know you've had a couple of ex Jehovah's Witnesses on your show before. And I was brought up as a third generation Jehovah's Witness. OK, so that was that was quite a trip. I will say when I started listening to Jordan Peterson talking about people who are ideologically possessed that I was like, oh, I know this from the inside. Because because I would definitely classify Jehovah's Witnesses as a cult. And I would say that they train their members very well in how to block any outside thoughts from getting into your head. And so I think it's the very it's really the very definition of being ideologically possessed because people observe this. And people observe this. They observe that, you know, when Jehovah's Witnesses come to their door and they're they're talking to them about their stuff, that they have wrote answers, you know, that they have practice and they have practice and they practice these road answers over and over and over again until they. It's not just that it comes out of their mouth, but it's in their mind as a kind of thought blocking mechanism so that if you have a thought contrary to what they teach and that, of course, creates emotional stress, then you deal with that stress by repeating inside of your own head what they have taught you to repeat over and over. And so I really, you know, when people talk about these extreme social justice warriors and how cult like they are and you watch them chanting their slogans and all this, it feels very much like it's part of that same same sort of process inside of their minds that they're using the chanting of the slogans and and things to actually block their own ability to think critically about. About what their their ideology. Yep. Yep. Have you observed that? Is that what you would say, too? Oh, yeah. Well, and it's not, you know, I want to be fair to social justice warriors and Jehovah's Witnesses and people who grew up in the Christian Reformed Church because any any group has this dynamic. And the question, yeah, I really like Alan Jacobs' little book, How to Think, because he goes into some of this because he reflects on the fact that none of us think by ourselves. We all think we all think together. And so to a certain degree, you need you need rote answers and atheists have this. And I mean, it's just part of I think the non-player character meme kind of symbolizes that nicely where we all develop programs. And the reason we have programs is because the world is just too complex to not have programs. Now, problems happen when there's dissonance between the programming, what you're experiencing, what you've been told. And then now suddenly you're out into the realm of chaos. Now you're into the underworld if we're going to use Joseph Campbell language. And well, now we have to now we have to do some more thinking and now we have to do some more figuring in and we have to figure out if we're going to assimilate if and then suddenly a community that this I think. So as individuals, I have much more compassion to those who have been programmed in a sense because individuals are just individuals. But in terms of a community, now you have the question, can the community process these dissonance factors together because no one system has all the answers. So how do we as a community deal with this? And that's where I think the stronger, deeper values of being of faith, actually, because faith is being certain of what we don't know in many ways. And and and figuring out those things that say, OK, well, here's some things we don't really have an answer for. That's not going to throw us. That's not going to throw us for a loop. Let's talk about these things and let's be honest about what we know and what we don't know what we're sure of and what we're hoping for. And let's let's do that in community together. And and you know, I think that's that's one of the great values of of I think the idea behind free speech that there's a there's a security for this. But as you know, Eric Weinstein talked about this in a conversation, I think on the Rubin report, which I've never been able to nail down that that quote again or find it again, because I just don't want to watch the whole thing again. But he Weinstein said, Eric Weinstein, he said, you know, in order to have that kind of security, you do need to have a certain sense that everything is OK. And that's really what I think Christianity offers, because here we have a God and he's the maker of the world. And Christianity is a good story. It's a comedy with a happy ending. And the God is trustworthy and good. And so there's lots of things I can't know. Like my little dog can't figure out the long guys. But I do know his character and I can trust in his goodness. And that means that I can be I can acknowledge things that I don't know and I can be in relationship with people that I have differences with. And and to me, that's and that's the difference between a very closed system that says our system protects us. And what I think the heart of Christianity is, I it's not that my system of let's say Calvinism or whatever is is so integrated or tight. This is this is my attempt to know this God. But it's the God in who I trust, not my system of Calvinism. Right. Well, I think when you talk about the fact that the group has an openness to be able to process these things and uncertainties together, that that's exactly the opposite of how a cult operates. Because I'll give you an example. I lived through the time when Jehovah's Witnesses were particular predicting the end of the world in nineteen seventy five. It didn't happen. They denied that they ever predicted it. Yes. And if you were in the group and you actually complained, well, here I didn't go to college or I didn't do this or I didn't do that or I I missed this or that other opportunity because of this. They simply denied that they had actually predicted it. And they put the entire they claimed that the membership had was over enthusiastic and had misconstrued what they said. So they put the blame, the leadership put all the blame on the members. And and so that's the kind of mind the kind of mind games that they would play that would leave people feeling extremely uncertain or having no sense of confidence in their own ability to think and perceive the world in a correct manner. So, well, the way that I got out of there was before you go into that. That's I think when Peterson talks about self tyranny, that when he talks about Solzhenitsyn and you read 1984, that's exactly what he's talking about. And I see that in many conservative groups. They have this there's this need to self tyrannize. And that's exactly what you're talking about. You know that we all thought Jesus was coming in nineteen seventy five and we all know he didn't come and we can't process that. And the leaders, you know, oh, we never said that. Well, if you're in an organization that's like that, you know something now. Yeah. So how did you get out? Well, I actually I'm not going to go into too much detail here. Maybe at some point we can talk about a little more detailed late at a later time. But I actually I had a personal encounter with Jesus Christ and I didn't know who he was, but I knew he wasn't who they told me he was. And that set me on a journey into Christianity, into various Christian denominations. I tell people that I kind of worked my way backwards through the Protestant Reformation until I became Catholic. The Orthodox then have a lot of hope. Well, I was even I was even Lutheran for a while. So I had all the bases. I will say to you as a Calvinist that when I was a Lutheran, I found that being a Lutheran, you sit on a point of tension. And there's a lot of things that Lutheranism stops. It's like, well, we're not going to we're not going to deal with this, that or the other thing. And you're left on this point of tension where you either have to become a Calvinist or you have to become a Catholic. That's why I think about about Lutheranism. But my Lutheran pastor was he was the one who gave me my Christian baptism and he was wonderful man and really did a lot to to assist me and to bring me to bring me ahead in not just in spirituality, but also in life. Because I was at that point, I was a divorced mother of four kids and didn't really have an education or background to support myself. And he helped me to get on my feet in many ways and have deep, deep forever appreciation for for his role. When I when I did become Catholic, I had been going around for a while before I became Catholic, speaking in Protestant churches about cults and had done a lot of work on, you know, the entire how you define cults and how cults operate and how they how they control people and stuff like that. I was sharing that with a lot of people. And when I became Catholic, I started doing a little bit of that work within with some Catholic publishers and actually ended up working in Catholic media for for a while for about 10 years. I was an editor at a very big Catholic online magazine called Catholic Exchange. And so I got to know a lot of wonderful people, a lot of wonderful Catholic writers. I've really also met the man who became my husband. So, you know, that was that was good. I actually met him in a Protestant church. I was headed towards the Catholic Church and he was a cradle Catholic who had left the faith and then had been brought back to Christ by some Protestants. And we happened to meet each other in a Methodist church. You know, all this orchestration, you know, talking about Providence, you know, it's really it's really amazing when you look back in your life, you can see God, you know, arranging this and arranging that and everything. And one of the things I'll tell you about, I mentioned I'm homeschooling and I have nine grandkids, but I homeschool one of them. It's actually the son of my oldest daughter that she was pregnant with when my when my third third child passed away. You know, and of course, we're really worried about her being pregnant and having this trauma, you know, at the same time. But that that little boy is is the one that I'm homeschooling. He's he's 12 years old now. So it's it's all good. So we do a lot of interesting things together. And I took the personality test that Jordan Peterson has. I know you've taken it to write. So so it turns out this is so hysterical that I am both extremely high in openness and extremely high in orderliness. So it said so this is why I like I can see the left the left and the right arguments. I you know, I can I can flow either direction so easily. But also, like it mentioned in there that if you that if you're high in orderliness, you'll be a person who has like lots of storage boxes and stuff. I just cracked me up because that's me. That's my house. I'm always trying to organize it. Everything has containerized, you know, I don't know. You know, but I'm high in in openness. I got that creative side and there's such a conflict between the two. It even mentioned that in the report, it says you'll often experience a conflict. I'm like, I just cracked up when I read that because that's me. It's like I have all these art supplies for the kids and I'll think, oh, I should just throw all this stuff on the table with the kids. Go at it. And then this other part of my brain goes, but they'll make such a mess. So, you know, I really I really thought that personality, that personality test was very interesting. And I think everybody should take it. I really do. I think you get you'll get a lot of insights into yourself. I'll tell you how I stumbled upon George Peterson. Yes, I'd like to. OK, so from the time I was in the school, I was in the school. I was always interested in women's issues, but not from the kind of like women's liberation side. I was interested in it from the standpoint of looking at how women's lives had changed over, you know, say from the 1930s or 40s up to, you know, the modern time and looking at the modern times. So that, you know, the woman's liberation movement, which I think has, you know, some positive things in terms like Jordan Peterson says we want people's talent to be able to do things that are not just about women's rights. And I think that's a really interesting point. And I think that's a really interesting point. And I think that's a really interesting point. And I think that's a really interesting point. And I think that's a really interesting point. And I think that's a really interesting point. And I think that's a really interesting point. And I think that's a really interesting point. And I think that's a really interesting point. And I think that's a really interesting point. And I think that's a really interesting point. And I think that's a really interesting point. And I think that's a really interesting point. And I think that's a really interesting point. And I think that's a really interesting point. And I think that's a really interesting point. And I think that's a really interesting point. And I think that's a really interesting point. And I think that's a really interesting point. And I think that's a really interesting point. And I think that's a really interesting point. And I think that's a really interesting point. And I think that's a really interesting point. And I think that's a really interesting point. And I think that's a really interesting point. And I think that's a really interesting point. And I think that's a really interesting point. And I think that's a really interesting point. And I think that's a really interesting point. And I think that's a really interesting point. And I think that's a really interesting point. And I think that's a really interesting point. And I think that's a really interesting point. And I think that's a really interesting point. And I think that's a really interesting point. I know you like him and you've quoted him before. And he said something so funny. This is way back, of course, he's right. I guess in the 20s or 30s that he's writing this. But he said that, you know, tens of thousands of English women said, I will not be dictated to and went off to become stenographers. Oh, that's Chesterton. That's a master. But he also said something else that was so interesting about women. He said that the man is narrow, but the woman is broad. But he also said something else that was so interesting about women. He said that the man is narrow, but the woman is broad. The woman's interests are broad. And the man is a specialist. You know, he becomes a specialist. But the woman has to be broad because her role is to teach children about the whole universe. So she has to be broad. And he also said that the home is the place of freedom. And that's so true. I mean, a woman in the home managing her day is really much freer than her husband who's going out, has to be at work at a particular time, has managers or has bosses and all that, telling him what to do. And he said that the woman by way, by her psychology and the way that God made her, is actually made for that freedom in the home. So I thought, you know, these kinds of things were much on my mind. The role of home economics and also I read a lot in, I don't know if you're familiar with distributism. It's based on the writings of Publia XIII, which was at the end of the 19th century. He started with what we now call Catholic social teaching. Well, the first big encyclical of that, Rerum Novarum, was written by Publia XIII. And based on what he was saying and his observations, some Catholics came out with trying to create a discussion of how some of these things could be implemented economically. And, you know, one of the things that, concepts that Publia had, now everybody hears about just wages, right? I mean, just wages or a living wage, you know, you hear that all the time. People should be paid a living wage. People should have just wages. Well, actually what Publia XIII said is that, you know, men shouldn't be paid wages at all. They should be owners of their own things. Or if they work in a corporation, they should be part owners of it. And rather than being, you know, what was called back then wage slaves. So the idea that the idea in Catholic social teaching, the first idea is that you're an owner of your own productive property or you own productive property, you know, corporately as being a part owner of some corporation. And rather than that, you're getting, you know, wages, somebody just paying you for your work. And, but everybody falls back now on that just wage thing. And he said, well, if you're going to have these wage slaves, employers, you better pay them a just wage. That's where that came in. It wasn't the first line in the whole concept. And so, you know, Chesterton and some other Catholic thinkers, a priest named McNabb in England, you know, really tried to get people to think differently than this kind of corporate industrial way of life where people would be more be owners of things. And one of the things is like if you're an owner of even a small piece of property or even just your own home, you try and use that as productively as you can. So it's the idea of the family as a productive unit rather than the way we look at it today as the family as a unit of consumption. So, so I was reading about about that and and looking at the lives of women and these things were kind of coming together. And there's a there's a particular concept called radical homemaking, which is the idea that women really are the ones and Peterson's mentioned this women really are the ones who make the economic decisions. The idea that you are the idea that your economic freedom is based on you going out and making money is a distortion. Your economic freedom is where you make the decisions on how to spend the money. Well, women always were making the decisions on the spending and still even today, even with all this, you know, egalitarianism within the family. It's really the women that still make most of the decisions on how they spend the money. And so the idea that the decisions that we as women make in the home have an economic impact on the whole wider society is one of the things that, you know, I was looking at. And another thing was the idea of fertility. So as Catholics, you know, we value feminine fertility. That's why, you know, we we oppose, you know, artificial birth control and things like that, that that interrupted that natural unity between the between the sexual act and procreate procreation and. And fertility is really it's one of those things that is one of those feminine things that the world does not value. It looks on it looks on fertility as a handicap or some sort of curse or something to be overcome rather than really something to be celebrated. So I was looking at looking at that issue that all of these things together and really thinking about how could we address this. So when I was working, you know, in Catholic media, I had written an article and it got a lot of views got like over twenty thousand views and a lot of response from from the readers. But I was really addressing my fellow Catholics and I was saying, you know, if we look at all of these issues, should we think about reassessing how we educate our daughters? In other words, is it necessary for women's life track to be the same as men's life track? You know, where, you know, leave high school, go to college, maybe get even graduate school, start a career. And then, you know, when you're in your early thirties, suddenly go, oh, hey, what about a family? You know, and it you know, the joke used to be many years ago, like in the 1940s, the women went to college to get an M.R.S. degree. Ever hear that one? Yeah, I've heard that one. What's wrong with that? Because then it came then came the idea. Oh, well, you're wasting your college education. Yeah, you're wasting your mind caring for your home, caring for your family, bringing up your children. Oh, really? That's such a waste, you know? And that was that was the attitude that started changing. Like now you've got this college education, get out there and actually do something with it. You're wasting your time at home. So that, you know, I was I was I written an article saying, could we construct something different for women? Could we construct a track of education where they still get the I mean, I'm all for the education of women's minds and, you know, reading all the great books and knowing science and, you know, philosophy and studying Latin and the whole ball of wax. I'm all for that. But does it have to be the same track as men have where it doesn't leave room for that starting a family early? Yeah, you know, now I had my first child when I was 20 and I had my third one when I was 29. This is very interesting because so when I was 29, I was having a hard time with pregnancy. And I remember I said to the doctor, I can't understand why I'm having such a hard time with this pregnancy. I had such an easy time with my first two. And and he goes, well, you're a lot older now. And I'm like, I'm a lot older. I'm 29. He got he said, you know, those years make a big difference in a woman's body. And so I and I started noticing like there were all these women who, you know, waited until their thirties to start having children and then they couldn't. Yeah, they were having all these fertility issues and problems. And there were so much disappointment and so much heartache with that. And so, you know, I wanted to just ask, ask my fellow Catholics, just kind of throw it out there. Could we do it a different way? Could we have some sort of way where young women could still get the education, but they could also start their families earlier? They, you know, at that height of fertility and the height of their own health and ability to to have these lively babies, you know, was there some way to do it? Could we imagine something different? And of course, oh, boy, did I get pushed back on that. Just throwing out the question was making all kinds of people very anxious. And, you know, of course, some people were willing to engage in that conversation, not that we solved the problem at all, of course, but, you know, it's something to think about. So then I was, you know, looking at YouTube videos about things like distributism and, you know, radical homemaking and, you know, women's education and all this stuff. And I run across this video, this professor, he's standing in a college classroom and he's talking to the girls in the classroom. And he's saying to them, listen, I'm going to tell you how it really is for women. First of all, you know, you want to you think you're here to have a career. I'm going to tell you that most people don't have careers. They have jobs. That's number one. Number two, that when you get into your 30s, you're going to want to have a family. You know, you're going to be hitting a time crunch that the men are not hitting in terms of being able to find a husband, start a family, get all your ducks in a row for this. And you're not going to find the satisfaction in these jobs and careers that you'll find in a family. And I was flabbergasted. I was like, whoa, somebody is actually saying this. Oh, man. I was just like, because nobody was saying this. Nobody had the guts to say this in public. College, you know, to college age women, because that flies in the face of all of the all of the tsunami of influences coming from the world and what they're saying to women. And so that was my first thing I saw of Jordan Peterson. So I was like, man, I'll see what else this guy has to say. And so I started looking at his other at his other videos. And the first thing I did was I looked at all of his, I looked at some of his interviews and some of his stuff he did for the Canadian Broadcasting Network. I saw that online. This was all before the whole Bill C-16 thing happened. And then I saw his his college lectures, a maps of meaning and his college lectures on what was it? Personality and transformations, which I thought was just I thought was just great. You know, I was drinking all of it in. And then the Bill C-16 thing hit and he rose to all of this prominence and, you know, had all of these interviews and all of this created all of this excitement on one hand and terror on the other. You know, so so that's how I kind of got into him. Well, then I started looking as I was listening to his lectures and things. I started looking at the comments underneath his lectures and what people were saying, and especially when he started the biblical lectures. And I saw all these comments where people were saying, I used to be an atheist. I used to be an atheist. You know, I didn't think that religion had made any sense. I didn't think it. I thought religion was stupid. Yeah. And you saw these transformations. Just one second. I grab tissue over here from my nose. Cold is really doing a number on me. So, so that really impressed me a lot. And the reason that really got to me, I think, was because of a conversation that I had back when I was working for the Catholic website. And I had an email conversation with an atheist. And it was a very, to me, a very deeply impressing kind of conversation. It was it was one of these conversations is a very frank and ironic and, you know, just we were both just very open with each other in our in our thinking. And the conversation was not so much about arguments for or against belief in God. It was more a conversation about how atheists view believers and how believers view atheists. And, you know, there have been atheists for ever. You know, I mean, right, the ancient Greeks charged Socrates and Aristotle with being atheists. You know, there have always been in societies that had a belief structure in the supernatural. There have always been those who, you know, either were thought not to believe or I actually didn't believe, you know, and throughout all of history, it was looked on. And especially after, you know, Christianity started, it was looked on. Faith was looked on as something that some people had and other people didn't. And when those who were not believers spoke about it, they spoke about it in that way. They'd say, well, you have faith, but I don't. So the believers were seen to possess this thing called faith that the unbelievers did not possess. And so the way that the believers viewed the atheists was as people who had a kind of blindness. Right. There was something that those of faith saw and that those who did not have faith did not see. Right. Longanuckar, who's a Catholic priest, he's actually an former Anglican priest. So he's actually a Catholic priest with a pastoral of kids. And he's in, I think he's in South Carolina, North Carolina. I can't remember. But he wrote a book called The Romance of Religion. And in that book, he talks about, you know, a lot of themes about heroic stories and their relationship to the Christian story. But one of the things he says in there that I thought was so clever was he said, you know, atheists will say, oh, I see through all that religion stuff. And he said, well, seeing through is exactly what the atheist does not do. The atheist is like a man who looks at a window and sees only glass. You know, whereas the Christian is having this vision of seeing through the world to what's behind the world. So that would be the view that Christians had of the atheists is that there was a they had a sort of blindness. And the view of the atheist was that the Christian possessed something that they didn't have somewhere along the line. And I don't know if this is fallout from the French Revolution or if this is, you know, a more recent phenomenon. Things switch. The atheist, instead of viewing the Christian as possessing something he didn't have, started to view himself as possessing something the Christian didn't have. And that thing was reason or rationality. Right. Right. OK. So the bottom line then became that the atheist views the Christian as insane. As someone who is irrational and doesn't view himself as being a person who doesn't possess something that the Christian doesn't have, but instead as someone possessing something that the Christian doesn't have. Right. And that and that was kind of the bottom line of the conversation that I had with this atheist guy was I thought that he was blind to something, but he thought that I was crazy. Now, now, when you think about the implications of this is very interesting because how do we treat in society, how do we treat blind people? Well, we make every effort to include them in everything. I mean, that's why, you know, as far as information is concerned, you know, there's Braille books and there's, you know, books that are read out loud so that they can listen to them. There there's, you know, all the little little Braille marks on the elevators and all of that. We view them as we certainly don't look down on them or we view them as people that we want to make as much provision as possible to include them in this society. Yeah. OK. Yeah. But how do we treat people who are insane? We not the same. Right. We could we we you know, sometimes we hospitalized them or we incarcerate them or, you know, we don't trust them with important jobs. We may not trust them to raise their own children. Right. You know, it's a very different viewpoint. So I left from this conversation with this very, very nice and peaceable atheist man who had believers in his family and certainly wasn't, you know, in a persecution mode toward Christians at all. But I could see the like the trajectory if this impulse toward atheism continue to expand in our society. What did that vote for the kind of society that my grandchildren are going to have? You know, if you have this, this if this atheist wave kept growing and growing and it became the preponderance of the people of the people in society, what would happen to the Christians? And you already had some atheist saying things like, well, it's child abuse to teach a child, you know, the Christian take. Well, it's not a long walk across the street to say, well, you shouldn't even have your children or have to be able to raise them. That's right. It had put a sort of a pain or a little pain in my heart after I had this conversation of thinking about what the future would be like if this just kept going. And I couldn't see any anybody out there. And for all of the great, you know, apologists and, you know, people like C.S. Lewis and even present apologists, Peter Craif and all those people that I that I read who made these great arguments. You still I didn't see that wave subsiding in any way. Then I started seeing all these comments under Peterson's videos. Yeah. You know, I used to be and I was like, oh, this is it's not right. This is here. Somebody who's finally getting through. Here's somebody that can say the things in the way that it is getting through to people who are who are atheists. And that just that filled me with so much joy. It really did because I even I said to somebody I said it is really possible that in my lifetime I will see atheistic materialism fall, you know, as a as a as a viable belief structure. And I did not think that I would see that in my lifetime. No. Did you feel that way? I felt exactly the same thing. And I had very much the same experience you did. I Peterson was saying things is like, wow, I didn't expect a psychology professor to say things like this. Most many academics, many academics will be many academics are concerned rightfully concerned about their vocations and their employment. And so they shut up about what they really believe. They'll say things in private, but they won't say it in public. And here is a guy speaking his mind in public. And then just like you, I started reading the comments section and I said atheists are atheism has seemed to be a one way road. Once you go to Sam Harris, you don't come back. Well, they're coming back and they're coming back because of Jordan Peterson. I have to pay attention to this. And that's that was exactly my experience. But I I love how you just articulated this. I think you just I just think you just laid this out so nicely and so clearly and so helpfully. And I think I think you're I think you're dead on right. That's that's no, I can't improve on what you just said. It was it was really, really good. It's joyful, isn't it? It's joyful. It just filled my heart with so much joy to see that. And gave me, you know, a better sense of hope for the future, for the future of our society, for the future that my grandchildren are going to be living in. It just I just thought it was terrific. So that was really that was really a great thing for me. The other thing that's been so amazing has been all of the stuff that surrounds Jordan Peterson. So, you know, the rebel wisdom stuff, would you enjoy? I like listening to them to Jonathan Pajow. Yeah, what a treasure. Yeah, yeah. Yeah. First, he is. I wish he had, you know, a million subscribers to his YouTube channel. He's just amazing. Yes, yes, yes. You know, such a sweetheart of a guy. So much fun to talk to. I love Jonathan. Yes, yes. Yeah, good sense of humor and just really so insightful. And one of the things that impressed me about Jonathan Pajow was the dimensionality of his thinking. You know, Peterson talks about all these levels that things operate on. And Jonathan Pajow really, he really hits those levels when he's talking about the icons and stuff. Now, you know, in Catholic theology, we teach typology. You know, Old Testament, you know, sacrifices, all of the Old Testament things that point to the reality in Christ. So, you know, the book of Hebrews about the, you know, the priest going in with the sacrifice and Jesus being the high priest and all that. But also all the other typology, you know, from Abel shedding his blood to King David to, you know, Isaac on the altar, you know, all these things. And so we do this sort of, you know, here's the Old Testament. The Old Testament is Christ is hidden in the Old Testament, revealed in the New. And the New Testament is the fulfillment of the Old Testament. But it's a it's kind of a flat back and forth. And when I started listening to Jonathan Pajow about the symbology that really got my interest, because then you're yes, you've got the typology, but then you're stacking these levels of reality on it with the symbology. So that it's not this flat kind of correspondence thing that you're doing, because what you're doing in the symbology is you're connecting with the phenomenological world. And this this particularly appeals to me because, you know, when you start trying to work with land gardening and you know this because you're you know your background in Dutch, the Dutch are, you know, into the dairy and you talked about the cows and all that. But anytime you work with animals and you work with land, it teaches you it teaches you about reality. I think what I think one of the reasons why we have, you know, so much confusion about sexuality is that people are so disconnected from the birds and the bees, the literal birds and bees, you know, and the flowers in the trees and the animals. I'll tell you something hysterically funny. I was, I'm interested in getting some goats someday. So I'm on Facebook groups about goats, you know. And so there's this interesting thing about animals, about bovines and caprines. So the goats are caprines, the cows are bovines. And what the people who breed the who breed the cattle, the cows have found is that there's actually a connection between the way that a bull is, for lack of a better word, hung and and the construction of the utter of his female offspring. Well, you wouldn't think that but but that actually has been found out in the genetics of cow. Makes sense. Well, people, pardon? Makes sense. Well, so people are wondering whether this would apply to goats too. So one day I'm looking at the Facebook page of these goat people that I'm that I'm looking at. And there's all these pictures of the, the working, the working parts of these male goats, you know. You know, how, how is the way this, how is the way this goat is constructed? Now, his female offspring and can we see any connection? And, and there was, you know, and I started laughing on the Facebook page I said, this is the only place on the internet where people know what these parts are actually for. So, you know, there's something about being connected to the earth and the animals that just is like reality. Hey, reality suddenly strikes you. And I think the part of the problem of our society is that whole disconnection that people have. They now think these things are, you know, that you can do anything with these things. No, they have, they actually have a purpose. They have a telos. That's right. That's right. Yeah. So bouncing off of that, something I learned from Jordan Peterson, and something I learned from looking at some of young has to do with the fact that we have these archetypes and male and female, you know, in, in our psyche. You know, we have these elaborate constructions that are, you know, part of it is ancestral, maybe even going back to the animal world. And part of it is based on our, our experience, our experience in our family and all. And we have these instinctive, elaborate, instinctive set of programs or responses and impulses in the area of masculine feminine relationships or male and female relationships. But of course, that stuff is, it's, it's fallen. It's fallen just like the rest of the human world has fallen. So, you know, thinking about one time Jordan Peterson showed a picture of the Virgin Mary holding Christ, and he made an interesting statement. He said, any society that doesn't hold this as a sacred image is doomed to failure. And I thought, Whoa, no, of course, what he was talking about was the sacredness of the, the, you know, mother and child. Right. Together. Right. But I thought about that a lot. And, you know, fitting that in with what Jonathan Peugeot says about icons and all of that. And I really think that the, you know, God has given us archetypal images of purity in Christ and in the Virgin Mary. And why would he give us those images if it's not to purify our internal archetypal images that we have of the masculine and feminine. And I thought, you know, we need those icons. We really do. We need to be looking at those icons. We need to be looking at the crucifix. We need to be looking at icons of the Virgin Mary. We need to be staring at them so that they, so that they enter into us and they in ways that we cannot, could not possibly even put into words. They affect our soul. And so I do, you know, Pope John Paul II said that that the church needed to breathe with both lungs. He was referring to the East and the West that we need to that the spirituality of the East and the iconography and all of that was as much a part of our Christian heritage as all the things that we have in the West. You know, the church fathers and Thomas Aquinas and, you know, the statues and the cathedrals and all that. But when it comes together, there's really something there that deeply affects us and and deeply changes us. So what do you think about that? You ask you ask an heir of Dutch iconoclasm what he thinks of that icons and the Virgin Mary. I, you know, I, I think you have a point and I think your point is right in terms of these. So you know, of course, was the son of a reformed minister. Right. Also, heir of that iconoclastic tradition, Jung, Jung destroyed all kinds of icons on his way to hit through his career. But the I think you're, you know, I, this is an area that I've never paid much attention to in terms of the the history of my tradition. I understand why the Reformation. I understand, I understand why the Reformation responded to some of what it was seeing and some of what it was. Some of the the abuse that it saw in the church. And I in terms of Luther, my take on Luther is that he was, you know, he immediately he was a would be reformer who kind of had the the temperament of Jordan Peter. And that if you push him, he pushes back and and Luther kind of got pushed into being, you know, pushed into schism by the age and politics and context that he was in. Oh, yeah, he could have been handled entirely differently. Yeah. And the history of the church would have been different. And so then we so then we ask difficult questions about well, why why the Reformation and was the Reformation a good thing? And is the Reformation something that we should we should celebrate or not? I the you know, one of the things that I ponder about. So when I was a number of years ago, I decided I was so tired as a pastor of preaching series that I said, I'm just going to go through the Bible and start with Genesis. I'm just going to go through it. And so but I take breaks during liturgical seasons. So we'll be in Advent and and land. And but but during ordinary time, I'll just continue my little journey through the Bible, which I'm I'm very glad I did because it folk it forced me to pay attention to places, especially in the Old Testament that nobody visits or pays any attention to. And and so you you look at both the tabernacle and the temple and you find these contexts of rich imagery where there are images of of seraphim and there are images from the natural world. There are almond branches that the the almond farmers in Ripon like to remind me is is God's most favorite nut. And and there's all his favorite nut. And there's this rich imagery in the tabernacle and the temple that God certainly isn't against statuary because in the in the best reformed principles, God commands the the sculptors to make it for his temple and his tabernacle. But but what God is is quite definitely opposed to is reducing him to an image that can that we can only represent as part of his creation. And so figuring out the workings of that. And then, of course, you have the incarnation, which, you know, I give a lot of I have a lot of patience for the for the Pharisees and the scribes and even Jesus disciples when at the end of the Gospel of Matthew, some bow down to worship and others doubt because it's like, hey, we've over the last 600 years, we had polytheism and statues beaten out of us. And now you're worshiping this Jesus. I mean, this is this is something that Christians don't fully appreciate in terms of the dissonance that God invited Jesus peers into. So I I'm I'm still I'm still processing the icons and the statues and I still have the iconoclastic the iconoclastic echoes in my ears. But at the same time, an appreciation for the for the sacramentalism that you I think you you very nicely described in that don't look at the window, look through the window at what you know at what you should be seeing. And I think some of what Protestants lost and a friend of mine, I should probably have him on for a conversation, Len Van De Zee, wrote a wonderful book in IVP about sacramentalism, where, you know, when it comes to the body and the blood, the Eucharist, the, you know, the host, the Lord's Supper that John Calvin said, you know, this is Jesus is present here in the body and the blood. We just don't know what to do with that word present, given our philosophical context. So, you know, I listened to your point. Someone I had made an incautious remark in one of my videos and a Roman Catholic took me to task and pointed me to some Bishop Aaron videos on the Lord's Supper, which I deeply appreciated. And so this is this is an area that I think we need continued conversations between Protestants and Catholics and Orthodox on to to help us to help us figure out the language and the practice around how we represent and how we represent and and teach. So, you know, so I'm a I'm a reformed Christian. So the Heideberg Catechism is is one of our doctrinal converse dot one of our doctrinal one of the doctrines that I submit to within my tradition. And that's it. I would love to and I think in glory, we will have the opportunity to pull John Calvin and Martin Luther and some of the popes together and and all gather and say, all right, let's talk about art and representation in the Christian life and how ought this to how ought this to work. So I that's where I'm at. That's where I'm at right now. We might have something better to do. Well, hey, you know, I, I see, I see life in the age to come. I don't know how God's going to arrange it. But we don't even know how he arranges this one. But I think we will, I think we will go further up and further in as C.S. Lewis says, and we will find levels of his glory that today we hardly recognize or appreciate. And I think part of that will be the healing, the healing of the story of this age. Oh, definitely. Yeah. And I deeply, I deeply long for that and anticipate that. So, yeah, and you and you show that so wonderfully in your in your YouTube videos that I'm sure it's it's moving many people's hearts. It's it I can see by the comments underneath it. People really appreciate that. I mean, you know, your your faith definitely shines through and your the centrality of Christ to the way you process everything is just really terrific. And so, you know, we we share that even if we have differences about some of these other technical things, we definitely do share that. And, you know, you know, we call in the I don't know if you're aware of this, but in the Catholic Church since Vatican II, we've come up with a phrase for describing Protestants and we call them separated brethren. So that's beautiful. Yeah, so that and you know, one of the things that Vatican II said was that a longing for Christian unity is one of the best evidences of the of the work of the Holy Spirit in a person. And and I think that's definitely true. And I can see in my lifetime, you know, when I was so my my my mother's side of the family comes from South Southeast Massachusetts. And, you know, these two these two little Christian reform groups of huddled Friesians who came over clinging to cows into into Whiten'sville, Massachusetts. When I was young about the worst thing that could happen to to one of our young people was for them to fall in love with a Roman Catholic. And that was, you know, that's only 40 3040 years ago. But today, the you know, the CRC, you know, does does, you know, participates in community services with the with the with the Roman Catholic priest in the Catholic Church, which is right next door to the church. My mother attends and and so much healing and reconciliation has taken place. And I'm I'm deeply grateful for that. And I I hope it continues. It will be, you know, I think I think part of it has been forced upon us because of the the change in the context. And now suddenly the the things that divide us don't seem nearly as important as the the struggles we face further, you know, further out. So I definitely. Yeah, I think the pro-life movement did a did a great deal to unite Catholics and Protestants who, you know, saw, you know, hey, let's put down our our mutual assured destruction. And let's let's let's instead focus on seeing how many of these little lives we can save. And, you know, that, you know, it's unfortunate that it takes something like that to wake us up. But, you know, we're we got that that sinfulness in us and that pride. And, you know, sometimes sometimes it takes that. Well, I think part of the problem I read Alastair McGrath's I've mentioned this book quite a lot, actually. Alastair McGrath's book entitled Heresy, where, you know, the point he makes early on is that book is that orthodoxy and heterodoxy. You know, they work together and you usually discover orthodoxy because of heresy. And so, you know, the issues that we're continuing to work on, I mean, ideally Protestant churches. The reason we have this word Protestant is because we're protesting some things. So I think deeply at heart, I think the what should be at the heart of every good Protestant is in fact the unification and purification of Christ's church. And and where, you know, where together we will work through Martin Luther, for example. He was in some ways successful as a Roman Catholic Church reformer because because of Luther, a whole number of reforms came through in the church. That's what we look at those things in terms of decades when we should be looking at them in terms of centuries. Right. It could be, you know, you look back at Augustine's time, you know, the big the the Donatist controversy. So there's the Catholics and the Donatists and the, you know, Augustine's mother was a Donatist. So they were, you know, they didn't want to have anything to do with these priests who cave. And the Catholics were the wobbly ones who let them back in. And, you know, these it took hundreds of years for for these things to get worked through. And you would imagine that a God who isn't afraid of using processes over vast amounts of time that would say, yeah, well, we're going to do that in the church, too. It's just really little 60, 70, 80, 100 year living creatures. We're so full of ourselves. We demand that God do it, you know, right away. Yeah. The smiles. No, we're not. We're not. We're not very naturally patient. You know, and I think one of the things that, you know, you show in your videos a lot is a phrase that we use in the Catholic Church a great deal. And maybe you use it also. And that has to do with providence. Like, it's all in the providence of God. That's right. You don't know that until you look back. That's right. You know, whether we're looking back on our own life or, you know, in the future age, we're looking back on this age. We really can't see the problem. When you when you look at, you know, how God has such total respect for our freedom and why should he? I mean, what are we that's right? In regard for our freedom? You know, it's just a big irresponsible. Can God be with God? Look, we have that much respect for each other's freedom. You know, we want to control everybody. We can't even control ourselves. We've got to have such high regard for our freedom that he so gently and subtly orchestrates all these things in such a way that he accomplishes his will. And yet he doesn't dominate us and control us. And he gives us our freedom. And it's just, you know, when you sit and start pondering that you suddenly have to say, OK, you know, criticism of the way the world works is really way above my pay grade. I don't know. I don't know anything. That's that's kind of where we're at. Oh, wonderful. Wonderful. How's your how's your time going here? I've got to wrap this up because I've got a I had a couple of people who want to do lunch with me because they're interested in my church. And so I don't know if they're watching my videos. I get I get calls now from people and they're like, well, we want to know more about your church. I'm like, do you watch my videos or not? Because have you been to my church? Well, you know, I I've thought about starting to Jordan Peterson meetup, but I know it's mostly young guys. You know, of course, you're a man and I'm a little bit older than you and I'm a woman. I mean, I'm a grandmother. And so I don't know how they'd respond to, you know, talking about Jordan Peterson with an older woman. I wonder why people see this video. They're going to want they're going to want you to start a meetup. That's what I think, because I think I think people are I folks are going to love this video if we post it. If you agree to that. Oh, absolutely. I want I do want you to. I think it should be just like we've done here. No covering icon because you look beautiful and to not to to to just have your voice and to not have the expression of your face. And I think that would I think that would be we can figure that out on email after this. But I I think you would be it's harder to start a meetup if you know, it's been easy for me because of my videos. And so my friend in Southern California, John Van Donkey, had a little harder time. So I came down there and, you know, and we got it going. But it's I think you should definitely start one up because I think it would be great. Well, thank you so much for the encouragement. It's been wonderful talking to you. And I definitely want to do it again at some point. I really want to get into the whole cult business because I know some of the people that you had previously started to touch on that issue and had a lot of questions. And I do have I do have some things I could say about that. You might not be surprised. I'm trying to if I can ever get the time. I'm you know, I've got all these ideas for other things. And part of it is to have more people in on the conversation. And and then we could have like we could do maybe a grouping of four or four or six people and talk about cults and some of this stuff. But that would be great. Yeah, for me, it's just about finding time. So we'll we'll we'll see what comes. We'll see what comes. I mean, I know I didn't plan any of this and just God is so good. And he like you say, we we think we run this show, but we can't even run ourselves. But God, God does glorious things. So OK, thanks, Paul. You take care. I'll talk to you soon. OK, thank you, Mary. Bye bye. Bye.