https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=ZZH7rrnROHs

 most of the time, most of the models I have for living a meaningful life are in the context of family, you know, and so a lot of people my age are, you know, getting married, having kids and that's kind of what they're devoting a lot of their time and energy to and that's where they're at least, hopefully, wanting to find a sense of meaning and purpose. And so I guess I'm struggling with like, okay, maybe I'm not gonna have a family anytime soon or ever, you know, if not. And if I'm not doing some kind of unusual job or full time ministry or something, then like, what will make life meaningful? I know that's a really kind of basic question that everybody's asking, but like, I don't have a good answer for it. Yeah, no. When I graduated college, you got serious about the faith and started trying to grapple with the sexual identity stuff. I think I treated it as like, this is my one big thing, and if I can just address that, I'll probably basically be good. Like that'll be my hero's journey and then it'll be over. And now I'm discovering, oh gosh, this whole thing is fractal. It's, there's many, many cycles and many iterations of everything. And, and, you know, so I guess the point I'm getting at is, you know, ironically, the failure of that relationship, I don't, in my estimation, didn't really have anything to do with the sexual identity stuff, but a lot of other things. But I've always been of this mentality that, oh, if I can just deal with the sexual identity thing, then relationships will work, life will be good, I'll find meaning and purpose and happiness, everything will be fulfilling, I'll just ride off into the sunset, and it'll be fine, it'll be great. And it's not happening. And that's, that's, that's been a really jarring realization. And I feel really foolish for, you know, thinking that, but... You shouldn't. You've been programmed to think in that way since the time you started consuming, you know, Hollywood media in America, because that's exactly what that media sets you up to imagine is the pattern of the world. Okay. Oh, Ryan, why don't you introduce yourself a little bit to me. Okay. So, I am 28, I live in Texas. I grew up in Alabama. Grew up going to kind of a semi rural Hellfire Brimstone Southern Baptist Church. You know, I was a really trusting kid so I wanted to believe it really badly. But then I would sit in church reading Revelation, basically every week and so the pastor would be up there screaming stuff. I'd be sitting in the back reading Revelation like I don't know, I don't know what to do with all this. Of all the parts of the Bible to read as a kid. Yeah, I don't know why it just, it really, it was really charming to me and then, and I mean so like I said I wanted to believe it all. And by the time I got into middle school I was just reading a lot of stuff I, you know, my mom gave me a copy of mere Christianity but I, I had the audacity to to say ah, I think Lewis is too pedestrian. And so I was, I was reading Chester 10 and Sam Harris, actually, letter to a Christian nation, tried to read Dostoevsky didn't really get it a little too young. You know, kind of from an early age was just like exploring the territory, a lot. And things finally started clicking with me when I went to in high school I started going to a cooperative Baptist Church. I don't know if you're familiar they're the group that split off from the Southern Baptists over the issue of women in leadership. Really, so they're, they're for it and the Southern Baptists were against. Yes. Okay. Yeah. And so, depending on who you ask the the Southern Baptists experienced either a conservative resurgence or a conservative takeover. And the cooperative Baptist split off and said we're going to do our own thing so there's smaller denomination. And nowadays they're starting kind of what it sounds like the CRC is doing their fight over homosexuality. But that's where that's that's the church that I got baptized in that's where things finally started to click and. And I wasn't super concerned about all the theological things regarding whatever women in ministry stuff like that. But it was around the same age in high school that I was going to that church that I also started developing homosexual romantic feelings. And so, decided my senior year of high school that I was gay, went into college and kind of acted that out. But theologically was was becoming much more interested in the faith as well and becoming more kind of firm in my sort of traditional theological convictions. And then those two paths were divergent. To say the least, and by the end of college, I just felt like I was completely coming apart, you know, I had these theological convictions over here but I was doing this kind of promiscuous gay thing on the side and, and it wasn't clicking it wasn't making sense and then I still don't know how to describe it but I graduated college and there was an evening secular college or Christian college. What to secular college. Okay. Yeah. Oh, and studied computer science, by the way, I write software for a living. And, yeah, right after I graduated college something just clicked into place, I had a had a conversation with some older wise people and they just kind of encouraged me to see God as father and it wasn't it wasn't a very compelling or interesting conversation but for some reason that just clicked into place. And all of a sudden things just started gelling, and I moved to Denver, and got really involved in a, what they call it a converge Baptist Church out there I think it's like john Piper's denomination. I was was doing the full time software developer thing, and was going to this church that's like a tiny Baptist Church full of old people sounds kind of like living stones and, and the youth pastor left and I was one of the only people in the building that was under 40 so they thrust me into that role as tends to happen. Yes. And so I was this kind of shy awkward guy who writes software for living talks computers for a living who was now a youth pastor and it's like I don't know what to do here y'all. Yeah. And I was pretty open with the church like hey y'all I just like two years ago I was living an actively gay life so y'all are cool with me doing this and they're like, Oh, whatever, you know, that's also true of a small church, right. They didn't have options like whatever. You know, we'll keep an eye on him but what's the worst that could happen. Right. So, um, and it was a really challenging experience I mean it really, it really forced me to kind of start working through stuff and you know it was Gen Z kids who have their, their stuff going on, you know, and. So anyway I did that for about a year and a half and then I moved to Texas. And the same pattern emerged basically I was going to a small sort of Baptist Church and eventually they suddenly needed a youth pastor and some lady in the church supposedly had a vision and said, I just feel like Ryan will be really good at this and so, once again, I, I am, you know, I became a youth pastor and. And it was around that time that actually met Tim York at a meetup the guy who gave you a violin and came to faith through beauty, sitting right here. Yep. Yep. And he. At the time I only knew Jordan Peterson but he encouraged me to look you up and pageau and once I did stuff really started clicking and melding and in a really new way. And I was trying really hard not to infect my youth group kids with that but you know a lot of my, my teaching with them was kind of me working through these ideas and so we're talking a lot about patterns and trying to keep it reasonable try not to go into all the the language and stuff but like, I don't know and I just I noticed something interesting during that which was once I started talking that way. And I was more engaged. They were way more interested in this, this kind of me helping them map the territory rather than just me saying here's a Bible passage let me tell you what it means like that wasn't as compelling to them as, let me zoom out and and describe to you these, these, these things that make sense of your life and make sense of the whole Bible and can kind of cohere stuff together. And I just found that super interesting and, and I'm no longer in that role, or at that church. I got engaged and moved to a new city and then we ended that relationship and that was about a month ago and so I'm kind of this place where I'm just trying to figure out like, you know, now what, you know, because a part of me is is interesting and is interested in orthodoxy but I don't know I just have reservations, I guess. I mean the. I think I'm in that spot that a lot of people are in where the, the, the evangelical world seems just too goofy. I think that moving to the Orthodox Church seems like kind of a warp like, I'm just pretending and I'm just, it's not really going to solve the problem that I'm really grappling with. And so, I don't know that's just, that's, that's where I am right now. I mean, there's a lot of people that are in a similar boat as you in that, and some are some seem to be leaning into orthodoxy and maybe attending churches now, I mean part of the difference between the evangelicals and the orthodox is, especially the evangelical churches. I'd regularly have because we live in a community with a lot of African Americans and it's fair number in this church and so people would come in and after one Sunday they'd be like pastor I want to join your church and it's like, why don't you come for six months and Well, if you're still coming in six months, then we'll know something that we don't know now because I'm not going to go through all the stuff to have you join this church, only to have you stop coming a month from now so keep coming to get to know people and by the time, by the time you're ready to officially join, you'll be ready to officially join. Right, yeah, but the orthodox, you know they have their process and their kind of thesis and all of that so well let me ask you, um, what attracts you, have you been to many orthodox churches what what has been your experience so far with it. Yeah, so I was going to an Antioch and I think that's how you pronounce it orthodox church in Fort Worth for a while. And I was just attending when I could because I mean I was a Baptist youth pastor. Right, and then I was secretly sneaking off to the orthodox church for catechism and I, it felt kind of, I felt a little slimy, I felt like okay this isn't really really the right time for me to be doing this. And so I stopped going, and because I, you know, met a girl and all of a sudden my values changed overnight. Just, yeah, I mean just in terms of my openness to that kind of right I guess right. But, um, yes, I mean I went to some catechism classes. I went to Divine Liturgy a few times but I didn't, I didn't really immerse myself in it for a long time. Yeah. But, you know, again I'm kind of in this place right now where it's like I just ended a relationship that I thought was going to be lifelong and so I don't think I'm emotionally in a place to. Yeah. Or, you know, everyone is trying to encourage me like, don't make me decisions right now. Yeah, yeah, I kind of went manic right afterward and was like oh I got approved for a house loan and was going to like go buy a house in Dallas and all this stuff and, Yeah. And everyone's trying to encourage me just just chill out a little bit. You know, yeah, it's good advice. Don't make big decisions and in those moments of transition when when you're just kind of upside down. Yeah. And I think one thing that's troubling me a bit and I wanted to get your thoughts on this, it's just, I mean one of the things I've done during this time is you know I got on the on the discord server and been involved and I've been, I've been listening to you for a while since maybe like 2019 or so. And especially pageo and reading Matthew's book was really really really transformative for me. And the more I've gotten into this space, the more a lot of stuff is falling into place for me but it's getting harder for me to feel like I want to engage with people who are not in this space, and I don't, I don't like what that's doing to me. You know what I mean. And I don't know how to resolve that, or, or, or what to do with that. Because I don't want to become the kind of person that's so arrogant, he can't like, you know, be in a normal group with people, you know, like a Christian community, because that seems really foolish and arrogant, but, but at the same time there's there's something just about the sort of overly simplistic overly compressed view of the faith that is really irking me. Yeah. And I don't know how to resolve that. Yeah. And you're living in the Bible Belt. So that. So, you know, going to church in Texas. I, how do I know this I've never lived in Texas, I suspect, whatever you're imagining is probably accurate. Yeah, it's, it's out there I've been in enough places. There are similar communities here in California. You know I've lived in. I've lived in California, Michigan and New Jersey for extent and the Dominican Republic for extended period of time. I've known Southern Baptist missionaries. So, now when you say getting harder and harder to feel like you don't want to engage with people who are not in the space. Are you saying, specifically, Christian people or is that true sort of out there and yeah just specifically among Christians. Okay. I mean historically, especially since I moved to Denver a lot of my friends were were secular. Yeah. And I feel comfortable there. You know, but I was like the token Christian and those friend groups you know, yeah, which I mean, evangelistically was was helpful but yeah. Yeah, so I all I'm talking about is I, you know, when I'm sitting among a group of Christians and I feel that kind of cognitive dissonance of like, I want to engage with you, where you're at. But I'm kind of mentally or theologically or philosophically kind of exploring some other stuff. And this is just not congruent to me and. I don't know. I don't think it's a bad thing. But I, your concern I appreciate that you have the concern is good that you don't, you don't want to. You don't want to become a, you know, an anti evangelical and in all the worst ways, while becoming you know and an orthodox ideologue. At the same time, as you well know by virtue of the story that you told about the churches you've been in. I think in, in the United States we sort of have a bias of imagining that churches are something like movie theaters or gyms that they're basically instant or Costco their institution that we go in and we have a membership that your church membership is analogous to your Costco membership. And as you well know, being a part of a church is being a part of a community. And it's a community that's not only horizontal and the people that you're there but it's also vertical in that you're participating in the tradition of being a part of a community. So I don't find it. I don't find it surprising that given what you've been immersed in and where your thinking has gone that you increasingly find it difficult to, let's say be part of a community that has its own traditions that you're very familiar with because you grew up in your 28 so you're still in a period of life of. So, you're still in a period of life of individuation, and that you're, you're continuing to, you're continuing to wrestle with your upbringing in my experience, especially after 3030 to 50 is when people really start to do the hard work of getting, you know, processing the house that you grew up in the, you know, the church that you grew up in and really coming to terms with all that after 50 is where you tend to settle into this is this is my perspective. And up until 30 so you're right in that space between 20 and 30 really up until 20 you're sort of making commitments experimenting exploring discovering, and that's all that's all very good and it sounds like you've done it in a, in a very, I think a very authentic way and that you didn't just, you're not just visiting churches watching informing opinion, you've been involved and and being a part of a church is not simply going and showing up and just observing like a non player character being an audience, it's, it's doing things in the church and being a part of the mission of the church whether that's a youth group leader or a deacon or an elder or running the stream or, you know, cleaning up on Saturdays, all that and there's a part of that that's been like profoundly discouraging to me in a way I mean, like, before I was a youth pastor the first time I had all these thoughts about like well here's what you know here's how teenagers in the US need to engage with Christianity and here's how their leaders and give you help me and blah blah blah. And then I step in and do it and realize oh my goodness, I don't know anything. There's way more there there are many many more variables here than I ever could have imagined, and just kind of come to grips with my arrogance, and then coming to terms with the fact that like, I'm not going to make the incredible difference I thought I was going to make I'm going to show up, and I'm going to do my thing. And it'll have whatever small impact it might have. And that's, you know, that's it. And I don't know I, I don't, I don't think it bothers me now as much as it used to but I think there's a part of me that's like, maybe transitioning to a place where I'm finally giving up that that dream of like making a big difference or something. And just kind of settling for like you know, I'm just living a relatively small life. And that's okay. It's, it's actually intended for me you know. And I don't know, there's just a part of me this, this. I don't. I don't know I don't I don't know what I'm, what I'm saying with that exactly. I do know what you're saying, because so for example I. Let's see I got married. When I was 25. I left the country for the mission field when I was 27. And that was, you know, a similar experience where, you know, I'm going, I'm going to a different country I'm learning a new language I'm engaging with the people of a very different culture that I have I have to do all that cultural assimilation. And all of this education I'm doing all of this and to get there and I realize, gosh, what am I doing for these people. There's not a whole lot I can do I'm, I'm helping them. I'm helping the pastors have a little bit of training. I'm, I'm, I'm trying to assist them to not do overly crazy or destructive things but then again, I don't know what the heck is going on in their culture and so it is it is a very humbling process and that's a good good experience to have in your late 20s, because it's a recalibrating experience now, I'll tell you that if you lean into something for 20 years. What you will discover is that in that 20 years you will grow in wisdom and knowledge and capacity. And after leaning into something you will actually be able to accomplish something now I'm not saying you'll change how youth ministry is done in North America, anything like that but you might actually have an impact in the lives of people and you begin to form relationships and you will begin to make a dent in a little piece in this world and, and so, but you're still asking very, very orienting questions which are very appropriate at age. Do I you know do I do I sort of, I would say I would recommend in terms of your, your concern about developing a harsh unfair bias against a certain group of Christians or a church or a branch of Christianity, just, just, just recognize that you have that. And then your mind sort of give it an avatar, and you give it an avatar so you can sort of zoom away from it and look at it and say well there that is, that's when I step into a Baptist Church, I get triggered and I listened to them do these things and my eyeballs and just just put all that on an avatar and look at it and say okay that's that. And it's there. And I've got concerns about that, but I'm, I'm not going to derail my life because of that avatar. I'm going to, and by putting it by moving it into an avatar and looking at it you're gonna say okay, I know it's there. There's some good things about it there's some bad things about it but I can keep my eye on it, because I've differentiated it from myself in a certain way, and I don't have to let that thing possess me. And, and that then will give you a little bit more agency and autonomy, and sometimes you know you might find yourself triggered and, and then you recognize I just, you know, that avatar just possessed me and I am manifesting that avatar in this place and I don't really want to do that but he's also got his point because there's some crappy stuff there well there's, there's crappy stuff everywhere and part of the beauty and downside of learning. Another, another room off this hallway of mere Christianity is an orthodoxy. You'll discover much of the same thing, you'll find some, you'll find some, wow you know the orthodox are able to be and to do some things that the evangelicals weren't. But here amongst the orthodox there's some of these other things here that. And, and that's the way it is, as you go in from one place to another and so I don't think it's, you know, people will often come to me, and they're, they've been in a job in ministers this isn't uncommon they've been in a job or they've been in a church for two, three, five, ten years and you know it's kind of feeling like a shirt that's a suit that they've grown out of a little bit and I'll often recommend I'll say you know, well if if you get a letter and you get an email or you see a job, I see a job opening or something go ahead and just pursue it a little bit and lean into a little bit because you'll learn more about it as you move towards it. Yeah, I think that was helpful for me doing the the bivocational thing for a while. I was a youth pastor last year I mean it was a really cool setup honestly like the the high school was right here. The church was right here and I work remotely so I moved my, my software office or desk to this like abandoned coffee shop at the church. That was across the street from the high school. Right. And so it was this cool and it was coven time you know so everything's kind of chaos so they're like coming into one class and then they like have two hours off and so they'd wander over to my space and see me working and I'd be working my desk job which is really flexible and then they'd come in there and then it was a cool opportunity to engage with them like right in the moment, you know, like they're seeing me live in my normal life, and they're, you know, like maybe they just are angry and they just happened at school so they come in there in a huff, and we engage about real life right there. And then, you know, that room is the same place we're doing like youth group night and so it adds so much more depth to the experience of like how we're engaging with each other, rather than just them showing up and me spouting off some stuff about the Bible and then I don't know so I enjoyed that but also, I think yeah exactly what you're describing it gave me kind of a sense of like okay, I've explored the ministry thing a little bit. I'm good without that. Because I had a similar experience what you're describing a couple years ago I flew to Zambia for a couple weeks because I was thinking about, you know, helping with a ministry out there and it was, it was a disorienting experience or maybe orienting I guess because it's like every day I was just grading math papers. And then I would go to my little place at night and just get on Reddit and scroll Reddit all night and it's like, I thought this was going to be some big transformative experience but it's like, I'm, I'm the same person here with the same problems and the same on we and, you know, like, this isn't fixing me. This isn't doing anything and I'm just grading math papers. You know, like, in the grand scheme of things like what what does what does this mean for people, what does it mean for me, you know, I'm pretty sure I don't want to do the ministry thing full time, ever. And I'm happy with that and I'm happy with the software thing but I think I still want to live a meaningful life, you know, and I think one of the problems I'm, I'm dealing with is just that most of the time. I have for living a meaningful life or in the context of family, you know, and so a lot of people my age are, you know, getting married having kids and that's kind of what they're devoting a lot of their time and energy to and that's where they're at least, hopefully, wanting to find a sense of meaning and purpose. And so I guess I'm struggling with like okay. Maybe I'm not gonna have a family anytime soon or ever, you know, if not. And if I'm not doing some kind of unusual job or full time ministry or something then like what will make life meaningful. Yeah, I know that's a really kind of basic question that everybody's asking but like I don't have a good answer for it. Yeah, no. A few thoughts. One is the clock speed of meaning. So you're a tech guy you understand clock speed and CPUs and some of that kind of stuff. Meaning, meaning works at different clock speeds, some things are sort of immediately meaningful to do. Cleaning the shower. So there's something about cleaning the shower that you know you shower in this little thing every day and bit by bit it's it's getting dirtier and dirtier than I've had enough so you go in there on a Saturday and you clean that darn shower and you sit back and it's all shiny. That's meaningful. I clean the shower. And other clock speeds of meaning are really slow, like family and family, you know can be deeply meaningful but there's an enormous amount of monotony and drudgery and that that goes into that too because children grow up in time. And, you know, family and marriage is is sort of both that way, but it is, it is a fairly reliable predictable source of meaning in in one's life. Not everyone marries, or should marry, or succeeds in their marriage. And so, then people look to all kinds of other things career. Now it sounds to me though like, so some people I talked to, you know, they remember watching this is there's there's this rehab movie 28 days with Sandra Bullock that was on a number of years ago and you know they have all these people who are in recovery and you know like the, they all want to sort of jump into marriages and romantic relationships and everything and, you know, usually the therapist will say well, well first see if you can keep a plant alive, because if you keep a plant alive. Well, there you got something that maybe graduate to a cat or a dog. And maybe if you can manage your relationship with a cat or a dog you're ready to to really start to manage a long term relationship with your human being. So, we live in an interesting space where on one hand we take our, we have all these institutions like churches that are sort of consumer focused, but we have a poverty of institutions that you know something like monasteries that afforded people. I would say if they're single, an enormously meaningful community, and a path to grow on. And so what part of what happens in Protestantism is sort of marriage gets swapped out for monastery and that's not exactly an even trade because in some ways managing a home and a marriage and a family is more demanding than being a monk. So, and so now this, we've, if we follow the language you have vocations. And so well, okay so you work in technology and coding. Well there's a vocation but unlike let's say a monastic vocation that is filled with rhythms of worship and liturgy and all of these things. And so, the money laundering is sometimes just something that I do to get a paycheck. So, the, the replacement of family and career that are replacement of monastery for family and career really hasn't quite arrived. So, I would, I would recommend not necessarily for fronting institutions as your only hope for long term meaning. Instead, continue to do some of what you described in terms of your ministry to the youth in. It was, you know, almost any good Christian ministry is primarily about relationships. And, you know, you have the church and its youth ministry but especially if you're in an aging church that's probably dying and the youth ministry is just sort of one last gasp to not slide off into irrelevance, and to accept the fact that the institutional arc of this church is going to end that 60 years which is most where most of them do. And I very quickly realized that what you are putting into those kids. This institution of the church that might even be paying you a little bit of money or at least giving you a little title or status to do this, they're not going to benefit for many of this and what you pour into those kids is something. No one can take away because it's fundamentally relational. So, I, I also think that on the heels of a major disappointment in your life such as a relationship that you had hoped would arrive at marriage and a family and this whole path. It's very easy to feel like or it fell apart or for whatever reason that happened you don't have to talk about that at all. I can't do it and this will never come, and I'm not even sure I wanted after this. Yeah, that'll pass. I hope so, because I mean it's it's honestly it's ironic to me because I think, you know, like by when I graduated college and got serious about the faith and started trying to grapple with the sexual identity and the I think I treated it as like this is my one big thing, and if I can just address that. I'll probably basically be good like that'll that'll that'll be my hero's journey and then it'll be over. And now I'm discovering oh gosh this whole thing is fractal. It's, there's, there's many, many cycles and many iterations of everything and, and you know so I guess the point I'm getting at is, you know, ironically, the, the failure of that relationship, I don't, in my estimation didn't really have anything to do with the sexual identity stuff but a lot of other things. But I've always been of this mentality though if I can just deal with the sexual identity thing then relationships will work life will be good. I'll find meaning and purpose and happiness, everything will be fulfilling I'll just write off into the sunset and it'll be fine it'll be great. And it's not happening and that's that's that's been a really jarring realization. And I feel really foolish for, you know, thinking that, but you shouldn't you've been programmed to think in that way. Since the time you started consuming, you know, Hollywood media in America because that's exactly what that media sets you up to imagine is the pattern of the world. I remember, I gotta be careful what I say here. You know, my marriages are very uneven some, some people are married and they don't have hiccups in their marriage and everything is fine and other almost everybody has more trouble than that. And some people have even more trouble than that, depending on all sorts of things. And I imagine that, you know, I could resolve struggles in my marriage with my wife by sitting down and reasoning with her. That didn't work at all. And then I imagine that, you know, because I didn't I never saw my parents fight. And my older sister was a little better attuned to the fact that if my parents weren't getting along they tended to do so in silence but they also tended to make a lot of trouble in the family and there wasn't there wasn't very much conflict in my home growing up and so I didn't I didn't have any of that experience in terms of what to expect in a marriage and then when my wife and I had, you know, various levels of conflict for a whole series of reasons, I always thought that these things could sort of you know they can be reasoned away, they can be explained away. And, you know, all then all then the therapist will dispel it and and our Christian you know, and and what I very quickly discovered was that there were many things against which I had no weapon. And there was a resolution of which wasn't about to come, certainly not within 45 minutes, or within two or three weeks or with even within a month or a year or even a decade. And some things I just began to add to begin to realize this probably will not be resolved my entire lifetime. Now what do I do. I think it's sort of triumphalistic optimistic can do formation that Hollywood the culture. Yeah, is that an American thing or Western thing or is that just a human thing. I mean, I'm not anything but an American human so I can't really say. I think, I don't know but it is definitely deep within our culture because we tend to live immersed in all of these little stories that either wrap things up in 18 minutes or 43 minutes depending on, you know, well now we've got streaming so we have a couple of weeks we have a few weeks to wrap things up but life is not like that. And, you know, related to that, I mean, around that time that I kind of graduated college and things started clicking the place, I think one of the one of the most helpful things was I was reading the Brothers Caramazov Dostoevsky, I just stumbled across it at a thrift store. I had never heard of it but it was a big book and I figured why not. And I think that's what was at least part of what was so helpful about that book was, it was. It wasn't just a clean arc like the main character is kind of, kind of a wuss and he's kind of unhelpful to people. He just goes around listening and let's people walk on him, and yet, somehow at the end of the story he's the one left standing, who's the hero. And, and, you know, especially a hero among the youth. You know these kids who are looking up to him, even though maybe they shouldn't be, you know, and I think that was really impactful me I could feel that in my own, you know, story, my own life. And something about that felt very true to me. And I started thinking about like okay, how can I embody that. Or, you know, and then a scary realization I think was maybe the people older than me that I look up to are embodying that also, you know. And so, you know, I talked to a Paul VanderKlay and I'm like, oh, why is Paul, give me your, you know, tell me what to do in life what direction to head like well, I don't know maybe Paul's just someone like me but who's a little further down the road, and it's just trying to figure it out, you know, because there's a part of me that's really tempted to be like, you know, I want to give up on Protestantism, but I'll wait and see what Paul does. Or you know Dallas Willard stuck with it somehow so you know that's something but but then it's like but but is is Paul or Dallas Willard actually any different fundamentally It's not as far as I can tell, but, you know, and I, but I don't but it's it's, I don't want to say that part out loud. Yeah, because there's a part of me that wants to be like well, no, just make just make these people the clinging to them they're gonna be my anchor, you know, and then it's disorienting when you know my mom came to faith for Robbie Zacharias coming to her community and doing like a kind of revival thing. And I was like, well, I mean she hasn't gone through any kind of crazy deconstructionary thing after his stuff came out she was just kind of like well that sucks. But, you know, if she was 30 years younger. It might have had a huge impact on her. Yeah. You know, yeah. And this but this is also something of the stage of life you're in now too, which is, you know, to a certain degree we need those, those, those saints those heroes those ideals ahead of us when we're younger because they, they help us navigate. And, and we have to see them in a certain light, not necessarily because they want to be seen in this light, but we need them to be seen in that light for our needs. In other words, we're bringing something to that and you know that's why you get the saying you know, you know, the the caution cautioning people to be where meeting your heroes, because you have exactly this realization and the same with same goes on with your parents. I mean at some point, at some point in in adulthood, especially if you have very good parents. You begin to see the clay feet of your parents you begin to see their, their pitfalls now if you're. Did a really bad job maybe later in life you begin to see what they did okay, instead of loud dad cheated on mom and, you know, abandoned the family and took up with and she then did this and you know there's plenty of stories out there like that too so No, you're right. And this is, this is part of why in Protestantism for example Protestantism is a little more reticent to, to basically to turn to canonize individual human beings. And so on one hand you sort of need saints that you can look up to and strive towards on the other hand, Protestants Protestantism basically says yeah but you know they're still on this side of the line. And the only one on that side of the line is Jesus, not David not Moses that but you know we'll put Jesus there but nobody else. And, and, and so, no, you're you're exactly right, and And, and so, it's, again I think there's something of American culture in there of this can do instrumental culture that says, Okay, so I've got this struggle in my life, bang. Here's an answer. And I think that with. Okay, so, and I've seen people do it well, this Protestant Church, this was this was crazy I'm going to go into orthodoxy and they go into orthodoxy and maybe they're tremendously blessed but at some point, if they've got their eyes open they'll see, they'll see trade And, but again, that is, I think, the age that we're living in the present age. It's a function of. It's a function of this world and, and I think you can see that if you look at the story of Jesus. Okay, that's the question. Okay, let's pre suppose Jesus is Christian who Christianity says he is. Why would taking this in this world lead to this kind of reaction to him, not only then but all the way up until today. And it's a function of the agent and the arena. And those two are always interacting and so it's and part of this is about growing up. I mean that's that's that's what we're doing and we don't stop growing up. You know, when we hit 21. We keep growing up I, you know, I'm in my late 50s now and I still, there'll be days when it's like, gosh, when will I grow up. I'll, you know, I'll stay up too late. And to get up and it's like, I'm a 58 year old man why don't I know enough to go to bed on time. And, you know, I do better at it than I did 10 years ago partly because my body is less accommodating of my foolishness at this age and so it's like, You know, do the right things. Yeah, yeah, and I think maybe I part of me I just need to accept that. Some of these things I'm not going to figure out, at least for a while or maybe ever and I don't know just that bothers me for some reason, probably an idealist. My wife's an idealist. It's part of our marriage. Right. Why can't it be like this. It isn't. Well, it isn't and you seem perfectly content with that. Yeah, that's because I'm not really much of an idealist. Right. But but then again sometimes I won't strive and achieve in the way she will, because I'll say, I don't know, I don't know if I'm gonna get there. So, So, I mean, in, in your experience with stuff like that. How much of that is just like personality that like that's the way you are and that's where you're going to be and how much of it is is like can I grow into a little bit more realism and acceptance of the way things are or is there, is there a part of me that's just always meant to be this idealist like things have to be this way. Both. And, and you can work really hard to find the line and, and what you discover as you pursue that line might be helpful in terms of coming to terms with it, but it's both part of it is, is just how you're wired and whether that's by genetics or who raised you or what you're the interaction of all that it's there's just way too much combinatorial explosiveness in there to say, this is it. It's kind of the nature nurture thing. It's like, it's both. It's both. And so there are, you know, it's kind of like, you know, how fast could I run a mile. Now, when I was 16 or 18 or 21 or 25. And I if I trained really really hard I could probably run a mile within these parameters. Now that I'm older, I probably couldn't get up to that. But, you know, there's just so many variables in these questions. And it's a good question. But if you're looking at the question in order to do something with the answer. Maybe. That's, that's, that's fair. But again, I think, I think it's helpful to recognize that we always see the world from where we're at right now. And that has everything to do with age, you just had a major life event which is, you were, you were making progress to the loss of a dream. And if you dream like this, you grieve that dream is real. And, and grief. As you'll learn later in life when you know you grieve the loss not just of dreams but of people, you know, parent dies friend dies. And you learn something about grief that you know part of grief just takes time, because. So, so not only are we always sort of imprinting and recalibrating and updating, updating this map of reality and ourselves which we do so consciously but mostly unconsciously. And when you take a blow, like you just took. There's a major recalibration that has to go on in you and that that that recalibrate snappings in you that you're not even aware of and that's why I've watched you know as a pastor of a church with older people, I watch a lot of people grieve. And sometimes it's grieving a spouse. Sometimes for elderly people it's it's grieving a loss of agency and power and vitality and opportunity. And all of that stuff has to be brought on to the map and dealt with in an appropriate way. If it isn't dealt with and you get weird act things out like you know the 72 year old, wearing gold chains and driving a red sports car because in 1975 that was the thing to do. Yeah, and in 2020 you look at him it's like, oh, he's doing that. Right. And I think, I think that that's what scares me a little bit about the phase I'm entering into, you know my 30s as a single guy because most of the people I see in that space. They're just kind of self pitting miserable sad sacks, or they're yeah they're they're larping in some sense they're they're walking around wearing baseball caps backwards and trying to be the cool guy and it's just like it's just really like sad and I'm like how I don't know, I don't know. Well maybe that's true in Texas if you move out to California then you'll find everybody's still single at 30. That's, that's fair. Yeah, I mean, I'm single at 30 in California. Right. And, and, and yeah I mean, like when I when I was in Denver, most of my friends were like that and so if I told them, you know, like if if I go hang out with those friends and tell them kind of where I'm at they'd be like what do you, why, what do you, you know, so your first big relationship in your 20s didn't pan out like well welcome to the world kid. You know, and, but it's all perspective right I grew up in Alabama and all my friends in Alabama got married real young and now I'm like a decade behind the curve. And it's like, it's two different worlds and and it's hard to kind of piece it all together. Yeah. But, and and what you're also discovering in this moment are again and this is typical when you get late 20s and then 30s especially. You're going to be able to see the map that you've spent 2030 years accumulating. And it's like, why do I feel this way, I had an expectation. Where did that expectation come from, I never, I never gave approval to this expectation on my map. No, but it's yours. This is why people go into therapy. And I and I struggled to, you know, I know that I need to do the grieving thing right now. I don't want to do that. And so instead I'm just work on little personal projects you know I made a website to search all your videos a couple weeks ago stuff like that and I'm like, just just working on goofy things to just distract myself from like the problem that's right here which is, yeah, you're dying Ryan, and your life's not panning out how you hoped it would. And what are you going to do with that. I don't know if I don't want to look at that. Yeah, I'd rather, you know, get on the discord server and look at everyone's doom posting memes and stuff like it's a lot more fun. You know, it gives me a lot more dopamine. Yeah. Anyway, yeah, that's true. That's true and that doesn't go away. We find all sorts of ways to avoid looking at what we don't want to see. And then something will happen or something will come in, and we can no longer avoid it. And then we have to face it, but it's often in those moments that we grow. So, I mean, don't be too hard on yourself with this, with this pattern part of it is also, again, our circumstance that you can afford this right now in your life. You know if you were, if you were a 20 if you were a 21 year old woman in Alabama with a two year old. There's a lot less avoiding that two year old and that two year olds needs. Yeah, no, I've been thinking about I think you said recently that the, the, the meeting crisis strikes the affluent or something like that. Yes, like, I think you're right. Yeah, you know, I, I remember. I was 23 or 24 and I read Anna Karenina by Tolstoy, and he kind of hits on that theme in the book you know the main characters this kind of angsty like me wondering what his life purpose is and then he sees these peasants who are miserable work in the fields, but he's like, in a sense they're happier than me and he doesn't know what to do with that, you know, and I, that was really that really hit me as like huh. I learned that with the Haitians that I worked with, they. These people lived on about 50 cents a day. And, you know, they understood, they understood how uncertain their lives were boy they're their worlds were full of meaning. And, you know, the, the, the need, you need to be. You need to be fairly well off to afford a meeting crisis for many people, and that the 20 year on the 21 year old woman in Alabama who's got a two year old at home. Her life is full of meaning, and she probably is would really love a little bit of rest. And that's that's kind of, that's kind of where we're at. You know what what to what I was just I right before this I had a conversation with with someone who, you know, we connection was bad and it was very personal conversation we knew we wouldn't share it with anyone, but, you know, this individual went to the army. And, you know, I've I've often spoken with people for whom, you know, their experience in the army even if you know maybe they were deployed to Iraq or Afghanistan tremendously meaningful. Now lots of other things came along with it too. But tremendously meaningful. Yeah. So, I, I'm not, I'm not. The way you're talking, you're, you know, you're, you're, you're working on self knowing and you've achieved some things already and so you know I'm not too worried about you. That doesn't mean that life. You know, that doesn't mean that you're going to get everything you want in life. I mean the truth is, things come at us in this world that, you know, think about Chad the alcoholic. I mean, Chad the alcoholic I part of the reason I like, you know, having people on video and with at least a name or an avatar or something in this realm is that we can use them as examples I mean, Chad the alcoholic talks about his, you know, does he he was an alcoholic well that's a difficult question because he recognizes that his alcoholism brought him to a, which brought him to having to pursue a meaningful path and a disciplined life that has brought him a job and now a wife, and he's hoping at some point And all of this came through a whole lot of wreckage and a whole lot of pain and and the, the bills racked up in in that wreckage and that pain will come due for him just like they come due for all of us, but it can be a very meaningful thing to work your way out of a really bad spot. And frankly I mean that's that's kind of my, my attitude or my feelings towards like my own kind of sexual identity stuff like I'm not happy about it, but I don't know if I would have taken Christ very seriously otherwise, especially in light of just how the world's changing I, you know, and I think that was also something that was pretty discouraging to me as a youth pastor because you know I mean, I didn't I didn't share my story with them I was trying to be fairly prudent with that but they would still come to me and say hey Ryan I need to share some with you I think I'm gay, think I'm bi, think I'm pregnant. I think Christianity is nonsense you know, and especially with if they would come to me about sexual identity stuff it's like you would think I'd have the right I'd be the perfect person to talk to it's like, well, you know, the only answer I know to give them is like, you're, you're going to have to work through a lot of stuff, and it's going to be really hard. And, and, you know, Christ is there, but, you know, you're going to find them, and, and that's going to be really hard and discouraging and I don't tell you, kid, good luck, you know, and but that's a terrible answer. Anyway, but but the, the point isn't so much the answer. Because what that kid was looking for was someone who they could, you know what you talked about me or Dallas Willard they they they looked up to you and and and what they saw through you was, hey you know what, I'm not alone in this. And he, you know, he's had, maybe not exactly the same but he's had similar struggles and he's still here. And he's, you know, you know he's, he's not on the post office wall and he's not, you know, but maybe just just maybe there is hope. And maybe things will be okay and maybe there will be people I can talk to. And, and, and maybe I won't be alone as I work my way through this forest. You know, and I think, you know, you know, I think about that with respect to the ups and downs of my marriage, the ups and downs of my career. And in some ways, I would not be. I would not be able to talk to people I would not have the wisdom I have today. If my marriage had just been easy. I probably would have had all sorts of self righteousness and self importance and confidence which was completely unfounded. I thought I was, I thought I was doing everything right because gosh everything is just dandy. Instead of recognizing that maybe just our personalities and circumstance etc etc but you only. You will learn things by. You will learn things by facing up to hard things that you can't learn any other way. John Piper has, you know, a great title dim don't waste your sorrows. That's, that's profoundly true. And, and the difficulty with hardship and suffering is that many people that in bitters. But if you can, and this was, you know, one of the profound things that Peterson said just as he was sort of coming back into public life with all that akathasia and all the pain he was dealing with the one thing he understood was, I better not let this make me bitter. Because if you work as a pastor or you work as a clinical therapist, you recognize that there are corners people put themselves into, and a big difficult one is bitterness. And once you sort of give your soul to bitterness. It's tough road back and usually the only way that gets broken is deeper levels of suffering and hardship. Where you, your, your life can no longer afford that bitterness, just for survival. And that's, you know, and people in recovery have to go through I mean they deal often people in recovery sometimes have to deal with resentment in that way that their resentments were fueling this and their, their father did this disappointed them in this way their And that disappointed them in that way and the people who were supposed to bless them in life curse them. And so they are rightfully angry and resentful. And that then get it gets expressed in all kinds of ways that are self destructive and it's like, Yeah, you're dealt a bad hand. Now, what are you going to do about it. And at that point, and that path out of that is enormously meaningful. Hope I can go closer to that and not not towards the bitterness. Well, and and so, again, in, in the Christian faith. I think you can lean into going to Christ and and bringing these things to Christ and saying, Okay, you're my master. You know the beginning of the hyper catechism for example. What is your only comfort in life and in death that I am not my own, which is completely antithetical to the American way which says I am my own. Okay, little center of the world. You're ready to shoulder that agency. I am not my own but belong body and soul and life and in death to my faithful Savior Jesus Christ was fully paid for all my sins with his precious blood and has delivered me from the tyranny of the devil. And so, you know, with these things. If you're if you're grieving, you know, the, the, the cliched but good advice is always well you give your, your give your sorrows to him. And you pray your sorrows, and you pray your tears. And, and, you know, people think they're going to gain something by walking away. And you know really what you gained. That's, I've felt very much that in my, my whole faith journey. Who is it. Is it is it Peter who you know, Jesus tells them about tells the crowds about eating his body and drinking his blood and they disperse and then Jesus turns to them he's like, y'all gonna do it too. And is it is it Peter who responds like, where else do we go, like, like what you said is weird and, and I don't know about that but who else and I feel that really strongly it's like, especially since discovering pageo it's like this whole, and in particular Matt just this this whole world has opened up of like, oh my gosh, everything is structured like Christ like Christ is the structure of reality that idea has hit me like a truck. And it's like, I don't, I don't know, even if I somehow got to where I don't believe. I don't know if I would have believed that Jesus rose from the dead it's like I still don't know what I would do with seeing this structure everywhere, like, what else is going to bring any sense of cohesion this stuff I don't know. And I, I don't know. We're small, we're small. We're weak. And we stumble. And we mess up. And all of all of our heroes have clay feet. And, but yet we, you know, faith. There's a reason it's faith. And it's not site. We lean into it and we long on it and we, and we, and we, we act as if you know all of this is true, and we pursue it. And that's, that's, that's the walk of faith. It's the walk of faith. So, and I know you probably got to go in a minute but I mean just to that point, I mean, I think that's, that's something that struck me so much about Jordan Peterson coming across him like, you know, I think I started contrasting him with, you know, because he says stuff like, I'm not sure if I believe in God but I'm afraid he exists or, you know, I act as if he exists. And then you've got the pastor who's getting up there given his propositions every Sunday about God but then isn't dealing with his porn addiction. It's like, which of those is the obedient son. You know, it seems to me that Peterson is closer to the kingdom. Could be, we don't have a lot of perspective to make those judgments. But the the contrast is the contrast is real. You know, and this is, this is part of the reason Jesus says, you know, be careful with with passing judgment. And in a sense says, don't don't don't don't do any judgment, don't do any more judgment passing then, then is absolutely necessary for you because, you know, you can find. You can find people who are, you know, deep in the church tribe who are deeply troubled and outrageous sinners and some of the worst kinds of sinners and hypocrisy and self righteousness and find people outside the church tribe that are that are benevolent and beautiful and all of that and then you can turn around and actually see those same self righteous person within the church tribe also have other elements of glory that are unavailable to those outside and I mean, every human being is so multifaceted and our ability to comprehend any of them is so limited and then the judgment through which we look to try to make a summation of them is is even more reductive that and that's why Jesus says, careful with judgment and and we all have to show discernment we all we all need judgment in order to know how to deal with one another. We've all got that, but this is part of the reason that the command to love is so liberating. Because you can look at that person who maybe is the self righteous praying in a church that you think, gosh, after 30 years of being in church, this is the best you've done. And then you can look at perhaps that the beautiful person who is outside the faith or have another faith who seems to have some qualities that certainly outshine this person in the church and say, well what what must that say about all of this, it's like, well, you know what with the command to love. And so, it puts them both on an equal platform, and one might be easier to love than the other in some ways, but maybe not in other ways. And so the beauty about, you know, be careful with judgment. And so, the point of love is, at least now I know how to act towards that person. I need to figure out what love looks like, and what it requires. And that's for all of us usually more than enough to try to wrap our minds around and to act out in the world. So, hope that's helpful. Yeah, I think so. I think I think I need to go sit with that and I think that'll probably help me with how I'm feeling about. You know, going to a Baptist church or whatever, and you're grieving, and you're grieving and what one of the one of the crazy things about being a pastor that I've learned, especially in a case like yours if someone has just lost a spouse of 50 years. I don't have to remind them as much that they're grieving, but listening to a little bit of your story. And so, what the others are doing. Hey, buddy, you're grieving, be a little patient with yourself. Take some time, especially for an idealist because an idealist will be like, I should be able to get over this grief quickly. Well you know what your body's going to tell you when you're done with the grief and the rider on that elephant doesn't really have a lot to say about it. And that's why it happened on your map that especially at the age of 28, you don't fully see or understand. And that's why you have friends. And that's why you have time. And the funny thing is that after you've lived long enough you can look back at different periods of your life and say, this is what I thought back then. And so, later on, that looks different. And that's where if you grow in faith through your lifetime, you can gain wisdom you gain perspective, and then you also are able to say to others you know what I, I know what some of that pain is like. It's just like with those kids coming to you as a youth pastor, because, you know, they're a decade younger than you. And this world is throwing a ton of things at them and they had a feeling, and then a fear, and I think I'm gay. Oh, okay. Well, talk to me in 10 years, 10 years, 10 years ago I was eight yeah 10 years from now you'll be 28. And I, yeah, I mean, I don't know, I just, this kids. I'm really worried about that generation. They don't even like, it's like they weren't even looking for me to convince them that the Bible's true or something like that they just, they just want something to anchor them to anything. You know, I mean they're just, I mean they're, they're really living in the kind of nihilistic age, and in a way that I think even I didn't end. I don't know. They're just they're longing for something. I don't know how they're going to get it. And that's why again, we trust someone bigger than ourselves. Well, they might not have a meaning crisis for them might not be able to afford it. Well, right, it was great to talk to you I will send you the copy of this video and you obviously can share it with whomever you want to and if you, you know, be willing to have me share it on the channel, I'm sure others would benefit from it So I'll send you the video first and make up your mind and then let me know. Okay. Okay. Appreciate it. Great talking to you, Ryan. Bye bye.