https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=rA0c12RJmVE

 Hi, this is Paul. I am at Synod and not really able to make much content and so there were some videos that I wanted to make and talk about. Now, I'm sorry if this sounds echoey. I am in a dorm kitchen, dorm floor kitchen, but I figured this way I wouldn't bother my sweet mate. Before I left Sacramento, Laura and Nate and Julian made a video on Grail Country and I thought it was an outstanding video. Laura basically picks up where she and I left off as she explains early on in the video. She asked me to take down a couple of the videos, some of the videos that we had had conversations. She very much didn't want her opinions hurting anyone that she was in community with there and so she wanted to give some disclaimers and give a little bit more of a positive spin on things. What followed was a really terrific conversation. Laura, of course, lived in a conservative Roman Catholic community, a small community. Julian is a Hutterite and he practices intentional living in community in a Hutterite, which is a Mennonite community in Alberta. Nate is his Christian anarchist self up there in the woods of the Pacific Northwest. I thought their conversation was terrific and so I wanted to share it with you and so I got permission from each of them to share it, partly because Laura was on the channel already. She opens the context and I thought maybe I'd play some of it and do a little commenting before I just give you the whole rest of it. So here we go. So I have two guests with me today. One you've seen on Grail Country before, my friend Julian, and one new face to Grail Country audience and this is Laura. Anyone who follows Paul VanderKlay may have seen the conversation she had not too long ago with Paul VanderKlay. Laura was actually the one who had the idea for this conversation so I'm going to kind of kick it over to Laura. Laura, if you want to explain what you talked about with Paul and what you'd like to explore today with Julian and I, go ahead. Yeah, so Paul and I talked about problems with Benedict Option style communities. The video isn't up right now and the reason it's not up right now is that I realized that people were getting the impression from the video that the place where I had lived was just a really terrible place across the board because all Paul and I talked about problems and so then I was sensitive to the fact that people who lived there might see it and might be thinking hey we were nice to this lady, you know, now why is she dissing us on YouTube, especially since they've been through some struggles and problems in recent years and they might feel like I was kicking them while they were down. So that's why it's gone right now but maybe if we have a good conversation here and I manage to make some things more clear then maybe we can unlock my conversation with Paul again and just link to this video for more information. So yeah, I want to make it clear that the problem wasn't that it was a terrible place and it's not that the people involved were bad people but it's that there are certain endemic problems with these insular conservative Christian communities. One of them is if it's a new... Now I have to be a little careful with my audience too because when she talks about conservative Christian communities she's not talking about, you know, even the Christian Reformed Church which obviously the label conservative is may or may not be appropriate depending on your perspective or where you stand or what part of the Christian Reformed Church you think about. It's much more appropriate to some of these Benedict option more intentional communities where people are choosing where to live and with whom to live and how to live based on their common Christian convictions and yeah so let's keep going. Projects. A lot of people who just, you know, had standard suburban upbringings or whatever are getting involved with freely then you have kind of a selection problem and that the people who are attracted to the project probably all have really similar personality profiles, very similar concerns, maybe they're all reading the same websites and the same few books, you know, they're all kind of obsessed with the same few things and then even if they're all super nice people who are all people of goodwill and trying their best when you put them all together in one place, you know, there are slightly crazy stuff, things they might get into that nobody can put the brakes on or they might all, you know, kind of go off a cliff together because they're not balancing each other out, right? They're all likely to be, like if they took the big five test, right, probably everyone is super super high in conscientiousness, right? It's likely that people would be high in neuroticism because the kind of people who look around at society and go I have to get away because terrible things are gonna happen, they're probably high in neuroticism because, you know, all their neighbors are just, you know, plugging along like this is fine, you know, and so, you know, so that's gonna cause some dynamics obviously, right, and it's not an individual person's fault, it's just that this, these spirits are conjured up, right? So people can get possessed by fear or, you know, unreasonable fear, like, or they can be obsessed with how bad things are on the outside, right, so that they're always thinking about like, oh, the bad people that we're trying to get away from or that we're trying to protect our kids from, what are they doing now? I need to like check some blog to see the latest outrage, right, and then you're like on edge all the time, and there can be kind of a mania for control because you're afraid, like, maybe your main, your main motive for being there is I want to raise good children who aren't polluted by the bad stuff that's going on in society, then you can be very fearfully controlling of those children because it's so important to you to make them turn out a certain way, right, and you're so afraid of the things they might get involved in, you might end up kind of pushing them over the edge because you're so controlling of the details of their lives, right? You know, and yeah. And this question about children, I think, is a very real one in that, let's say, you had these issues, let's say, in the 19th century because your community, your church, you had these issues all the way into probably the middle of the 20th century. People could leave your community and they would notice different values. Maybe it was drinking, maybe it was with regard to sex, it was, there's lots of fiction that plays on this, but today the world is in some ways so all-pervasive and so available via all of this electronic media that even if, for example, there was a kid in my Christian school growing up who his family didn't have a television. That kid would always have his book reports done on time and that kid read way more books than we did and looking back on it, I would say that, wow, what an advantage for that kid to grow up in a household where they didn't watch television because look at all the great books that he read. At the time, the kid was just weird and the kid would have to deal with that. Perhaps you have an entire community, then suddenly people are thinking, oh, you're raising your kid in some cult or something. Part, I think, of the equation is that there is sort of an implicit communal agreement as to what is normal and, of course, this is always what we have. Then people think, well, this kid is not normal, better or worse, but at least odd. We've got these collective obsessions. Sometimes there's a kind of monomania that there's just like, even though the parameters of the Catholic Church, for example, are quite broad, these little communities might all settle on one or two things that everyone's supposed to be doing to be able to have like- Latin Mass. Yeah, whatever. Even though there's quite a range of things you can be doing. Julian said Latin Mass, in case you didn't understand him. Yeah. Those are some typical problems. I'm not saying that people should never try to do better projects, but if they do want to get involved in something like this, they should be aware that those dynamics are kind of everywhere in this world of people who are trying the bent-up stuff. They keep cropping up. Yeah, but obviously there were good things too. Children were getting a good education. They were reading a lot of classic literature and they weren't consuming a lot of junk media, so they tended to be- well, what you would expect people like that to be like. They had a good sense of how to be a serious person. They had a good sense of morality. They were very well acquainted with intelligent books and good aspects of culture. They could talk to you about Molière or whatever in an intelligent way. That's great. I don't know if you have any criticism of that. There's a degree to which this is often true of homeschoolers, and even if they're not necessarily in a separate community or Benedict option community, homeschooling has sort of been a part of this as well. They did do a lot of playing outside, like playing traditional kids' games. That was great. Families weren't in chaos. I never had to worry that I couldn't send my kids to play at someone's house because the parents were on drugs or anything like that. That's not a small piece of this. I think even in, for example, a church community, you'll have that assumption that the children are safer here, are people you can trust, and people normally have those kinds of relationships. But if you're living in an intentional Christian community, you tend to extend that trust further by virtue of the community. And of course, there are plenty of cases where that trust is violated, but it's part of the attraction of such a community. There are a lot of good things. If people want an extreme example, they could watch the movie The Village. Because if you watch that movie, one of the things you notice is that there are a lot of nice things about the village. When I see the way people are living in that movie, they're having barn dances, and they have a cute little schoolhouse, and they're doing all these wholesome things and living in nice cabins and stuff. I think, oh yeah, I'd kind of like to live there, but obviously there are problems with it too. So I guess if I wanted to kind of tell you the whole story, I'd put it that way. Yeah, I think in these kinds of communities, it's often, being a kid in that kind of community is probably one of the best childhoods you can have because of, you know, often it's a rural community, so you get to spend your whole childhood just playing in the woods or playing with other children. There's this aspect of having all these families living relatively close to each other, and they all kind of know each other and get along, and so the kids kind of just feel they're able to play with each other's, you know, play with different children, play with, go visit different houses, and it's kind of just more a free environment for the kids. But I think it's probably a lot harder for teenagers and people going through that kind of existential phase of life, you know, around the teen years and the early 20s and sort of starting to ask questions and experimenting and sort of having to make the choice to live in this kind of a community, even challenge some of their theories about faith or whether they want to be a Christian. I think for people around that stage of life, it can be probably the trickiest to navigate, and it's also the trickiest to how to raise teenagers or whatever in that kind of environment. It's also a lot harder and leaving space for them to kind of find their own way and not try to be overly controlling, while also kind of, you know, having some basic structures and guidelines there. I think those are some of the trickiest, maybe for any parent, but I think in those communities it can be even more difficult. Yeah, definitely. So, Julian, I'd like to ask you, like, what do you think would be a community like yours, which has like a lot longer history? Like, what do you think, what would be the primary differences between the kind of community that Laura had an experience with and, you know, and your community? I think the biggest difference is the Hutterite communities aren't really, you couldn't really call them intentional communities, because most of the people who live in a Hutterite community, I mean, pretty much everyone who lives in a Hutterite community wasn't there, isn't there, you know, because they had some revolution in some aspect of modern society or some grand conversion to a communitarian faith or something like that. Most of the people were born here, this is what they know, this is what their parents and their grandparents were doing, so in that way it's kind of more like, I don't know, a medieval village or like a Hasidic Jew or something like that. And so I think, in other words, it's intergenerational, it's still quite clearly intentional, but if you grow up into it, it feels much more normal, and I think that would lessen the impact of the sense of, here I've chosen this, and especially for the children, that my crazy parents chose this, and if your parents didn't choose it, well then it's just sort of normal, because grandpa and grandma and aunt and uncles are also part of it, and I think that extended family aspect is also important. I think it lands more in terms of somebody's identity. That just gives it a completely different dynamic. I've thought that there's kind of basically two different ways of going about the religious life, and one is the kind of modern quest for authenticity and the sense of the search and the journey and sort of finding your true sense of spirituality. And people always point out this irony about these conservative people who join the Catholic church or join the Orthodox as, you know, they're still in the modern mode because they embark on this kind of quest for authenticity and end up becoming the most traditional kind of Christian. And on the other hand, there's this older form which is kind of... That's the option, and that's in a certain way where post-modernity and consumerism are extraordinarily difficult to escape, because by virtue of making it the choice, you have changed something about your relationship to that community and the rest of the world. More grounded in tradition, more rooted, more, you know, this is what my parents believed and we're going to pass it on. And I think that kind of older mode is closer to what hotterites are like. But of course you have the search kind of mode mixed in as well. Like I was thinking about this when it comes to something like adult baptism. That the difference between adult baptism and infant baptism is that infant baptism kind of embodies that older traditional kind of mode of... It's sort of a rite of passage. But with adult baptism, it's more of this authentic, you know, find your own self, choose for yourself, like be part of this community because this is something that you feel deeply inside of. Now of course, hotterites are anabaptist, which means baptize again, whereas Laura and the Catholics would be practicing infant baptism. Nate's an Anglican, I assume he's practicing infant baptism. Christian-formed church practices infant baptism. And so, yeah, you have that kind of authenticity sort of built into it. But yeah, I just find it fascinating to kind of track these tensions within the hot right world between the more kind of traditional way of life and the kind of inroads of a more authentic search kind of spirituality. And I think you have kind of both at play in our communities today. So I don't know, I think just the fact that hotterites aren't really an intentional community probably is one of the main differences between the hotterites and something like a benediction community. Well, that would have been the origin though, right? So the question is, here's another interesting question for you, Julian. Do you think it's even possible for a group of modern people to begin the foundations of something that would have the kind of lasting legacy of what your ancestors did? I think so. I mean, I think there have been modern a community started that have been going on for a while. Like the Bruderhof, which is kind of a cousin to the hotterites, they started 100 years ago or so, I think maybe longer. And aren't the kibbutz experiments in Israel also basically that old? So I think it can happen. I do think there are sort of cultural forces that prevent those kinds of community experiments from happening or from achieving a kind of longevity. The kibbutz is interesting. My wife worked on the kibbutz when she was in Israel, but that actually has been going for quite some time. Yeah, so my question that I came up with after my conversation with Paul is, is the problem with these newer communities just the fact that they're new, right? And if we let them run for a while, they eventually settle into a mode of being that works pretty well. I think I'm going to leave it there. And the rest of the video will just be the video. It won't be me commenting on it. Again, I just don't have that much time to devote to this, but I really like this conversation. It goes in some interesting directions. And if you decide to watch it, I hope you enjoy it. Thanks for watching. Yeah, so my question that I came up with after my conversation with Paul is, is the problem with these newer communities just the fact that they're new, right? And if we let them run for a while, they eventually settle into a mode of being that works pretty well. You've got to give people time to figure out how to do it. Yeah, expect immediate success. Yeah. But I think, you know, just going on for a long time isn't necessarily, I mean, this is something that Hutterite sort of always critique themselves for, is that, you know, we're sort of so old and so set in our traditional ways and sort of so out of step with the times and so rigid and dogmatic in our traditions that we find it impossible to change and renew and reform and so the kind of dynamism of these newer communities, the spark, the, you know, what has all these people coming together and being excited about their crazy ideas, you know, that that kind of spark is always missing. And so the challenge in a community like the Hutterites is always like, how can you get these people to sort of become more excited about living in community and try new things and reform and mix things up and just renew the community life? Yeah, that's interesting. How would a reform happen? Like if a few people had what they thought was a really good idea for changing something about the community, what would be their strategy for going about that? Oh, man. I suppose the same way to happen anywhere. Like, I mean, some reform that's happened in Hutterite communities has happened with increased education. So just having our own Hutterite teachers who went through university and are educating a new generation of students like that produces a whole new group of people who think differently, who think outside of the box. I guess just having dynamic leaders, like having leaders in the community who have a different kind of vision, who have a different, want to go in a different direction and so it comes from the top. How it can happen from the bottom up, I guess, because just people starting things, like in my community, one thing I've done is start a community book club and that's one way of getting people together and having these conversations and yeah, and that's been a kind of source of renewal and other kind of small things like that. I don't know, I think probably similar to how one would go about renewing the Catholic church or something like that. I think we're going to do it at a much smaller scale. So I don't know. I was wondering, are the people you were in community with, were those like literally Benedict Option people or sort of, like were they reading Rod Reier and the American conservative and all of those? They were probably reading his blog, although back then, I'm not sure where he was blogging. He may not have been at the American conservative yet. They were definitely reading a lot of Catholic blogs, right? Like I think a lot of people read Father Zee, Father Zollsdorf, if anyone knows who he is. That would be an example of the kind of blog people were reading. A lot of people read news sites of the World Net Daily type, right, that tell you a lot of stuff that, you know, a lot of like new world order things that you should be scared of. One thing I've deeply enjoyed doing is getting acquainted with the kind of, the inside, getting acquainted with the Catholic insider culture war and the dynamics between the traditionalists and the progressives in the church. I just find it so fascinating because you can kind of perfectly map it on to some of the dynamics in the Hotarai Church. Yeah, I mean, it's often felt to me that our arguments are so stupid, but when you hear about some of the things the Catholic traditionalists and progressives are arguing about, you're like, wow, we're not quite so bad. Right, that's interesting. Are beards important in your community? This is a silly question, but I'm just curious. In more conservative communities, they'd be more important. Yeah, do all the grown men in your community have a beard? Yeah, that's kind of the norm is when you get married, you're supposed to have a beard. Is there any disagreement over whether you can trim it or how much? Well, I guess the trend today is having these long hipster beards. So I guess some people show up with these really long hipster beards and I guess people would just kind of make fun of them or say something like, you know, you should trim that stupid beard already or something like that. But I wouldn't say, yeah, it all depends on the more conservative or the more or the less conservative communities. My community is definitely more on the quote-unquote liberal side of the spectrum. So you are on the internet right now. That is kind of a tell already. Yeah, so I had read this book years and years ago, Better Off by Eric Brenby. I read this probably like, I don't know, 2006. And I just re-read it. And this is a guy who lived in a conservative Mennonite or Amish. He never really specifies community somewhere in the United States, but he didn't want to dox them. So he didn't tell a lot of details about exactly what category they belonged to. But one of the things they argued over was what you should do with your beard. Like he once came upon a group of men arguing about whether it's okay to trim your beard, right? Or do you just have to have the beard God gave you, in which case it's just going to grow to whatever it's meant to be, right? Like Nate is going with right now. Yeah, you know, I actually made a conscious decision. I had been like kind of trimming my beard like a little bit more. And I kind of like, I decided to let it go back to natural mode. Oh, that's interesting. Yeah, it's doing some interesting stuff. Yeah, Julian, it's interesting to me you brought up the whole hipster thing. And don't you think that I've had the beard way before hipsters were a thing, first of all. But second of all, like, don't you think that there's a certain aspect of what hipsterism is? It is a desire for tradition. Oh, yeah. Oh, yeah. Because you can see it in its aesthetics, right? Like it wants like, handcrafted things, and the beards and like, it seems to be like a desire for tradition. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, I think the current cultural moment makes Hutterites look a bit less weird than they would have maybe 30 years ago. Right. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, if you look at pictures of Hutterite pastors from 30 or 50 years ago, they could pass for a hipster. I mean, they have these big beards, these little black hats, these the suit, the whole suit thing. Like they could. Yeah. Yeah. I had sort of an early attack of hipsteritis or whatever you want to call it. Like when I was in high school in the 90s, because I just had this sudden realization at some point in my teenage years that I didn't really know how to do anything. You know, like in school, they teach you all these paper skills, but you don't know how to do anything. No. I didn't know how to build something or grow food or, you know, care for a goat or any of that stuff that really like you should know how to do. So I started getting really crunchy about certain things even back then, like, and my mom would laugh at me, but like if I remember once having to, I remember once making a pumpkin pie where I cooked the whole pumpkin and then, you know, and I scraped the pumpkin flesh out. And then instead of like putting it through the food processor, which is the normal thing to do where I come from, because it's stringy, you know, I put it in a sieve and I got like a pestle and I was just like pushing it through the sieve to get the pure pumpkin puree. And I was like, yeah, this is how I have to do this because I'm now I'm really doing it on my own steam. Right. This is why I probably did taste as good because pumpkin pie that still has those little pieces of pumpkin and it doesn't taste nearly as good as the really soft, um, mushed up stuff. Yeah. But I think this is like, okay, the whole foodie thing, I think that's part of what's going on there too is like, it's a desire for things being done like more in accordance with tradition. That's like, yeah, that's an aspect of what's going on there. And like I had the same thing growing up too, that you did where it's like, and it's because of our knowledge is information paradigm. And for me, cooking was the thing that I, it was easy. My, my grandfather who raised me was a chef. My granny was a great cook. So that's what I gravitated to toward cooking. And I eventually did that professionally for, for a number of years. Um, but yeah, I mean, it's like, until I learned to do that, there was nothing real. I didn't do anything real. Like I, like I mentioned before we started recording, it's like, my greatest skill in life is something that is now useless in our age, which was that I was a font of trivia because I retain information easily. Right. Okay. Now, and I was speaking of the crunchy hipster stuff, like, let me tell you about it. An interesting tension that happens in the hot ride community. So this, what we've been discussing about, like with the rules, like how do you, how far to cut your beard? You wear suspenders, you wear the plaid shirts. Like one thing that's happened in especially more liberal communities in the past, I don't know, a few decades is there's this increase, decreased emphasis on these kinds of things. Like there are people that say things like, well, we need to give people more freedom. Um, you know, focusing on the externals is a form of a Pharisee, you know, that's like being a Pharisee and we need to focus on what really matters on, um, following Jesus and living life of community. So there's this, this kind of positive push to sort of get back to the essentials. Um, but one thing I've noticed that comes as a kind of side effect of that is that this kind of, um, crunchy stuff actually sort of falls to the wayside. So, um, that I think how to rights for many years have been, have been doing a lot of this kind of stuff without really knowing it. So, you know, we have things like, um, community gardens where you grow your own food, you have, um, like limitations on technology, you have, um, I don't know, like, uh, just the emphasis on a simpler lifestyle and having smaller homes and people getting together more. And so those kinds of things. But I've noticed that one thing that happens in more quote unquote liberal communities is that there is this emphasis on this sort of individual's relationship to Jesus. So that says things like, well, um, all of this external stuff doesn't matter. What really matters is that you have a relationship with Jesus or something. And, if you have a relationship with Jesus, then you can, uh, you'll be able to, you know, manage, uh, technology in a responsible way. So we don't need to, um, have any kind of restrictions on giving people phones or technology or whatever. If they're like a responsible, um, Christian people, they'll just manage that on their own. Um, and so I've noticed in the more traditional communities, um, they just have all of these older rules, like, um, you know, there are no cell phones. Um, they, um, I can come up with another example at the moment, but I've noticed that this kind of, um, pietistic faith sort of acts as a form of disenchantment within our communities and sort of has all of these kind of older guardrails, um, falling away. And like, as much as I, as I, as I have no patience for sort of arbitrary rules or whatever, um, I think some of these older guardrails do kind of act as a resistance to capitalism, act as a resistance to, um, I don't know, secularization or whatever you want to call it, this sort of, um, uh, I don't know, individualizing, homogenizing force. Um, and, and so I've been wondering, how do you navigate, you know, having individual freedom, having, having people making their own decisions while also being clear-eyed about the ways in which, um, yeah, you, you kind of, something like technology isn't just something that the individual can kind of make its own decisions about, um, and, um, because, because it's a sort of power, it has a certain force over you. Yeah, it'll change you. Yeah. So- In ways you don't expect. So I- There's this, there's this weird paradox where, um, I think people have noted this about the Amish as well, where it's actually the more liberal communities that end up, um, giving way to forces of, of capitalism and secularity and, and all of this. And it's the traditional communities that actually kind of resist the more. So, um- Yeah. This might be a time, a good time to ask, um, do the more conservative communities have any, anything like festivals of inversion? Um, I've thought about this actually. Yeah. Um, yes, yes, they definitely do. I mean, I think something like a wedding in a outright community can be that I've, I've read a, I've read this account in, there was a sociologist who visited a outright community. Um, and this is, um, like up in Alberta or something. And he described what happened, um, during the annual communion, where they only had the baptized members of the community present at the community service, which lasted about, it's a really long service. It lasted about two or three hours. Um, and I should just note this is, this is so far away from my, from my experience in, in the more, um, liberal community that, um, I actually don't even know what to make of this story. I don't even, I can't even imagine how this could be true, but he described how the older members of the, you know, the baptized members of the community would go into this three hour service and then the young people would stay behind and have this absolute hell raising party, like drinking alcohol, um, uh, you know, having this absolute booze fest, um, doing weird, uh, sexual or romantic things. And, and it was sort of, it seemed like it was sort of accepted that, um, well, the young people are going to have their one wild night while we are off it. Um, so it's, it's this. That's, that's cool. I think that kind of thing is strange. Unbelievably strange juxtaposition of like the, the holiest day of, of the year juxtaposed by the, you know, the absolute descend into frivolity and carnival, um, both during the same time. Yeah. Yeah. That part is really interesting. And, and you also have this dynamic of, um, people often talk about army circles of Rumspringen, and there's something, uh, again, this is, this is a liberal conservative split. I think I think this is less extreme in liberal communities where it, it's kind of expected a bit more of, um, of unbaptized members that they sort of have the freedom to, um, kind of live it up until they get baptized. And then they're sort of, then they're expected to settle down, have a family and contribute to the community. So, um, yeah, I think I, yeah, I was, Charles Taylor in, um, in the secular age talks about how in medieval societies, there's this carnival that happens every year. And then there's, it's a kind of pressure, safety release valve that kind of, um, lets people sort of let off the steam. Exactly. Yeah. And yeah, Catholic communities that I'm familiar with, so not just the place where I lived, but I can think of other projects or places I've been involved in. Um, nowadays, the very devout Catholic communities don't tend to be tolerant of festivals of inversion. And I think that's a problem. Yeah. You know, so like when Halloween comes around, they try to make some alternative thing where all the kids go to the church basement and dress up as saints and, and still just keep doing the same, you know, holy things they're supposed to be doing every other day of the year. Um, but I think it's better to just say to the kids, look, here's a 24 hour period where you can be a vampire and you can run around outside and be crazy and get candy from, you know, the secular people down the street. Or it's okay, just do it, you know, I think that's good for people. Yeah. And the, what I should, what I should note is the irony is that, you know, the hotter right reformers that have been absolutely horrified that, you know, there are something like festivals of inversion going on because their vision was like of these communities that are just this bastion of orderliness and cleanliness and holiness and, um, you know, perfect sanctity. Like there's this images that they have of the community being like this well functioning clock or each individual part has its function or like a well functioning hive where each bee sort of busily gathers honey and brings it back to the hive. And yeah, so it's, but look at Purim and a Orthodox Jewish community. I mean, yeah, I mean, yeah, there's, I think that's, that's kind of thing is inevitable. I think you kind of have to have that. And I think it's actually the communities that have that, like it's, tends to work in their favor, I think. Yeah. So, yeah, I agree. Yeah. I definitely have some of the, you know, the, the kind of, um, yeah, there is a part of me that would like to kind of be able to resist some of those natural dynamics. But, um, yeah, I definitely see that you do have to leave room for the margins and all of that. Yeah, that's fascinating. Yeah. Yeah. So, okay. So, so, so you do think, do you do, do you think it is possible for, um, these kind of modern projects to kind of create these kind of communities to be successful? Ben, I think you kind of indicated, do you do think it's possible, Julian, but I just wanted to, can I just get a, like a more unambiguous, like answer to that? Yeah, I think, I think it is possible. Um, I think, um, going back to Roger and the Benedict option, um, one issue I had with the book was the fact that he was kind of presenting the Benedict option as a response to secularity or, or, or kind of modern dynamics or whatever. And I think, um, the community has to come from a more positive place. Like, like you have to be positively motivated for, you know, you want to live in community as an expression of love of neighbor or love of God, or, um, because you think this is the best way to live a radical fulfilled Christian life, that this is the vision of human flourishing. I think, um, without that kind of positive vision, you're going to have some of those dynamics of, you know, people are being afraid, people being, um, paranoid. Um, so yeah. You also avoid this notion that somehow everything was okay if you just roll back to the clock to the fifties and there's no gay marriage and no abortion. Yeah. And that it was a Christian paradise. Yeah. And that's not an accurate view of history at all. Yeah. And that can be, that can be part of the motivation people have too is like, let's just revert back to simpler times and get together in community because, um, yeah, we can recreate, uh, whatever used to be the better society. Okay. I have a great quote from iRobot, you know, by Isaac Asimov. Okay. There's a story where he describes some people who are called fundamentalists. And he says, essentially they were those who had not adapted themselves to what had once been called the atomic age. They were simple lifers hungering after a life, which to those who lived it had probably appeared not so simple and who had not been there for simple lifers themselves. Yeah. Yeah. Um, you know, I wonder is the, is the longing for a simpler life, um, is that a deeper longing for, you know, for, for, for something real, something human, something genuine that then gets corrupted in various ways. It gets kind of projected back to the 1950s, or it gets projected into some, um, I don't know, future liberal utopia or something. And, um, yeah, maybe there's a genuine real longing underneath there that people try to concretize in a specific historical time. And that's when it gets corrupted. Yeah. In the Catholic world, a lot of people would love to be running St. Tereza Valencia's household, right? Like they admire Louis and Zélie Martin, who were her parents who are canonized now. And they think I want to have that household and I want to raise St. Tereza Valencia, you know, like that would be the perfect life if I could do it. Um, but you don't live in a small town in 19th century France, right? Like, so if all you do is read a book about them and then go, okay, I'm going to recreate this household, it's not going to work. The things you're going to have to do to recreate that household are going to be too weird and too, like, too rigid, right? Whereas for them, in terms of having a certain kind of household, just the fact that they lived in that village in 19th century France was doing a lot of the work for them, you know? Um, and they just happen to be very devout people. But if you want to be like them, it's, it's not just that you're going to be devout, it's that you're going to try to try to do a historical reenactment of all this other stuff that you don't actually know at firsthand. All you know is that you read one book about them, you know? Yeah. So yeah, that's difficult. Yeah. I mean, the key might be to identify what is it that you find beautiful and compelling about this life? Like, like, or maybe to do it to kind of do it negatively, what is it that you find alienating and awful about living in the modern world? And what are some things you can do practically in your direct sort of environment to kind of foster community, foster celebration, foster a connection with nature, foster, you know, less reliance on technology? What can you do practically in your real life environment? And I think, yeah, I don't know. Well, at least in my established community. Maybe you don't know how to articulate it, but I think you do know because when you were talking earlier about these sort of like individualistic impulses that you're kind of infiltrating some of the more liberal communities, right? And how somehow like the conservative communities seem to more be more resistant to that. Even though neither side could probably articulate it and you're having a hard time articulating it here. Isn't it possible that the thing that you did, sorry. Oh, I'm okay. I can hear you. Oh, I'm not I'm not working here. Can you hear me? There we go. Yeah. Okay. All right. But if it might. So the question I want to ask is if if the individualism itself isn't the cause. Well, I mean, the individualism, I mean, okay, this I'll try to articulate more, more in trying to flesh out more what I see is the problem in in these liberal communities. It's just that there is a loss of the social communal dimension of the faith and people assume that it's they assume that that a community is made up of a bunch of individuals that have like this heartfelt desire to be part of the community. And then every all the magic happens from these individuals getting together and they miss the systemic the the the principalities and powers that are at play. They miss the fact that even if you have these wonderful individuals getting together, you're still going to have these forces of technology and individualism and secularity and all of this kind of stuff that's going to be sort of impinging on the community life and sort of driving driving this community apart and stopping it from living genuinely free lives, being able to be stopping them from being able to connect with nature and stop them from being able to resist capitalism. It'll stop them from being able to, you know, go down the line. All of these, whatever, whatever value you want to embody, it's going to kind of stop it. And so this focus on the individual misses the fact that we as a community have to do some practical things. We're going to have to make some hard decisions about how do we resist technology? How do we resist community? How are we going to, you know, do farming? How are we going to do manufacturing? How are we going to build the architecture of our houses to foster community? How are we going to structure our communities so that we can live in a more natural environment so that our children can enjoy, you know, the air on the ground? And how can we and so those kind of systemic things are just missing with this focus on the individual. But that said, like this individualism is the problem, but obviously it's just not an option. I think I can just see it. So there's all of these tensions between the traditionalists and the progressives in all of these traditions. Like you have it in the Catholics, you have it in the Hutterites. And it's obvious for me, looking at some of the more conservative communities, that whatever they're doing, like why, like in my more generous moment, see some good side effects. It's obvious that we can't go back there and that what they're doing doesn't really work and isn't going to work because they don't, they're not, the sort of rules they have in place aren't there in any kind of intentional way. They're not really intentional about, you know, resisting capitalism or being more in tune with nature or whatever, being less consumeristic. It's sort of just this traditional way of life that doesn't really have any kind of intentional resistance. And so they're just sort of holding on to the rules and traditions without really knowing why. Yeah. So you mean the problem of focusing on the rule itself rather than the larger thing that the rule is trying to keep you in tune with. Yeah. Yeah. What is the positive vision you're trying to embody and how can you work towards it as a community, as individuals? Yeah. So how do you guys hash out these issues? Do you have meetings where the agenda is just all about let's check up on what exactly we should be doing and how? I would say most of these conversations happen informally. Yeah. I wish we would be having more of these kinds of conversations at the highest levels of the church, but I don't think we are. I think we're, yeah, we're talking more about discrete questions, like what do we do about this specific issue? And if you kind of step back, you can see why it is we're talking about this issue as opposed to and sort of see the deeper ramifications of going this way or that way. But I don't think, yeah, I don't think people are seeing these deeper dynamics at play. How are people chosen for leadership roles? The Holy Spirit picks them. Do you do that? Well, there's actually interesting. It's basically, the community basically selects some candidates and so that's the kind of human side. And then the candidates are put in a hat and randomly chosen. So there's a kind of human and spiritual dynamic there. Yeah, there's a process like that is described in this book. Yeah. Yeah. But I was struck by the way the Catholics chose, I was reading an account of Pope Francis' election and I was struck by how they chose the Pope and it was the politics involved were just crazy. Yeah. Yeah, Nate, do you have any thoughts on the question you asked me? Yeah. So what I'm, I was actually trying to get a little bit, a little bit deeper layer than that. What I'm suggesting is that the reason for that people are finding themselves longing to build these kinds of communities is a product of our individualism because it's left us feeling, it's left us feeling isolated and we want something, we want something more. And I would, I would say in defense of your more conservative communities, like their inability to like maybe, maybe they can't say exactly why. They maybe would not say that we're doing these things to defend against capitalism or, you know, encroachment of secularity or whatever. I don't think you need to have an articulable reason, right? So like, like Orthodox Jews will, will like generally will say that, you know, they won't try to rationalize like why they follow the law. It's these are the things that God told us to do. Like that's the answer. And then the process of like, there's a way that the, that the practice of these rules, it becomes a way of expressing love. It is a relational act. I do these things because this is what my people do because I love my people. So there doesn't have to be a reason, there doesn't have to be a reason other than that. So it's actually like the modern, you know, atomized isolated individual who thinks that I have to have a reason to do this. I can't just do this because this is the thing that my people do. And yeah. And, and, and from my perspective, like trying to sit here and sort of diagnose, um, on the one hand, the, the, the maladies of, of the hotter right culture and, and then the dynamics of living in the modern world and then trying to kind of craft and intellectualize a response like that. That is absolutely exhausting to sort of try to navigate those tensions and kind of articulate what, what the best way forward is. Like that is paralyzing to try to sort of work it out intellectually. And I don't, I don't know if it's going to work. I don't think, and then how do you mobilize, um, all of these people to sort of adopt your vision of what the church should be and how we should be responding to. Oh, there we go. And now, now Julian raises the question. I think that is, that isn't under, that is the question that is underneath our question. I think it's like, what do we concede the church to be? And I think everyone has this problem. Like Nate, you're, you're an intellectual guy, Laura, you like, you're, you're intellectually minded. Like you have your ideas, you have, you see things wrong with the culture. You would like the church to be doing some things, but how do you, when you have it all worked out in your head, but how do you kind of make it happen in real life? It's a very different thing. Yeah. And one of the conclusions I've come to is that it's, it's much more important to pray and be charitable to your neighbors than it is to come up with some kind of perfect system for how everything should work. I sometimes, I sometimes believe that, but, um, but, but, uh, most of the time I don't. Yeah. Well, for me in my town, that's, that's the answer I came up with. But, uh, I think, yeah, I think you have a different, a different thing going on. I think it's true. It's just, it's hard to, yeah, it's hard not to kind of go into the politics mode and try to change things and move things along and all of that kind of thing. Yeah. Yeah. Um, well, Nate, what do you think the church is since, since you're the one who wants to ask this? I was actually going to bring up one more example. Oh, okay. Go for it. Of traditional versus, um, tradition of liberal communities in the hotter rights. Like this is a recent example that I think crystallized some of, some of, some of the problems. So, um, like most, like everyone else in the world, the hotter rights had the same havalu around COVID. So there were some communities that were more, um, that were more restrictive and had more travel restrictions and following guidelines and other communities that were sort of just like the wild west and doing whatever they want. And we're not going to follow the orders and we're going to resist and whatever. So we had for, we had a few months and maybe a whole year of kind of arguing amongst ourselves about how we should be responding to COVID should we be taking the vaccine, blah, blah, blah, blah. Like there was the whole, yeah, there were colonies lined up on all kinds of different sides. And then, um, here in Canada, we had the infamous trucker protest. And the trucker thing came at a kind of, uh, sort of, it was sort of the breaking point of, the conservatives who just were sort of completely fed up with the endless restrictions and seeming no end to, uh, you know, the restrictions around COVID. And what ended up happening is that, um, a lot of Hutterites ended up, um, participating in the protest. So people showed up with their trucks, people showed up with food, with signs, um, and just en masse decided to take part in the protest. Um, and it was for me, it was just such a surreal moment because, um, I don't think there has ever been a case and situation where Hutterites have actually participated in protests. Like we've had traditionally been sort of had a sense of non-involvement in politics, non-involvement in protests. And now some of the things that we've seen in the last few months, um, protests, and now suddenly the whole Hutterite world was just sort of full on all in on this protest. Um, they're holding signs, they're participating in the march there. I think there are even some Hutterite trucks in Ottawa. Um, uh, so, so it was just such a surreal moment. Um, and what kind of astonished me was not, it was not the politics of it. Like I completely understand the sentiment behind the trucker protest. Like I sympathize with it. I, um, I completely get the frustration. I get the need for protest. I'm glad they protested. Um, but to have so many Hutterites just sort of en masse without any thought, without any reflection, just decide to chuck the traditional Hutterite stance on, um, on participating in protests, participating in politics. Um, I mean, we can definitely debate the merits of not participating in politics. Like I'm not, I'm not suggesting it's necessarily the best way to go, but to just have it in this kind of moment of, of, of emotion, just kind of thrown out the window, um, was absolutely surreal. Um, and then in the, in the response from church leaders, there was, there was, there was a, from our, from the more, from the more liberal side of, of, of the church, there was no, um, there was no response saying, you know, traditionally this is what Hutterites have done and now we've decided to change or traditionally Hutterites have done this and, um, all you people shouldn't have participated in the protests. This is not what Hutterites do. There was none of that. There was, there was even a, it seemed like people didn't even notice that anything had changed. And then, but on the other hand, from the conservative side, there was a letter that came out where the, where the conservative leader said, uh, you know, um, traditionally Hutterites have not participated in protests and, um, all you guys shouldn't have done this and this is not, uh, what we stand for and, um, you know, uh, get back to non-involvement. And, um, so basically kind of condemning the whole thing. Um, but it was just surreal to see that the conservative side is noticing that some radical shift had taken place, but, but the liberal side of the church was like, well, nothing to see here, guys, nothing happened at all. Um, and so that was, that was a pretty, yeah, I, I felt like this was a kind of watershed moment that nobody noticed happening. Like, I think, um, things are going to be very different in the future for the Hutterites, but I don't know if many people noticed what was happening. So, yeah. That was interesting. So what risks are you now exposed to or like in terms of how your community might change through, through your involvement in this kind of stuff? Well, the biggest one I can think of is now that we've decided we're going to be involved in public protests and, um, more political engagement, that just opens us up to all the kind of awful political dynamics that happened with any conservative community. So we're going to be, um, drawn into Trumpism, more nationalism. Like, I just think it's, it's not going to be good. Like many of these kind of, uh, old kind of traditional things about, well, we don't get involved in politics. I mean, it's, it can lead to an indifference towards what's going on in the world, but at least it's a kind of, um, barrier, a kind of, um, it kind of stops you from, from getting pulled into some of these awful political movements. And so, yeah, I just think we're going to become way more politicized. We're going to become more, yeah, it's, it's just going to accelerate on that end. Yeah. So that's a, that's another example of, um, of some of these dynamics. Can you talk about, like, a little bit about the reasoning, like, why for the traditional HUD right stance of why you have a stance of non-involvement and why that would be such a radical departure for, for those of us or the, for people who might be listening, who don't really understand what that's about and would be like, why, why, that's a big deal. Why couldn't they go out and, you know, yeah, express their view, explain like why that, why the HUD rights hold that position and, and why they have that tradition. Well, I guess, I guess it just, um, it would kind of go back to the traditional Anabaptist idea of the two swords, um, where you have this, the kind of secular sort of the state and then the spiritual sort of the church where the church doesn't wield this, the sort of the state doesn't engage in violence. It doesn't, um, try to sort of move politics along by force, but instead it, it has this spiritual force of, of God's kingdom and kind of acts in the world, um, by, yeah, by being a different kind of community presence. And it's a, and, and from on that view, it is a political entity of its, in its own right. Yeah. Which means that- It's not being colonized by larger political entities. Yeah. Right. And that vision is just, and that vision is just completely basic. Like there's, there's no sense that, you know, as a outright church, we are actually engaging in politics just by being, being the church, just by being a different kind of weird community that, um, that, that hypothetically wouldn't be as determined by debates over, over vaccines or not vaccines or COVID or not COVID, that we would be able to have a degree of reconciliation amongst ourselves that could be an example to the wider community, wider, wider society. But no, we've, we've decided to, to go play politics and divide our communities over this and, um, try to move, uh, the levers of power in, in one direction. Um, so- Yeah. I think that matches up with Paul Vanderkley's advice on the culture war, which I really appreciated back when he was talking about that a lot, right? Because I, one of the things I got disillusioned with about being a conservative Catholic TM was that you are, you do get very drawn into all these culture war fights, but, but really following Christ is something else, right? It's not, it's not just being a, it's not being a side of the culture war. That's a, that's an impoverished version of, of what it is to be a Christian. But I liked Paul's positive vision of what you should actually be doing. And it's kind of like what you described, Julian. Yeah, I completely agree. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Um, so why, why do you think this idea, okay, so the Hutterites, uh, you know, have to some extent, obviously maybe that's breaking down now, but they've kept this idea of the church as an alternative polis alive, which seems to me to be kind of like obvious from the gospel of the kingdom. I don't really see how, I don't really see how you can see that as any other way. Yeah. Any other way. And I'm open to being corrected on this, but it seems obvious to me that that's what Jesus is talking about. Yeah. Wouldn't call it a kingdom if it wasn't a political structure, but it's, it's different. Here's the thing that's different about it because unlike the traditional polis of the world, which has always been in, had a hostile relationship to the Oikos, to the, to the family, to the household, the, the, the, what is envisioned by Christ becomes a family. Yeah. It's a spiritual family. Yeah. It is a spiritual family and it is a, and it is a political entity and it's a political entity that's set apart from the political entities that are represented by Caesar. I've, I've thought that you could boil the essence of the gospel down to God is love. And Nate, you might say where I'm going with this, but that, that kind of personalist essence that's, that's embodied there where you have God is literally love because he is this community of persons that, that, that is, that is continually engaged in this act of God is this act of self-giving love amongst the father, son, and the spirit. And one of the, which makes God a perpetual mediation between unity and multiplicity. That too. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. And one of the, the early HowlRide writers has this really interesting defense of community of goods where he grounds it in the Trinitarian act of self-giving. So the father gives himself to the son and the son gives himself to the father and the spirit. And just so the, the community sort of in, in, in community of goods, each person sort of gives his entire self and is filled by the self-giving of the other. And so community kind of grows out of this grounded, sort of grounded and grows out of this Trinitarian love, which, which, which takes root in a real way in, in the world, which is what divine authority is, by the way, it can't be separated from that essence of that essence of God as love. Like that's, that's, which is why, which is why Jesus's passion is the ultimate display of authority, even though it appears to the eyes of the world to be weakness, because it's the ultimate act of love. That's what makes it the supreme authority, the final authority. Because it's more real than the kind of political power games of the world. Right. Yeah. It's yeah. Because power is the root of idolatry. That's the, that's, that's the, the move to grasp and take what would have been given as a gift. And, and I think talking about love here brings us back to some of the dynamics of, of how community can go wrong. Because I think ultimately love has to be the foundation of, of life and community. Like it can't be fear. It can't be despair. It can't be some kind of enemy. And it has to be an outflow of, of Trinitarian love. It has to sort of be grounded in that spiritual life. Yeah. Which again, we should probably, we should probably emphasize that, Laura, you aren't saying that you're peddling the option people are, are deficient in, in love or anything like that. No, I wouldn't suggest that either. It may, they may very well, who knows? I wish them the, I think what they're trying to do is, is a good thing. And I wish them only success. I really do. And here's what I wish. Here's what I wish. I wish the church would help because I think the, the idea that laity can accomplish this. And I think this is moving forward. What is going to have to be done because of what's happening in our world. The fact that lady are having to go out and do this with very minimal support from, from the church hierarchy is a bad sign. I think what we need to happen, what we need to see happening is something more like what happened with the Celtic monasteries, where they were a collaboration between the monks and laity and building those communities. And those communities were not, they were not totally isolated and not, they were very much like in the world, but not of the world communities, those Celtic monasteries too. Yeah. And also we should emphasize that Rod Dreher, because this is a common mistake about the Benedict option. Rod Dreher is not telling people to flee from civilization and go live in the wilderness and make it isolated. I mean, you can do that. That would be one option. But, but he talks a lot in his book about things like exile in place, as he terms it, like, you know, you stay in the place you're from where you have roots, but you withdraw in some sense in order to preserve some things and you group together with other people in your area. And, and he talks about the importance of stability to the Benedictine monks and he connects it to his sister who you know, he wrote a whole book about his sister, but his sister was very connected in the area that they were, that they both grew up in because she stayed there and he left, right? And she formed all these really deep connections with people that turned out to have a big impact on the community and on, you know, her own life and her family and stuff. So he doesn't recommend that people necessarily leave the place that they're rooted in. And I, I would also recommend that if you're rooted in a place, you should stay there and do your best in that place and that you should stay connected to your extended family. And if they're like not as religious as you, I mean, unless there's something horrible about your extended family that you can't interact with them at all, you should, you should keep your connections to them. Partly because if what you're looking for is support in raising a family and stuff, they're, even if they don't agree with you about everything, they're still going to support you more than people who are just living with you because they agree with you about stuff, right? Because, you know, your mom is going to come and help you take care of your baby in a way that like, you know, you're a person, you know, who lives a couple streets over who you're just in a sort of arrangement with is, is going to help you, right? That other person, that other person would like to help you, but they're not your mom, you know? And I think I recommend staying where you are. I think also being, staying connected with your, with your family, especially if you're joining like some radical pan-ecoxid community, that also helps to kind of break out of the group think of the community and help you to see some of some of the dynamics that are happening in a community that can be, it can be bad. And so sort of having a bit of distance that might be helpful there to sort of be able to kind of step back and see it from a different perspective while you're in it. That's, that's certainly how I often feel within my own community is I often feel like I'm both an insider and an outsider at the same time, where I can sort of step back and, and, and see some of what's going on, but I'm also an insider and can kind of know the dynamics from the inside, but it's a strange, it's a strange path to walk to kind of be able to see, be able to step back and step in simultaneously. Yeah, even that shift, like even that kind of modern stepping back, that's again, that kind of genie you can't put back in the bottle. And what would kind of keep a lot of older communities together is, is the fact that all of them are insiders and they have a kind of negative view of outsiders. And there's a kind of group dynamic that gets built about, yeah, we're in and all you guys are out and this is the best way to be. And all you guys out there are just stupid and immoral, which I mean, that's a, that's a very, you know, inaccurate portrayal of, of, of other rights or other traditional communities. But I think there is more of a kind of in, in group dynamic that once you're able to sort of be in both worlds at the same time, once you're both, like most of us are, we're both secular and Christian at the same time, we're both, we're cross pressured by the secular world. It's, yeah, it's harder to have that all in kind of dynamic. And I wonder, is that, is that a good thing or a bad thing? Or is it just reality? Like what, what do you think? I think I'd say it's just reality. Yeah, probably just reality. Yeah, there has to be room for a margin, as we like to say in this current of the internet, there has to be some ambiguity. It's, yeah, you can't, like what I'm saying, you can't, like what I, Paul and I were talking about putting walls around things, right? And how, how high and how thick do your walls have to be? And then there's the question of what are you going to put a wall around? Because when I think of the various conservative Catholic projects I've seen, I think the ones that were more successful or had fewer problems were the ones where people were putting a wall around one pretty limited thing, not trying to put a wall around the lives of a large number of families, right? So like maybe they all started a school together in a, in a major city somewhere. And the wall was around the school, right? Who can teach at the school? What, what, what books are in the school curriculum? What priests come to preach at the school masses, all that kind of stuff that was super controlled. But then what the families who go to the school are doing on their own time is entirely their business, right? I think there's some value to that for people who have grown up as, you know, standard modern people, that might be a better idea than trying to do a whole new thing where the wall is around your whole town. Right. And so the real, the real trick might be, here's what I'm thinking. The real trick might be to build community where you are rather than to attempt to build a community like some, someplace else. Yeah. How, yeah. How can you nurture these good things? Right. That means becoming a human being and not merely an individual. But I guess, I guess that is, that while that is true, you do have to be aware of, you know, the social forces that, that kind of make, that kind of impinge against doing those kinds of experiments locally. And there's just certain things you can do as a community that you can't do with your family or as an individual. That, I think that's just our reality. Although people might be surprised if they look around the place where they already live. They might be surprised at how many people agree with them about a lot and would cooperate with them a lot in certain endeavors. Yeah, I think, yeah, definitely. Definitely. Yeah, I think, I think this focus on these very specific culture word issues kind of misses the fact that just as human beings, there's so much that we have in common, like the connection with nature, the, you know, children go down the line. Like there's just basic things that you can build community around with your neighbors that I think everyone could sort of get behind. That would mean that us, that would mean that us suburbanites would have to actually start talking to our neighbors. Yeah, but how do you, how do you encounter your neighbor in, in suburbia? Like how do you, what are the places you can get together? So, you know, when I was growing, when I was growing up in the suburbs, and it was one of the, the later suburbs, the ones that are totally car based and far from, you know, places where your, your house is not within walking distance of any stores, you know, that, that kind of suburb. The families on my, the families in my section of suburb were very interconnected. And we had social events, you know, there was always a Christmas party that bounced around to different houses every year, right? And everybody would come to it. And there was like a fourth of July grilling party and stuff. And, you know, people got along well, and they knew each other really well. The kids were running around outside with no one paying attention to them, playing in vacant lots or checking out like new constructions, all that kind of thing. So that was a suburb. I've had, I've had, I've had variable experiences. I've had variable experiences in my life. Like, you know, the last neighborhood I lived in before where I live in now, like we knew everybody pretty well. Everybody was really friendly. It was great. But then the neighborhood I live in now, it's, it's just like, people aren't really, it's hard. It's hard. What's changed is that it's a suburb though, because like the neighborhood I grew up in, if you go there now, people don't know each other, right? They don't interact much. So what, what changed? It wasn't the, it wasn't just the neighborhood. It's like, it's not just the physical construction of the neighborhood. It was something that happened in people's minds that made, like there's technological and social forces at play too. Yeah, definitely. But I think this is something that we can still change. I'm kind of like putting a little pressure on myself here too, because like if someone begins, I think all it takes, it may only take one person to begin to make the effort, right? To break that. Yeah. Like I can, I can, I can think of like, my mom was from the South. So it's like every time we moved into a new neighborhood, when I was a kid, she would like, like she'd go and bring baked goods to the neighbors and introduce herself. Yeah. And introduce us to make us go with her. Yeah. Well, in my neighborhood, it was, so your mom used to take things to when, when you guys moved in. Yeah. When we moved in, she would go, yeah. Yeah. Oh, cause in my neighborhood, it was the opposite. It was that if you saw new people moving in, you had to go bring them baked goods. She did that. She, she had been living on the West coast long enough to know that it was never going to happen unless she did it. So she took the initiative to do it. Yeah. See that sounds to me like buying other people presents on your birthday, but if it works, sure. You could also just have something like a bonfire and tell people, here's a bonfire in my backyard. Yeah. Like in my current neighborhood, I think some people would show up if I did that. Yeah. There you go. So, yeah, so instead of complaining about it, this is like a practical thing that can be done is like, Hey, why don't you may actually make the effort to form a more of a sense of community in your neighborhood by being the one who is the catalyst for that. So I have tried to do that. And my experience in, in the current year has been that some people really appreciate it. And some people think it's creepy. Yeah. I don't think anybody used to think it was creepy to try to get to know your neighbors, but now some people think that's creepy. Yep. That's true. I don't think that's anything that we can do anything about though. Yeah. I think the fact that the fact that there is a certain percentage of people that would not think it was creepy and actually be really glad that it happened makes it worth doing anyway. And you just have the fact that some people are going to think it's creepy. That's just, Oh, well, that's their problem. Yeah. Right. There's also a dynamic of, of just being a kind of intellectual guy. Like, for example, I, I would just rather spend a lot of my evenings at home reading a book instead of going through a bonfire or something. But then there's also the dynamic of, you know, a big part of your life is, is just reading all these books, thinking about all these ideas. And so it's harder to connect with normal people who talk about normal stuff. So how do you bridge that kind of a gap? It can also be a kind of Christian secular gap that it's just for some people that might be more extreme. I thought that one thing to do is just get into something like sports. I was just going to give you that advice because see, I've always been a sports fan, so it's never been hard for me. So I can, I can, it makes it well, at least with lots of different kinds of men, I don't have any problem interacting with. And like women are usually interested in intellectual things, even if they're not particularly intellectual. In my experience, I actually found women are much easier to talk about intellectual stuff than men. Yep. Well, I, you know, I don't think I've ever heard anyone say that before. In real life, like online, it seems like it's all men. Yeah. But not in real life. The people I talk to in real life about intellectual stuff, who are my age would all be females. But I also have a bunch of older friends who are mostly males, which I would talk about intellectual stuff with. I think I talk with a lot of married men about intellectual stuff, but I talk with females, my age about intellectual stuff and fewer guys, except my brothers and something like that. So I don't know. That's, that's in real life. And it's a different conversation too. It's a different conversation and it's usually a better conversation because a lot of times, like when you're having an intellectual conversation with other men, there tends to be a, there is a tendency to focus on a lot of minutia. And a lot of times when you're having those same conversations with women, they'll get, they'll get big picture things that, that will help you see something that you were missing. That's true. You won't get, you won't get the same conversation with men. So I noticed, I noticed that as well. I also noticed that sometimes if you are listening to a big group event, trying to talk about something super intellectual, egos, yeah, quite a few of them were just trying to show up how much they know about the topic. So they're just like telling each other stuff, but they're not really getting anywhere. It's just like, let me tell you all the facts I know about Julius Caesar or whatever. And then someone else is like, well, I also know some facts about Julius Caesar, you know, right. I don't know anything about Julius Caesar, but I do know about Genghis Khan. So let me randomly start talking about Genghis Khan. Right. Yeah. Yes. I've seen those conversations. Yeah. Yeah, absolutely. That's why I really, really would like to have more women in my, in my estuary group that I, my local estuary group that I have. So that's the other thing I'm doing where I'm at to try to build communities. I'm an estuary host. Yeah. And in person meetup. Yeah. I'm the only woman in the Chicago estuary meetup. Yep. My wife is the only one in mine in Olympia. So, yeah. But I think, but I think that in my, I think that it's just getting women interested in doing it. Because I think that like, once they were there, I think they would enjoy it. At least because of the experience of, the experiences I've had in my past, in my past of having intellectual conversations in person with women. I think, well, first of all, the estuary group is worse off for not having more women because of the dynamics that I just mentioned. And then second of all, I actually do think that they would enjoy it. As long as it's not, but it has to be balanced. The problem is it's really, like my wife will say, it's really hard for her to be the only woman in the group. That's tougher. She still comes though. I think mainly for my sake. So what do you think makes it hard for her? Does she say? Well, she's both the only woman and the only Jew. So, so she's traveling, she's having to represent on both fronts there. So I just think that, I think she just would like it more if there were more women. So, yeah. So the, the negative side of having serious discussions with women, I think is that women tend to like anecdotes. I like anecdotes, but you'll notice that with certain women, if they're not very good at conversation, what they'll tend to be doing is that they're just telling you a lot of stories, but it's not always easy to figure out what the point of the story is. Right. And so you'll tell them one thing and then they'll be like, well, I knew somebody who blah, blah, blah. And then it'll be a story about something. And they can't always, sometimes it's not clear why they told you that. And they can't always explain why they told you that. And then I wonder, is this person telling me the story in order to counter a point I just made or illustrate the point I made? Or is it just that this, that what I said, tangentially reminded them of the story? You know, I think that's the difficult thing sometimes about conversation. You know, that's interesting. You just explained something about the dynamics of the, of the grail country conversations that I wouldn't had noticed before, but that is like, like Sherry's like default for, is to relate anecdotes. Like, like that's a really strong go-to for her and our conversations. I usually am able to understand what she's trying to illustrate with her anecdotes, but. Yeah, I'm sure you're smart. I think her anecdotes are good. I don't know if this is true or just a generalization, but I, I find women are more interested in relational conversations or personal conversations. So how can we make this idea connect with your real life? And that's good. Yeah. Which is helpful for something like me, but. Yeah, that's, that's, I think, and in terms of, to put it in the context of the estuary, like that's one of the reasons I think that we built in the, to the estuary protocol, like the opening to talk about personal things, like that's part of it. It's not, it's not supposed to be just only intellectual conversations all the time. If there's something happening in your life, you know, personally or contextually that's, that's more salient to you than whatever, you know, books you've read or podcasts you've listened to, then that's also on the table to bring up. So. Do you find that, I wonder if, do men enjoy talking with women more or women talk? Yeah, I don't know if that's true. Depends on the women problem. Or vice versa. Yeah, but there's definitely something about just the conversation among guys. Well, Sherry is definitely one of my favorite conversation partners, but I enjoy the men I have conversations with too. Yeah. Yeah. Like Michael Martin, Michael Martin's awesome. I love talking to that guy. Yeah, I don't think, I don't think I have a preference for talking to either men or women, like it's a slightly different experience, but I like both of them. Yeah, we could circle back to something. I forget what the comment was where I wanted to bring this up. I wanted to talk about an annoyance I have with evangelicals talking about witness all the time, but I forgot what the context was of. Was it, was it that witness is defined too intellectually and not enough in terms of how you're living your life? Not quite. I'm just trying to connect this back to what the conversation was we were having. Yeah, I completely forgot it. Does it have to do with like the connection with martyrdom? Like in terms of the etymology of martyr. Oh, well, that yeah, that would probably be a different way of that would be more helpful way of thinking about it. But I just find that it seems like often when evangelicals, I don't know if this is the right word. I'm sorry, evangelicals. I don't mean to call you out like everyone else always is, but they should just get off on that word already. It's like everything that's wrong with Christianity evangelical. But it's just the way certain people use the word witness is like, well, I really need to watch what I say around secular people because they might get offended and not believe the gospel. And it's, it just kind of seems propagandistic and inauthentic to me, the way it gets used. It's not wanting to offend secular people, right? So like not mentioning, not mentioning mentioning a belief that you have that might seem offensive to them. Or it's something like when you're talking about politics, people will say, well, voting for Trump was very bad for the Christian witness. And it just seems like a form of nominalism where you're like, you know, there's nothing specific about voting for Trump that we can point out that was bad. There's nothing about the movement there that we think is objectionable. There's nothing about the Christian engagement to politics that we think could be improved. It's just these people over there might be offended by this. So we should probably play that down. And you're missing the larger conversation about, well, is there actually anything wrong with this political movement? And we shouldn't be aligning for these real reasons instead of just the public relations front being offended. So I often find that talking about a witness kind of, how do you put it? It sort of hides the deeper issues and creates a very superficial conversation. Oh, yeah. Because it's all about how you're presenting yourself and whether you're doing it in a way that'll like sell the gospel to people. And it's like, you're not, if you're always in the kind of admin public relations mode, if you're always in the kind of admin public relations mode, you're actually not really bringing the gospel to life because you're just pretending to be someone who you actually aren't in a way. Yeah, that kind of reminds me of how people who get really into this culture war mindset can get so defensive about their faith that they would not be willing to tell anyone about things that they struggle with in their faith or things that they just find unpleasant about the Christian life or whatever. But it might actually be really helpful to hear about that stuff. Yeah, exactly. It's exactly the same thing. Yeah. Let me think the antidote to Paul and this corner is just the honesty of, okay, I believe this, but I actually also am cross pressured by this or I think this, but I also see the merit of that. And just the way Paul talks about his consciousness, Congress, and how part of him is an atheist, part of him is a Christian, part of him is something else. I think that's such a helpful way of talking. Yeah, I agree. For me personally, this estuary environment has been much, much better. Spiritually than the super Catholic environment that I tried to be a part of before. And your mileage may vary. Some people might do great in the super Catholic environment, but in my life, the estuary has definitely been more helpful. Yeah, definitely. It's definitely done a lot for me too. I was just, now I'm just trying to figure out what was my brain connecting witness with the conversation we're having about the Benedict option. I'm not sure. It had something to do with borders and I can't remember. It was what you said just before we were talking about how a community needs to have either porous borders or just borders around certain things. Oh, just putting walls around stuff and how high and how porous can they be? Hmm. Well, Paul is pessimistic about the idea of putting walls around anything these days, because he feels like the presence of the walls affects what goes on inside the walls in ways that might be negative. And it's futile because you're just not going to succeed in keeping things out, or at least forever. I don't know. Yeah. Yeah. I guess we should let Paul say that himself because I'm just trying to summarize. Yeah, the internet has kind of just destroyed the borders around traditional borders that other rights have set up too. Yeah. If a bunch of families do all group together and sign a contract that none of them are going to have the internet in their homes, then you can maintain a wall for a while. But how many people can really do that? I need the internet to make money. A lot of people do. So, not feasible for a lot of people. Yeah. You would like to be free from that dependence, I guess. But it's tough. Yeah. I don't know if I can think about the internet as bad either. Yeah, that's true. That's true, like most things. Yeah, that is one thing that triggers me a bit about some of the conversations around modernity in these circles is it just gets so much more than just a bad thing. It just gets turned into an unequivocally bad thing as if modernity didn't bring all kinds of things we can affirm and can't really get rid of and are good. And ignores the dark side of tradition, which I think the exposure of the dark side of tradition is one of the things that Christianity did. The passion of Christ exposes the dark side of tradition, especially when you think about it in Girardian terms, that becomes particularly obvious where it's literally exposes the evil of the sacrificial, the hidden sacrificial mechanism that makes the traditional world function. Yeah, Shirley Jackson's story, The Lottery, would be one of my go-to's for acquainting people with the dark side of tradition. Right. Right. I'm well acquainted with it. Or like my parents, my parents both grew up in small towns in the United States and they were, my dad was born in 1933, my mom was born in 1938, and then I knew my grandparents as well who were born in like, I don't know, 1912 and 1950, something like that. So I'm very familiar with what small town life used to be like, and it was idyllic in some ways, and there were some things that were really great about it. But then once in a while you hear stories that make you think, wow, I wouldn't want to live with that particular problem. Yeah. Right. So in some ways, I wonder if, maybe I'm crazy here, I'm wondering if some, in some ways, like obviously there's a dark aspect to what's going on in modernity as well, but isn't the advance of modernity in some ways also represent like, somehow like the drawing nearer of the kingdom, which is what, which might be what's causing all these things to fall apart? Yeah. The only way out is through is one of the things people keep saying. Which means that our politics are just going to get worse and worse because, Yeah, that's what I'm expecting. Because our politics are not based on kingdom principles. So they're... Yeah, I'm certainly not at this, I haven't, I can't remember, I don't know, I've ever thought that, oh, there's a person I can vote for who will turn things around and make it all better. I don't expect that to happen at all. Yeah. Yeah. Well, if there, and if there were, they wouldn't be, they'd be unelectable. Yeah. Right. I mean, they'd swoopy. I mean, that the person, the person who would be electable to turn everything, who everybody thinks would turn everything around will end up being Antichrist. Yeah. And we don't like, we don't like it when people turn everything around. Like we, we like our little rots and the turning of the ages isn't very comfortable for most of us. Right. Right. Yeah. I don't know. I feel like there's a lot left to discuss. Like what, what are some other communal dynamics we need to explore? Well, maybe I could, I don't know how much longer we're going to talk, but I can, I can say something that might sum up some of what I'm trying to tell people. So again, from this book, so Eric Cabrendi, he, you know, he lived with these Amish people for a while and he was really inspired by their way of life and he was Catholic. So he bought some land in the area where they lived. And he thought, maybe I can start a Catholic community that operates along similar lines to this community. And he only wrote, he only wrote one paragraph about that experiment in the book, but here it is. Okay. Let's hear it. Yeah. We left Boston for a few months and got involved in forming a rural neighborhood association patterned after that of the Mennonites with others who wished to regulate the use of technology. The project proved to be a brief but instructive last use of the land we had bought. We learned that in its early stages, a fledgling community is very fragile and requires the right blend of many ingredients, including personal outlets. It presumes a certain level of psychological stability. If any ingredient is missing, the whole thing can quickly cave in. And thus, like a failed souffle, did this one. We sold the property, mourning the loss of our last tie to our original experiment. So that's all he says. I think this one line, this one line, it presumes a certain level of psychological stability is doing a lot of work. But we can, some of the things we said in this conversation, we can kind of see why that went wrong, right? Because he went to this place where he had seen these people who, who knows how long they had been there, by the way. Like they'd probably been there for a very, very long time. And he sees them, you know, after a long period of development where they developed the stable thing. And he thinks that he can just like go out, buy a piece of land in the same area and get a bunch of other people that have no roots in that place and move them to that location. And then somehow they don't make it work. And then it doesn't work any surprise, which is why this whole idea of doing what you can to build community, like real community, real Christian community, where you are, is probably the much more advisable option in the long run, I would say. Yeah, I agree. Yeah. In your case, Julian, you're just where, you know, I mean, you had, it was ready made. It was just there for you. And I would say, I would say that is one, that's the other thing that I would say is that Christians who, who like feel like that they want to be a part of that, like the other option is rather than to go and try to create their own thing, which is a very individualistic sort of capitalist kind of thing. It's almost, it's very entrepreneurial, individualistic, capitalistic, is to just go and find a community that already exists and has some history behind it and be a part of that community. Yeah. Yeah. That, that, that is, that, that puts new life into the existing community as well. Which I would say from a Catholic perspective, which means that laities should start to do more to collaborate with the work of the monasteries. Yeah. That would, how to do that would be a whole discussion, but yeah. And I just, I didn't even think of it until this conversation, but that seems like the proper Catholic expression of that is like, oh, we already have these monasteries. How can we, how can we support them? Yeah. I guess. Yeah. Those monasteries. Yeah. Yeah. Charles Taylor talks about the, the way I charge. Taylor talks about the, the one speed versus the two speed, but not, it doesn't use those words. That's Paul's language of the, the one speed and the two speed. Yeah. That's, is that Paul's translation of Charles Taylor? I think it's false translation of Charles Taylor, but you have, you have kind of the people like the monks who are kind of living the, the extreme full, full on expression of the radical demands of the gospel and then people who live a more, I don't know, how do you actually describe the difference making the normal people sound like subpar Christians, but I guess, I guess people who just live a less, less radical lifestyle and, and how you sort of lead. Yeah. I've, I've been interested in thinking about those dynamics within the outright community where it starts out as a, an attempt to have a one speed religion. We have everyone in the community who is sort of on the same page and everyone is living out the full radical demands of the gospel. But I think over time, a kind of equilibrium starts to develop. Yeah. I mean, I, I've thought about this in terms of, of, of, of, of apocalyptic versus natural law or something like that, where the equilibrium that a community kind of goes into where you have the two speed, you have the carnival, you have the hierarchies. And then there's these apocalyptic moments where a kind of radical one speed egalitarian kind of vision breaks out. And it's always just a brief moment. It never kind of is able to last for more than a few, more than a decade or a few years. And then it sort of comes back into that, that older sort of settled natural law kind of space. I mean, I've, do you think it's accurate to say that, that Catholicism kind of represents just sort of the natural, the natural equilibrium, the kind of natural, the natural law, like what, what given enough time, what kind of religion becomes without the apocalyptic breaking in? But, but I guess you do have the, the monasteries. I have to write that question down and think about it for a few days before answering it. Yeah. Yeah. I guess I've just thought in terms of, of the ritual, the, the hierarchy, the, all of those, the tradition, all of those beautiful things that people love about the Catholic tradition. I think that is sort of what the apocalyptic religion develops into given enough time. Yeah. What do you think? Yeah, that, that makes a certain kind of sense to me. Yeah. Yeah. But, but I guess the irony is that it doesn't seem possible to have an established church or that, that doesn't kind of come back into that older mode. And so should you continue to sort of resist and continually seek those hmm, authentic apocalyptic moments, or should you sort of just let the, embrace the tradition, embrace the natural law? Well, to some extent there, you can have both, because something that, something that Catholics are accustomed to is this tension between the, the institutional church and the spirit filled things that can happen. You know, in, in the life of the church, right, the institutional church has a certain rigidity or bureaucratic quality, right? And it has all the flaws that everyone's well aware of. And yet there's this other, were you saying two speeds? Yeah, there's like another speed or another track that exists in the same church. That's, that's a more spiritual level, level where like amazing things happen. And I would say that even though it may move slowly, it is still transformed by the apocalyptic vision and has never lost it. It just has a certain stability that keeps it from changing too rapidly in response to that apocalyptic vision. And a recurring theme in the stories of saints is that maybe a saint has a vision, like a direct vision of Christ, where he tells them to do a certain thing or spread a certain message, right? And then maybe that person gets in trouble with the hierarchy, right? And their local bishop says, no, stop, stop telling this message. I'm not so sure about this. Then what the saint is supposed to do is just accept that for a while and assume that God's will is going to prevail, right? And so you, there's that tension showing up again, right? You've got to accept, you have to accept that institutional church and the way it works. But you also have faith that if God is planning to do a thing, that thing will come to pass. So if Luther had just waited it out, he might have become a saint. That is the Catholic position pretty much. Yeah, maybe. Well, yeah, that's the thing. Like if you're Luther, you wait it out and then you will eventually discover, was I a heretic or was I a saint? But someone else will tell you. It's like, it's kind of like how Peterson says, you know, your identity is something that you negotiate with other people. If there's a new thing you want to do in the church, you can't be totally, you can't be sure on your own that you're right. You've got to, you've got to negotiate it with, with the other people at the hierarchy. Which is a very personal, which is a very personalist thing for him to say. You said Peterson says that, right? Yeah. Yeah. I've heard that too. He's, it's, Peterson's interesting because he's like, sometimes he sounds like a pure modernist individualist in the way he talks about the individual. And then sometimes it's like, he has a vision that's more in line with Christian personalism. Mm. So I wish, I hope he gets to the point where he can articulate that more clearly, but I think maybe he needs to be a Christian before he can. It sounded to me like what he went through with his illness taught him some personalism. Yeah. I definitely feel the apocalyptic traditional tension in my own life. Like there's, there are times where I can really see the, you know, some of what we talked about today, like some of these traditions and the value and the goodness there. And there's other times where you're just hoping for this apocalyptic moment, which will just sweep away this entire God forsaken tradition once and for all, and just return us to this barren landscape. We're just have to figure it out for ourselves. Yeah. So I'm sure there's Catholics who fantasize about that too, or it's like just drop your divine nuke upon this entire hierarchy. Yeah. But yeah. Have you read, have you read David Bentley Hart's recent book, tradition and apocalypse? I haven't, no. Okay. You might want to read it based on what, since you're kind of talking in that vein, David's primary thesis in that book is that the proper way to read the tradition is through apocalypse because you have to see the telos of a thing. You have to see the telos of the tradition in order to understand the tradition. And you can't know, but you can't, you can only know the telos by looking at it's apocalyptic mode through the apocalyptic mode. It's something slightly different, but probably related. Yeah. I was thinking when I saw the title of that book, that was something that would probably be interested in, but haven't checked it out yet. It's a pretty quick read. It's not, it's like less than 200 pages. Can I read you something from the dust jacket of his translation of the New Testament? If I just remember and get it. Yeah, absolutely. I think I have one. I have a copy behind me too. Is it the white one? It's actually, it's on my, I have a dresser behind me and there's more books on top of there. Okay. I usually can't, if I move, you can kind of see. I think I can see it now. Yeah, it's the white one. Yeah, maybe this will give you something to talk about. So here's David Bentley Hart's translation of the New Testament and the dust jacket says, this rendering also challenges the idea that the New Testament affirms the kind of people we are. Hart reminds us that the first Christians were a company of extremists, radical in their rejection of the values and priorities of society, not only at its most degenerate, but often at its most reasonable and decent. To live as the New Testament language requires, he writes, Christians would have to become strangers and sojourners on the earth. To have here no enduring city, to belong to a kingdom truly not of this world. And we surely cannot do that, can we? I love it. Yeah, that's good. On a completely different note, do any of you regularly read the blog of Rod Dreyer? I do. You regularly read it. I do and it scares the hell out of me and I really shouldn't read it. Sometimes I just say, I'm not going to look at it for a month and then like my whole life gets better. That's exactly my relationship with it. I have such a love-hate relationship with him. I think part of the reason I keep reading him is that I don't know of any other place where he can go and get that kind of cultural analysis alongside philosophical stuff and theological stuff. Yeah, that's true. There's no one else quite like him. Yeah, fascinating mixture. And then he brings his personality into it in a way that can be absolutely bizarre sometimes. I think Rod is very, very close to having the seeds of becoming a Christian anarchist. If he became a Christian anarchist and just stopped caring so much about the global politics stuff, it would be so much better. But yeah, I used to read Rod all the time. I don't really read his recent stuff, but I used to read him when he was a columnist for National Review all the time. Yeah, I used to read him in the early 2000s. And then when he came up with Crunchy Cons, my husband and I read it and our friends read it and we were all passing it back and forth like, oh, this is us. This is totally what we're into. I remember the very first National Review piece where he introduced the term Crunchy Con. And he was talking about his wife going to the co-op with her National Review tote bag. Can I read something from a recent blog post? I'm sure you guys saw the the post he wrote surrounding his divorce. Yeah, I just felt bad for him. Yeah, I felt bad for him too. One impression I had, well, I don't know, this is probably coming from private, but I was so struck by this comment he had in the middle of one of his pieces where he was talking about the sword and the stone. And he was talking, I think about the sword and the stone for him was whether or not he should give up on his marriage and just sort of let it go and stop fighting. But I just thought it was such a perfect metaphor for his stance towards the culture war that I was like waiting for it to connect the dots, but it never did. So let me just read this. So as I sat at that silent crypt this morning, I thought about the sword and the stone. Then I remember that today is Holy Thursday, the day that Jesus Christ was taken to the Garden of Gethsemane to his trial. On that night, Peter drew his sword to protect the Lord from his enemies, but Jesus told him to put it away and surrender to his faith. Jesus knew what was about to happen, had to happen for all righteousness to be fulfilled. I heard the inner voice say to me that now was the time to put away my sword, that is to stop fighting for a restoration of the past. In fact, said the voice, I had done all that at the monastery. I had made a nine-year-long journey across the empty bath and the flame all right, and now I needed to place it on the stone and to be free. Then it hit me. That stone I had just been praying with the stone that marks the spot traditionally, not necessarily literally, with their own disc, this card of the cross. The inner voice is telling me that the fight was over, that this is about to happen, meaning the dissolution of the marriage had to happen. But why I asked, why not just restore the marriage? I didn't wait for an answer, but banish the questions. I may never know, but that's beside the point. Why did Jesus have to suffer and die? We are dealing with the deepest mysteries here. I- Oh, that's so interesting. Yeah. Yeah, you're right. It's like, yeah. The image of the broken marriage, the image of giving up on the past. I think it might put a price on the larger cultural norms and the stance that he's in. You could think about it, the marriage of the church and state or something like that, the marriage of the church and state, and giving up on the past. Which is the actual sword in the stone in the context of, you know, Arthurian legend, like that's what it represents, right? It's like, because, well, first of all, it's the sword that represents royal authority, right? But it stands in a holy place and it can only be drawn by the one who was the true and rightful king, which means to be chosen by God. So it's the collaboration between spiritual authority and temporal power in that image. But I just found that image there so interesting. I was wondering, is it going to connect the dots here? Is his tone going to radically change in his future blog posts? But- He has so many of the right pieces. I just don't, yeah, I don't really- And I don't quite hold it against it because I think he is talking about stuff that few people do and so he sort of fills a hole. I just can't, I just can't, I just can't. A hole. It's just, I just can't, I just can't stand some of the stuff he puts out. I'm sorry. But yeah, I think he's just an extremely emotional person. Like he seems to be giving us what immediately goes through his head when he reads the headline and just sort of sits down and types 20,000 word blog posts. Maybe. Well, it'll be really interesting to see how he evolves from here. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. He's been talking more about it in his recent blog posts about how, about even some of the Ruth, his sister Ruth stuff, apparently. I didn't realize it, but apparently there was some ugly stuff in his family. Yeah. He alludes to it. It's never been resolved. I'm not sure what it is. Yeah. Well, maybe while we're talking about internet people, I can put in a plug for a person who I think is doing a really good job in the Catholic world right now, which is Larry Chaff. Have you ever heard of him? I look him up. I think Larry Chaff, C-H-A-P-P. He has a blog called Gaudium at Space 22. Okay. Yeah. So read some of his blog posts. I highly recommend him as a person who's thinking about Catholicism in the modern world and doing a really great job. All right. Good. Yeah. But I should probably split because it's been- Me too. Yeah. We have a read star agreed upon time. I think it was a great conversation. I would I'd like to talk to either one of you again sometime in the future. And thanks for the conversation today. All right. I really enjoyed this. Yeah. Great. See you. Thank you.