https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=_0wh8I0Qdd8

 So, the Roman Catholic Church in a sense said, the Bible derives its authority from us, and we will interpret the Bible for the people. Now this makes a lot of sense given the history of the Roman Catholic Church in the West, and the barbarian invasions, and levels of literacy after the collapse of the Western Roman Empire, and then the Middle Ages where, with the barbarian invasions and the collapse of the Roman Empire, the Church was the only institution standing. And so, Western monks converted the tribes to Christianity. It's in that period that, for the first time, Christianity becomes a religion of white Western people. This is between 500 and 1580, where Christianity gets into the West. The monasteries preserve learning, preserve education, preserve the books, and the monasteries really become the preservation of culture in the West. Once the Roman Empire collapses, and then the West is Christianized in this period of about a thousand years. What the Church does is the Church sets up a sacramental system which, really the Church creates a culture in the West that is so thoroughly part of this world and thoroughly Christian, and this is then the culture that, in the age of discovery, will go out through the rest of the world. But at the heart of it is this assertion that, well, the Bible is an expression of the Church. Well, I've got a really short hand, a whole lot of critical history here. But what happens towards the end of the Middle Ages is that the Renaissance comes along and part of what happens because of the Crusades is that these Crusaders go into the East and the eyes of the West are open to the world of the East, and so suddenly the West has access to Plato and Aristotle and the Greeks and some of the lost antiquity of Rome, and there's this huge movement in the West back to the sources. And so the West is enamored by a lot of what it's discovering in the East and this movement to the sources starts with a conversation about the Bible because what happened very early around 600 was that the Bible was translated into Latin, and that's called the Vulgate. And this became the Bible in the West. Everything was done in Latin. Well, towards the end of the Middle Ages, after the Crusades, with the rise of wealth in Italy and the Renaissance going on, scholars in the Roman Catholic Church, one of the most predominant ones, Erasmus. Erasmus starts comparing the Greek New Testament to the Vulgate. And, well, things don't always match up so good. And Europe begins to say, hey, wait a minute, shouldn't we update this? Well, there are still churches today that will say don't touch the King James Bible. The King James Bible is the Bible. You know, God gave us the Bible, the King James Bible fell out of heaven and landed here on English speaking earth and gave us the King James Bible. Well, the Vulgate was way more foundational than that. But Erasmus starts saying, you know, Jerome, for the masterpiece that the Vulgate was, didn't get everything right. And some of the things he got wrong impact some of our doctrines. We need to talk about this. Why didn't they want to talk about this? They didn't want to change what they had done. Right. The Roman Catholic Church is looking at this, you know, millions of people and their entire system that they've constructed and said, we can't just start tinkering with this stuff. And Erasmus is a scholar, well, we'll just have academics talk about it. Okay. Well, one of, so but scholars all over Europe are reading Erasmus and looking at the Vulgate and noticing the problems because, you know, what happens at the beginning of the 16th century, a technological disruption? Gutenberg printing press. Gutenberg printing press. You know the first book that was printed? The Bible. You know what language it was printed in? Germany. The first Bible? Latin Vulgate. Gutenberg's Bible. The Latin. Because everybody spoke Latin. Latin was the language of the West. Everybody had their own little tribal languages. But anyone who wanted to connect between tribes, you spoke Latin. Latin is the language of the church. Latin is the language of diplomacy. This endured all the way into the 19th and 20th century. And so scholars are, scholars are reading Erasmus and they're seeing the deficiencies of the Vulgate and they're talking about it. Well, there's one scholar, I won't go into too much, Martin Luther in Germany and he's a bright young man. And he's following Erasmus carefully and he's seeing the deficiencies in the Vulgate. But he's also seeing some of the issues going on in the Roman Catholic Church and if you go into the history of the Reformation, indulgences and Martin Luther's reading the New Testament in Greek. And he's saying there's issues with the Vulgate and there's issues with our theology and we need to have a conversation about it. So he writes his famous 95 Theses and he, guess what language he wrote those 95 Theses in? Latin. Some of his students, and he can get a sense of the internet here, some of his students took his 95 Theses, translated them into German and printed them and passed them out. Luther wanted to start a conversation, an academic conversation about a number of theological things. But very quickly his ideas start to spread. And Martin Luther temperamentally was the kind of guy, and you've all known people like this, you know, nice guy. But if you push him, he pushes back. So he does this. And he said some sensitive things to that guy, some people in the Roman Catholic Church a little upset and generally the practice was, well, we don't let people talk like this, so Luther, you need to shut up. Well, just like he said, well don't tell me to shut up. I'm right. I've got, I've got the Bible here, I've got the Greek text and I'm right. No, the church, Mother Church is telling you to be quiet. Well, Mother Church has to answer to the Bible. There's the move. Does the Bible answer to the church? Or does the church answer to the Bible? Martin Luther says, I have history on my side. The Bible was in Greek, before it was in Latin. Some of these Latin translations are wrong. That is implications theologically for us. We need to change our practice and maybe even some of our doctrines. And so the church keeps pushing, Martin keeps pushing back. Martin's in the Holy, if Martin had lived in France or Italy, he'd been dead and then nothing would have ever happened. But he lived in the Holy Roman Empire, which was neither Holy nor Roman. And his particular little prince didn't want to see his star scholar get killed by the church. And so he kidnaps his own guy and smuggles him off in a castle and says, no, you're not touching Martin. So now Martin has to sit around. But what does the scholar do when he's got, he doesn't have to teach classes anymore. He doesn't have students. What does the scholar do if you lock him up in a castle? Start a YouTube channel? Yeah. He writes. Well, one of the things he writes is a new version of the Bible in German. And he keeps writing his book, I mean, his feud with the Roman Catholic Church kept escalating. And he said, well, you know, I'm right, they're wrong. They should admit it. The church isn't going to admit it. Well, and then Martin basically has this idea. And again, Alastair McGrath is a terrific guy to read about this. Also has a good book on this. Martin basically said, hey, here's the Bible. I'm going to read the Bible. And I'm a smart scholar. He was a great scholar. I'm going to read the Bible. And then from the Bible, I'm going to have truth. And I'm going to start to reform the church. And so Martin and some of his people around him start reforming the church. And he thought, we'll reform the whole church based on the Bible. And we'll have one church. Cool. Well, Martin was reading the Bible. And Martin had a lot of ideas about how the church should be. Carlstad and others, a bunch of other people started reading the Bible too. Guess what? They had their own ideas. They had their own ideas about how the church should be. And, you know, a lot of the ideas, some of the ideas they held in common, but some of the ideas were different ways. And so because of the politics, the economics, because of a whole number of things, what happens is that the church fractures in the West. And the church fractured along governmental lines often. So in places, well, Italy was a patchwork at this point still. And we won't get into Italy because that doesn't get sorted out until the 19th century. Germany doesn't get sorted out until the 19th century. But France and Spain and England have some political cohesion. And so France and Spain stay Catholic. England is going to fight about this for the next few hundred years, swinging back and forth. And the patchwork parts of Europe, which is Italy, Switzerland, and Germany, are all going to get fractured into these tiny little groups that all have their own religion. And then in order to kind of satisfy everything, the rule is this. If you're the prince over an area, you get to pick the religion. So if I'm the king of Sacramento, I say everybody in Sacramento is Christian Reformed. Everybody has to go to church every day. Everybody has to go to church on Sunday. Well, what if twice? David knows of what he speaks. Now what if you live in Sacramento and you're Roman Catholic? What are your options? Move. That's exactly what people did. Move. But let's say I die and my son Philip says, it's kind of restrictive. I kind of like those wafers they serve at mass. So Sacramento's going to be Catholic now. Well, what do you do then? Move again. But people have jobs and lives and country. And so this is a mess. And so this is a mess in Europe for a long time. And there are bloody wars that get fought over this. And England has all kinds of wars over this. So what happens out of this is and then the Roman Catholic Church has the Council of Trent to try and because Martin Luther was pointing out some really big problems in the Roman Catholic Church and because of the Reformation, the Roman Catholic Church had to do some Reformation of their own, which they did. So in a sense, Luther did in fact achieve his goal, which was reforming the Roman Catholic Church but not necessarily according to what he thought. But here's the problem. You had all of these people all of these people looking at the same Bible and coming up with different answers. One word we would use of this today is pluralism. Well, what's the truth? There isn't Well, there can be four truths, kind of but elemental to the idea of truth is that there's one. So what is the truth about God? What is the truth about what God wants for people? How are you going to find this? Well, you can try and say, well, I'm right so I'm going to kill the rest of you. Well, that doesn't work out so good and that doesn't really square with the Bible. So what are your options? Well, at some point you're going to have to settle down and say well, maybe we should talk. Talking is better than killing. So what does it mean for us to talk? Well, these are actually just individuals these are clumps of individuals that have differentiation within themselves too but what begins to happen is they start to write things that today we call confessions. And they start to write documents and in a sense say I'm going to put my cards on the table so that we can have a conversation Did they try to make those boil down a little bit so that, you know, this is something that we think other people might be able to kind of flow with? Yes, because people start believing in clumps I mean, as much as we we like to imagine ourselves as American individualists that I see the truth purely myself and it's only me that really knows and that's why when you go to high school you find everyone's an individual and they're all dressing the same It's called naive So what happens, so let's talk about the belgian confession What's happening in See, part of the difficulty with this stuff there's so much history impacted with this So in Europe you have this little region called of the Netherlands or the low countries which is Belgium and what we call Holland or the Netherlands and this is part of the Holy Roman Empire this is kind of garbage country and it's garbage because it's low and the sea just keeps sweeping over it you build a farm there's a flood but it's a flood of salt water, that's a disaster flood of fresh water, that's good so this area is not very organized it's full of a lot of different little tribes it's owned by Spain the reformation had come to this place first the Anabaptists and then later the Reformed and so the people in this area were Protestants but they were being politically they were controlled by Spain and well the rule is whoever is the political leader gets determined the religion and so he said you all have to be Roman Catholic and the people are like I don't want to be Roman Catholic I want to be reformed and so he said I'm going to make you be Roman Catholic and he said well if it's whoever has the political authority gets to choose the religion guess what? we're not only going to have our own religion we're going to rebel so we can have our own government does this sound familiar to Americans? yeah was there like I'm sure there were, were there like political significance with that? so if they say you're going to be Catholic does it also mean you're going to be Spanish? and so they're like well I'm not, I don't speak Spanish I'm not going to be Spanish well not necessarily Spanish because he also controlled the Holy Roman Empire I mean so he these, I mean these dynastic families owns huge you know and these were incredibly diverse populations we look at them today and say well they're all white but white wasn't invented until the colonial period they were Frisian and Franks and Dutch and Saxons and you know they were all of these little ethnic groups and so these guys basically decide you know we want to we, self-determination we want to rule our own thing but here the emperor here is powerful and he sends up some pretty brutal forces to basically you know make the people do what he says well you know we saw the Iraq war how does that go? and the US didn't even try to Christianize Iraq didn't go well well Guido de Brey, the author of the Belgian Confession writes a letter to the emperor which is the Belgian Confession itself and he's not writing, it's not a declaration of independence what Thomas Jefferson basically writes to England saying these are our ideas England, stay on your side of the pond Guido is writing to the emperor of Spain saying we're Christians too and so what he's going to do in that document is go over a lot of the stuff I erased my creeds go over a lot of the stuff that Protestants Protestants protest and you might say well here's all of the doctrine of the Roman Catholic Church we have issues with this part who is Jesus doctrine of the Trinity organic inspiration of scripture we don't think that there are seven sacraments we think there are two so that's kind of a gray area but but we're we're with you on most of this and then we have this part that we disagree with and so what he does in the Belgian Confession is he says look at all that we have the same we should not be killing each other we should be saying we're Christians together so he temperamentally is a little different than Martin Luther and he's not at that point although his people are getting slaughtered by the Emperor's troops so he's saying this is what we have the same this is what we have different you know Rodney King can't we all just get along do you have to kill us and that's what the Belgian Confession comes out of so when you read the Belgian Confession a lot of what you're reading is stuff that the Protestants and the Catholics have in common plus some of the elements that they don't have in common plus well and some of these elements that some of them Mark sent me an email like you know everyone everyone should go to church the state should ensure that everyone goes to church well that's in the Belgian Confession why is that in the Belgian Confession where does that idea come from that's something both sides could agree on they couldn't agree on which church but that everyone should go to church and worship God is something they could agree on now we read that today and what do we think we think well you can't tell people they have to go to church we have so we're way the heck over here in North America that had this patchwork of colonies states usually state is the whole thing we have these little things Canada we call them provinces we have these states and many of these states have their own religion what was the religion of Massachusetts I never think about that today do we you grew up in Massachusetts what's the religion of Massachusetts who founded Massachusetts the pilgrims the pilgrims the pilgrims the pilgrims and then the Puritans followed the pilgrims well they were reformed Christians well what about Roger Williams well Roger spent some time in the Netherlands and they're kind of like more free thinkers well what is the Quaker state anybody know Pennsylvania Pennsylvania is the Quaker state why is it the Quaker state who founded Pennsylvania William Penn the Quakers you go up through the 13 colonies you realize they are segregated by religion so when they founded the United States of America what's one of the things that they put in the Constitution we are not going to kill each other over religion why not that's what these people were doing so what is a confession the confession is in a sense this is what we confess this is what we believe now it's important to kind of understand both sides of that a confession says this is what we believe and we want to explain it to the world and it's also a way in the context of fighting with Spain this makes perfect sense but now take this confession into America where there's in Sacramento all kinds of little churches and in fact a lot of church history has happened since then and there's a bunch of churches that say things like no creed but Christ what does that mean that's part of the issue no idea well who is Christ was Christ a man or is Christ fully human fully divine and so what actually you see if you go to church websites it's very interesting because almost every church website will have a little tab that says beliefs and they have a little page that has a bunch of things usually pretty religious and vague because they want to keep doors open that's a confession yeah I can't tell you how many phone calls I get or conversations where someone will say one or two things either oh are you non-denominational please say you're non-denominational or you don't have creeds wow I can't even tell you how many conversations yet most of those people that say that if you would say I think Jesus is an ascended being oh you're not a church click because they have a creed implicit in their head but they haven't written a confession what's the benefit then of a confession or a creed I come up to David I come up to David and say David I believe in Jesus do you believe in Jesus well who's Jesus to you well is Jesus fully man and fully God well I don't think that matters oh okay I think it doesn't matter why well because I've seen what happens when Jesus is only fully God I see where that goes for people and I see what happens when Jesus is only human and I see where that goes for people so I've actually done a little research into this and I think it's important that he be fully man and fully God and here's the difficulty that you face this is just one issue I mean let's look at the issues that the church go ahead Mark let's look at the issues that churches are fighting over today what are the big issues that churches are fighting over today music homosexuality women in office there's almost nothing written about any of those things in any of these books because they weren't fighting about them so but there's whole lots of other issues you know let's say David comes to my church and he walks in the church he says where's the altar yeah where is the altar it's there every night it's there every night that's right right away there there's an entire world of history behind that question most Americans would say what most Americans do is say what most Americans do is say well I like an altar or I don't like an altar and what's the basis upon which they either like or don't like the altar what they've known well does that connect up with anything how can you establish a community around it so the belgian confession is basically trying to have a conversation with the emperor saying we're really Christians but we've got some disagreements on these and they spell that out the heidaberg catechism is another kind of document in the similar vein see for years often when people who have grown up Roman Catholic come into the Christian Deformed Church see the thing is if you grew up in a well established church you know some things you've been educated oh we had a catechism because catechism is basically a medieval educational tool to educate the young questions and answers this gets into a whole little bit of a lot of education I'm not going to touch but this is how you educate the young these are the questions to ask these are the answers to give this is based on a view of authority and knowledge that has passed in many ways today you would just say I'd like you all to have answers of your own about who is god god to me is well that's fine except we're going to have ten gods in this room and we're going to probably add two or three more different gods as some of us are changing our ideas of god so hybrid catechism goes through Ten Commandments Apostles Creed Sacraments and then a few other things and basically says this is what we believe the Christian Gospel is and we're going to touch on some of the main teachings of scripture that have been gone out throughout the years in some of our points of contention with the Roman Catholic Church so you can see right away that the hybrid catechism is enormously contextual it was written with a conversation with Roman Catholic people in mind European Roman Catholic people that shapes the document Canons of Dor is shaped by a whole other conflict that I don't want to get into that is an in-house reformed fight between Calvinists and Armenians not Armenians, Armenians Armenians are somewhere else but that's where these documents come out of and so what has happened in the church is that the church takes these things and says okay we need to have continuity through history so we have creeds that brings us all the way back into the New Testament and then we have confessions that brings us through the reformation period and then now today I don't know, did you have them read Our World Belongs to God? Okay, there's another book that Mark is keeping from you and he likes to tell us what to believe So here's the thing that you want to have with your church you want to be in communion with the past and you do that through documents and you do that through institutions and you do that through beliefs and so we have the Bible and we have the creeds and we have confessions and that puts us in that gives us a narrative thread of continuity to the past we also want continuity with people in this world so the Christian Reform Church in North America has these confessions churches that have a historical link to us have all the same confessions why is that handy? there's upsides and downsides to that one of the downsides in the 70s for the Christian Form Church was a lot of this the Belgian Confession comes out of what today is Belgium the Heidberg Catechism comes out of what today is Germany these documents put us in connection with reformed churches all around the world from different backgrounds these specific documents tend to be held by the Dutch Reformed Communities one of the Dutch Reformed Communities went to South Africa and there were Dutch Reformed Churches in South Africa some of these churches developed a religious position called apartheid well, so we have the Dutch Reformed Community in the United States and we have the Dutch Reformed Community in South Africa and as is often true and you won't think about this you think, well what do Dutch Reformed Communities in South Africa look like? well you think they're all white well that's not true because they've been there for a couple hundred years and so there's probably more black Dutch Reformed people in South Africa than white Dutch Reformed people in South Africa you don't think about that, but it's true well they're about to have one heck of a fight over apartheid