https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=alRb0Ino3k4

 You know, we could say, okay, we could like, for other people to listen to or see or whatever. What is it picking up? Picking up you, mainly? Yeah, me. The camera's only faced here, but it'll pick up all of your voices. Yeah. So you can always say at the end, well, that wasn't me. That just sounds like me. Someone impersonating me. I'm the one in trouble. Let's see. It's a history class. Is it recording? It is recording now. Paul, tell us more about the schism you're leading. That was Dave Lindner, by the way. If there was any doubt. Should we open with prayer? That sounds good. Yeah, let's open with prayer. Lord, we believe that the God of creation is the God of redemption and that you have been working through time and history and through institutions and through authors and through books and through churches and through communities for 2,000 years. And we come together studying the Bible, but also studying what men and women have studied and written down all over the world. And that has become the church and its creeds and confessions and doctrines. And this is a long process, Lord, by which we not only try to love you with our lives, but love you with our minds and pass on the faith to next generations. And so Lord, I pray that this morning we might have a productive conversation about the history of the church, about the creeds and confessions of the Christian Reformed Church in North America, as you have blessed us with this institution. We ask, Lord, that this might be helpful for each of us to grow in faith and understand our service in the church and how to love each other better. So hear our prayer now in the name of Jesus. Amen. Amen. Okay. Where did you, you sent me some things last night. Where would you like to begin? Would you want to begin with, I mean, we could, we're going to have lots of time for question and answers. Do you want to begin with, say, elders and deacons and the form of ordination? Because there's a lot in there. We can talk about creeds and confessions too. Before we do that, I'd like to talk about why creeds and confessions are roads. Because that's really helpful in terms of, when we read a book, we usually do so in a rather, say, well, there's me and then there's the book and there's ideas in the book and there's me and what I think about those ideas. And that's usually kind of the first step in reading it. But it's really helpful to understand the book, to understand some of the history of the book and why it's written the way it is and how that book has functioned. Because then suddenly when you read it, you can begin to say, oh, it's not just me and this book. It's, if you understand the shape of this book, you know, think, here's an example, Declaration of Independence. Thomas Jefferson writes, all men are created equal and endowed with their creator with certain inalienable rights. Well, if you only have that document and you know a little bit about American history, you could say, well, men, not women, white men, not black men. What's going on here? Well, it's really helpful to understand and then not to dismiss any of that, but then you understand a little bit about John Locke and then a little bit about the Enlightenment and then a little bit about the wars after the Reformation, then a little bit about the Reformation, then a little bit about the history of the Roman Catholic Church, which was, you know, the end of the Roman period into the late Middle Ages. And suddenly those little words are, have this entire history. And now you begin to see, well, now we see the later history and, well, what do we think about these words? Well, we like these words. Well, why do we like these words? So, and that has everything to do with, you all are, you know, some of you are present office bears and some of you are coming office bears and say, well, I got to sign this covenant of office bears and I just read this document and, boy, I was kind of surprised by some of the stuff I read. That doesn't sound like our church. Our church is, our church is our church. And, but then at some point you're going to have to ask, well, how did a community that was shaped by these documents in, you know, the 21st century create City Life Church or at the end of the 20th century Living Stones Church? What's the connection between those? And then you have to ask the question, well, what does it mean for me to sign onto these documents? Does that mean that, you know, well, that's exactly the conversation we have to have. Because that conversation in and of itself is a huge one. So, there's just a get the ball rolling. But I don't know where you all want to begin. It sounds like you're, well, you're summarizing, I think, well, like some of our ethos definitely. So, you have good intuition for where we're at and where we're. I have a couple documents with me that I have enough for everybody, the covenant for office bearers, which is a one page. It's the thing you sign. So, Living Stones leaders have signed that. We haven't and look forward to in a few months. So, they're sort of just looking at that and saying, oh, what are we signing onto? And so, that's where I think the confessions, you know, conversation is big and there's different angles to that confessions conversation. And then, there's like another one here that we'll be reading at our installation service. It'll be, it's like the liturgy for installation. And I feel like it's really full of depth and meaning and helpful that we might even have a separate conversation like reading that and talking about elders and deacons and how church works in the CRC in terms of leadership. And just, you know, discuss and bounce things off of them. So, those feel like two things, like the confessions and then the elders and deacons and how we do leadership. So. Which, where do you want to begin? I personally don't care. So, if anybody has a feeling on that, Dan, anything? I think everyone usually works. All right. Now, let's begin at the beginning. We could start with creation, but let's start with Jesus. How about before creation? No. If you want to talk about the canons of Doric, we'll actually go there. And infralapsarian versus superlapsarian. The firmament. Start there. The firmament. Oh, I've talked a lot about the firmament lately. So, okay. Let's start with Jesus. At the end of the story, Jesus, after the crucifixion and resurrection, at the end of the Gospel of Matthew, is there with about 500 people. And the Gospel of Matthew says, and they worshiped him, but some doubt it. You could pull the entire history of the church right out of that statement. Because, first of all, these are Jews, okay? And the Jews had a very long history, a very brutal history, and one really big idea was beaten into that community over hundreds and hundreds of years of pain and bloodshed that made them completely different from just about everybody else in the ancient world. Any idea what that idea was? Monotheism. Monotheism. You worship only God. I am the Lord your God who brought you out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage. You shall have no other gods before me. You shall not make for yourself a graven image of, you know, so the Jews are really strange in the ancient world. And so you've got, I'll get this whole Old Testament where they're worshiping the Baals and they're, you know, worshiping the gods of Babylon. You have the book of Daniel. They're all supposed to bow down before the image or Nebuchadnezzar's going to throw them in the fiery furnace and for hundreds of years, if there's one thing the Jews learn, worship only God. At the end of the Gospel of Matthew, there's Jesus, crucified, risen from the dead, standing before them, and they worship him. Okay. Jews. What are we supposed to think about? This. And now we have, this is right there, you have the beginning of creeds and confessions because the church, well, so then Jesus ascends into heaven and, well, we thought, well, what does that mean? Well, it means within the cultural frame, he, Genesis 1, I don't understand Genesis, earth, firmly mid, God's temple is above. This is basically the Genesis 1 representation of the structure of the world. And when Jesus ascends into heaven, that means, just like the Apostles' Creed says, he sits at the right hand of God the Father. Well, what does that mean? It means that Jesus is the executor of creation. And Jesus says that at the end of the Gospel of Matthew, all authority in heaven and earth has been given to me, which says that Jesus is, the New Testament church says, Lord. Well, Lord of what? Lord of all. Okay. But these are Jews talking. So they have a problem. And then, in fact, when Jesus was around in the Gospel of John, Jesus says, I'm going away, but what, remember what he says? After he goes away, someone else is coming. A comforter. And this comforter is the Holy Spirit. So now you have God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Spirit, and they're all God. Well, what do you do with this? And so what happens is you've got all of these ideas, and all these ideas are in the minds of people, and they're going all out over the, throughout the Roman Empire, and they're saying, Jesus has risen from the dead, and he should be worshiped, and the Holy Spirit is coming on you. That's basically what the New Testament is about. The New Testament takes the Old Testament, which is, you know, there's one God, and the New Testament people start reading into that Testament again and say, yeah, but we kind of start to see Jesus back there. And so the New Testament people start reinterpreting the Old Testament, and they take these ideas, and they go out into the Roman Empire. And in the Roman Empire, these ideas about, you know, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, well, there's three gods. There's like the Creator God, and there's like Jesus as God, and then Spirit, well, we're full of spirits, and so this is all getting mixed in with everything in the Roman Empire, and all of these different evangelists going out. You've got the Apostle Paul, you've got Apollos, you've got these deacons that got named in Acts 6, they're going out, and so everyone's going out, and people are starting to share ideas, and they're trying to figure out how can we make sense of this whole thing. And these letters get passed around, and these letters take on authority, and that then becomes the New Testament, but that process doesn't stop. At some point around the, you know, 200, about 200 years later, the Church kind of says, we have to set aside certain books that are canon, and you understand that if you understand that the canon of Star Wars, the canon of Harry Potter, because, I mean, part of the real issue with Star Wars is that George Lucas kept breaking canon, and he's the founder, and so then you have all these fights about Star Wars and canon. Well, this is going on in the ancient world, and so then what starts to happen is that the Church, people are having all kinds of ideas, and say, well, what is Jesus? Well, Jesus is a man. Okay, well, what does that mean if he's a man? Actually, in the ancient world, it was much more, well, Jesus is God. Jesus is a God. So we have this God, and this God, and this God. We have three Gods. Well, what then do you do with the Old Testament? Well, and then some people came along and said, hey, get rid of that Old Testament, because that God in the Old Testament, he was a downer. We don't like him. A guy named Marcian did this, and so a whole group of Churches start saying, just get rid of the Old Testament. Let's look at Luke and Paul's writings, and that will teach us the way. Others begin to say, no, you can't do that, because when it went out to the Roman Empire, well, you had Hellenistic thought and Greek thought, you had Plato, and you had Aristotle, and you had Plotinus, and you had all of these other things. And so suddenly, Jesus is, well, Jesus looked like us, but he wasn't really like us, because Jesus had power, and that's the, you know, in Talladega Nights, where they talk about the Jesus they like. I like sweet little baby Jesus. Well, this was going on at a massive level throughout the ancient world, and Churches were all over the place on all of these things. And so some Churches were like, well, I like my Jesus, you know, I like my Jesus divine. And so then they start, and everyone keeps writing these Gospels. And so the Gnostic Gospels, for example, well, Jesus is divine, but what's the problem with Jesus? Well, Jesus has a body, and well, now you take Greek thought, which says that immaterial is holy, and material is subject to decay, and so, well, Jesus never sinned, and so the real hero of the story of Jesus is Judas, because thanks to Judas, Jesus got rid of his body, and then he goes to heaven when he dies, and then that's the Gospel story. If we're good and obedient, we're like Jesus, and we go to heaven when we die. Oh, okay, well, you guys hear that in Churches today, you know. So there's this massive process by which the Church has to get together, and other people are saying, yeah, but if that's your Jesus, then, first of all, you've got to throw away this whole book, and if you throw away this whole old book, Jesus can mean anything. So what do we do? So what they start doing is having councils, and those councils start writing things down and making decisions within the frame of reference of their culture, and that's where you get this idea of a trinity. You have Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, or Father, Son, Holy Spirit, but they're all God. Well, what does that mean? Well, three persons, one essence. Well, what does that mean? Well, actually, they're having that conversation in Greek, and they have understandings of philosophical understandings of what essences are and what persons are, and they continually work this out so they don't break canon. So you have the Old Testament, and then you have the New Testament, and then you have the culture you're dealing with, and you have to get all of these things to work together and not break canon and not break the story, because what tends to happen is that you start going down the road with an idea, and you say, well, Jesus is God, and Jesus is divine, but he's not human. Well, can anybody already see an issue with this? Yeah. What? Well, what about the body? What about the body? We all have bodies. He's not human. What about our bodies? Yeah. What about my life? That was one way that God had to give us to relate to him, to see his holiness, to see his power. The word, the Gospel of John starts saying the word becomes flesh. So if you say, Jesus is God, he's divine and not human, you read the Gospel of John and say, well, we don't really want this, or we're going to change some of these words so it fits in with our scheme. And the rest of the church says, now, wait a minute, Gospel of John doesn't belong to you. You can't just go changing the Gospel of John, or you can't just throw away the Old Testament, because here in the Gospel of Matthew, Jesus says, you know, heaven and earth will pass away before my word passes away, and Jesus quotes the Old Testament more than anybody else in those synoptic gospels. So you can't just throw away the Old Testament. So how can you keep the whole thing together, and how can you keep all the people together? And so they have these councils, and these councils create creeds, and these creeds create formulations. But here's a crucial thing to understand. All these formulations are committed to the language and philosophical categories of the times and places they are made. Now, there's a complication for us, because I don't know about how much Hellenistic philosophy and culture you all have studied. And so now, you join the Christian Reformed Church, and you go up to that table of classes, and you sign your name in the book saying, I'm signing on to those creeds and confessions. And you think, oh, what's in those suckers? And here's the thing. So, Jesus lives, Jesus crucified, dead, buried, that's around 30 A.D. You know, first creeds start coming in the fourth century, so the 300s. And somewhere in here, we get the Apostles' Creed. And if you read the Heideberg Catechism, one of the things that you noted is that the Catechism spends a lot of time on this Apostles' Creed. Now, here's a kicker. The Apostles' Creed isn't in the Bible. Here's another kicker. An articulation of the Trinity is not in the Bible. Now, historically, the Church just says the doctrine of the Trinity is in solution in the Bible. What do we mean by that? It means that the basic components are there, but it's not yet fit together. Well, when does it get fit together? It gets fit together in the process of these creeds, the Nicene Creed, the Council of Nicene. They get together and they decide a whole bunch of things about the Church. And, well, here's the difficulty. What does it mean when there's a big group of people and they're fighting about something, and so, let's say you're having a fight in your church, let's say someone gives you a facility. Oh, great, we have a building now. Isn't this wonderful? And then the next thing, you've got a pile of money to say, we need to remodel this facility. This is usually one of the early church fights any church has. We've got to remodel this. I think the facility should look like this. I think the facility should look like this. So you have a big meeting. How do you probably make a decision? Vote. Vote. I hire an interior designer. First you have to vote. Can we come to agreement by consensus? And then you discover there's a few people that are going to dig in. The church has to be mobbed. Because unless the church is mobbed, the Holy Spirit won't come. So you have a vote. What happens when you have a vote? Some people lose. Why do you? We're never going to have a vote in our church. We're always going to agree by consensus. That's a nice idea. That's a wonderful idea. What's the downside of that idea? You won't see some of this. It won't happen. You'll never remodel the church. Because that person there is mobbed. Well, this is what happens. This is what happens about big things like who is Jesus. And the church says the church has a vote. And these people say, okay, this is how it is. This is who Jesus is. And you all, you lose. They don't go away when they lose. They just become a different segment of the church over here. Now this kind of makes it sound like church history is all about votes. But there's another way to look at it. Alistair McGrath, who's an English scholar, has a wonderful little book called Heresy. And he goes through this process. And what he basically says is, one way you could look at this history is that there's just a group of usually men. Now they're not just white men usually. There's North Africans. It's a fairly ecumenical bunch in the Roman Empire. And a fairly diverse bunch. But it's mostly men. But one of the things that Alistair McGrath makes the point of, he says, you have to understand this is happening over hundreds and hundreds and thousands of years even. And so what the church is learning is that there are dead ends to ideas. If you say Jesus was not fully human, that in time becomes problematic in the church. It doesn't just become problematic theoretically. It becomes problematic pastorally for a lot of the issues that you all decided. Because if Jesus is only a God, then Jesus didn't really suffer. And if Jesus didn't really suffer, then my suffering doesn't really connect up with his suffering. And that becomes pastorally and emotionally and communally really important for a suffering group. And so what Alistair McGrath says is, this finding truth is not just a matter of committees, putting down words, making decisions. This is a matter of, over time, in almost an evolutionary way, the church sorting itself out. And finding truth, because in the long run, the idea that Jesus is not fully human doesn't work. And churches that embrace this idea tend to wither and die and fall away. Here's the thing. We're not just talking about the divinity of Jesus or the humanity of Jesus. We're talking about lots of things about church. We're talking about how the church talks about the Bible. The church believes in what's called organic inspiration. What does that mean? When you hear organic, what do you think about? Food. So what is organic food? True. Natural, without interference from false additives. Or a false, not false, man-made additives. And it gets really hard to define. We all hear organic and say, oh yeah, organic, good. And you go to Costco, it's just organic, organic, organic, organic. Because, you know, organic, yes. What do we mean by organic? Well, that actually gets really complicated to think about. But essentially we say we have a little bit of suspicion about technology when it comes to our bodies and pollution. And so organic means, let's say, no chemical fertilizers. So organic. Well, untouched is kind of the idea here. The idea of organic inspiration is that the Apostle Paul didn't go into a room and say, oh, Holy Spirit, Holy Spirit, Holy Spirit, okay, okay, okay, what should I write to Ephesians? That's not the way it happened. That the Apostle Paul was in relationship with the Church of Corinth. He had visited the Church of Corinth. And he sat down and he wrote a letter to the Church of Corinth. And he was responding. He was responding. And it wasn't, God didn't dictate into his mind all of the words of the letter. I just think of, that's kind of helpful because the thing you think about, he wasn't with a Ouija board or something, waiting for the divine write. That's exactly right. Now, it's really interesting because anybody know the backstory to the Book of Mormon? What's the backstory to the Book of Mormon? So, John Smith went to some revival meetings during the Great Awakening. Realized he didn't like anything that he saw there and kind of decided he was going to go there. No, that's the organic telling. Tell his side. What happened was, God told him to, or the angel of God told him to put his head into a bag. And he was going to find these golden tablets. And he was going to write the Book of Mormon based off of these golden tablets. That's right. And he had to find these seeing stones. And so, the angel Moroni told him where to dig up these tablets. And there were these seeing stones. And he translated the Book of Moroni, you know, the Book of Mormon, into English. Now, why would we really want to have a Bible? Why do we think we would want to have a Bible like that? Well, it's like the opposite of what I always tell people. I think I heard somebody else say this at one point. The Bible didn't drop out of the sky in King James Version. But in that sense, it did. And it's just, this is what it says. That's right. Easy. Exactly. And so, you know, the Bible falls out of the sky. Now we have God's Word. God's Holy Word. These are the words of God. You must follow them. That sounds like a really attractive thing. Read the Book of Mormon. It also fits like their mythology too. Of wanting to be separate from everyone else. You have a book that is inspired, that is given to you from God. It fits the ideology and story that they're telling themselves. That they are separate from the culture that they came from. But the interesting thing about the Mormon scriptures is that they can change them. Yeah. Right? That's right. Not only did it come from above, totally divine, but over time, whoever's in charge can change them. That's right. And so what you often find in religious traditions that endure, is they're going to need checks and balances on this stuff. The Quran as well. Why do good Muslims resist translating the Quran? Anybody know the backstory of the Quran? Muhammad goes off and... Because it wasn't... Because translations aren't written by Muhammad until you read the actual text. Because that's... Which is actually really cool if you think about it. Not only is it the language and the book, but it's also that it was written by him. So you're using the same language of the Quran. So if you really want to be a good Muslim, get working on your Arabic. Because you're not going to connect properly with a book without Arabic. Christianity didn't go this way. In fact, I was watching a lecture by a guy, a Canadian guy, North of Fries. He's dead now. And a really good point. Most of the quotation in the New Testament comes from a translation of the Old Testament in Greek. Right away, Christianity was a trans-cultural religion. Right from the start. And that then gets born out in its history throughout the world. And so with organic inspiration, we don't believe God plopped a book on our desk. Here's the downside of God plopping a book on your desk. Read the Book of Mormon sometime. I don't want to be too... That's on tape. I know. I don't want to be too ungenerous to my LDS friends. But the first time I read the Book of Mormon, I thought, this reads kind of like a knockoff of the King James Bible. It read like a knockoff. But here's the thing. If it's fallen from the sky, Well, you'd think God wouldn't make any grammatical mistakes or spelling mistakes because he's God. Well, you read your Bible, well, that gets very complicated. But the point is, again, that the God of creation and the God of redemption are the same. That God works through history. And this working through history is a messy business. No prophets. The history of the prophets. I love reading prophetic books. And we've been going through the Book of Ezekiel slowly in our middle school class. And sometimes you read in that book and you think, What?