https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=ujBV-9SHiXA

 Okay. All right. Today on my channel, on a rando slot, oops, I just lost your paper. Weston, is it Scopper or Scapher? How do you pronounce your name? It's actually Shaper. Shaper, okay. Shaper, yeah. So Weston, well, let's begin with a little bio because you've never been on my channel before. You sent me a very interesting paper and we just had very interesting conversation before recording, which is always the way it goes. Sometimes I, you know, the US California law requires that I gain your permission to record the conversation, which is a very fair thing, but I can already tell this is gonna be fun. So you start, who are you? Okay, my name is Weston Shaper. I'm 31 years old. I live in Missouri and I'm an aerosol scientist. That's interesting. You're just full of interesting. Oh, wow. Yeah. Boy, what an interesting thing to be during a pandemic, huh? Absolutely. Absolutely. It's a, it's, I joked with, well, I mean, yeah, it's been busy, you can imagine. What we do, I mean, just to give you a brief, our laboratory will test products for clients, but we do many, many other things, consulting or engineering or modeling. There's lots of stuff, but, you know, as COVID hit, there was a wave of products that, you know, people were coming up with and wanting to see if, hey, does this purify the air? What if, you know, what if I add a filter? What if I add UV? You know, everybody just wanted to see if they could, you know, so I don't know if they were making, you know, a lot of people thought they could make money off the pandemic or what, but you know. There's been a lot of money to be made off this pandemic. Probably more than any pandemic before by far. Right. That's true. So, so yeah, it's been busy, which is great. So yeah. That's not what we're here to talk about. Again, every time you open your mouth, just more interesting comes out. This is a problem for a guy like me. So let's limit the frame here and say, okay, well, how on earth did you find my channel? And why do you want to have this conversation? Yes. So I found your channel in 2018 sometime. Sometime in 2018. Yeah. And I stayed quiet. I think I even joined the discord. Well, I think I joined the discord after a year and I just, it sat on my phone and I just wasn't sure. I hadn't even used discord, but I found your, it is a lot. It is a lot. And, but I mean, I've been a little more active as of late, but so I found your channel, I think through searching terms, honestly, I think I was searching, I can't remember what I was searching, but I remember seeing, you know, clicking your video it was some theological word, you know, and, you know, but I mean, it was relevant, you know, why I was watching Jordan Peterson and I was watching other people. And I have this slew, you know, I have a list, just like probably many of your other viewers and you do as well, a list of guys you rotate. You'll listen to their videos or, you know, listen to their podcasts. And you were in my rotation after that, cause I liked the video that I had watched. And what I liked most about you honestly, is just how, well, how many topics you were willing to dive deep into. And also your, you are extremely thoughtful in your responses and you really weigh things in the balances. And I found that, you know, I just thought that was awesome because, you know, and like what I sent you, you know, on the topic of that, the paper I sent you, you know, that stuff can get, people are passionate, you know, about Christianity and religion. Yeah, yeah. And so it's, but to me, you know, a lot of that stuff is just fun to talk about no matter what. And, you know, so it- Well, okay, so let's dial things back a little bit more. How did you grow up in a Christian home? What was that like? Or do you still identify as a Christian? Do you go to church? I mean, some of these kinds of pastoral things that I'm always curious about. Sure. Okay, I've got a, probably a pretty interesting tidbit here. So my mom grew up Methodist in Southern Kansas and my dad grew up fire baptized holiness. And it was a, you know, very secluded group of, let's say holiness, it was a holiness group. And it didn't have the Pentecostal elements. It was more, you know, if you're wearing jewelry, you're probably going to hell. If you're wearing short sleeves, you're going to hell. If you're not wearing pants, you know, stuff like that. And they would have revivals, you know, that whole movement. And it was started by a guy named, I think his name was Benjamin Irwin. And he was sort of, I think he ended up, you know, he was just one of these fantastic characters that had a revival spirit about him. And it caused a tidal wave of Christian fervor, you know, fervor for the Lord. And, you know, there were good and they were really good and not so good things that came out of it. And, you know, they've, the group today has distanced themselves from that person, but they're a Bible school and they're still going. My dad left disillusioned from the church because it was just, it was too much for him. And so they, you know, they probably viewed my mom as the worldly woman that, you know, tore my dad away. But anyways. Oh, those Baptists. Yeah, right. Worldly Baptists. So, yeah, I mean, we, my parents raised my three sisters and I, we went to a Methodist church, left there and start, I probably was spent most of my childhood at a college church at the Nazarene, it's a mid-American Nazarene. It's a college here in the KC Metro. And then when I was in my late teens in college, we went to church of the resurrection, it's a United Methodist church. And then fast forward to today, I got married. I have two kids and we go to a small Baptist church in Missouri. All right, all right, that's good. Is that good? Yeah. Where did you go to college? Oh, Texas Christian University. Okay, interesting. Yeah. So you are, you are, you are middle America. I mean, really, really middle. Yeah, yeah, yeah. I spent a year in New Orleans. So that'd be the only, that'd be the farthest I went out, but you're right. I'm right, exactly. But you're right. Just I-35, that's the highway connecting KC, Oklahoma City, Dallas. Yeah, that was my, that was my trip back and forth home and school. Why, why did you get interested in Jordan Peterson? Well, I found one, the first video I saw of him was a video that just said Canadian professor is, you know, engaging outside of, you know, on a campus. And it was a wild, crazy video that was a little hectic and chaotic to watch. And that was honestly my first take. And I just, it was like, man, this, this poor chap's trying to be reasonable. And, you know, I didn't think much of it. And then, you know, later on his, maybe a news article came out about him. And then I just actively searched him on my own. And then, you know, of course, everyone knows what happened after that. He, he rose to, to, to prominence and had a huge impact on a lot of people and myself included. And I felt like he was, he was addressing, he was addressing a void in sort of the, I don't know, the, he was telling, he was saying things that people were fascinated by and clearly needed and want to hear. And so I felt like he's so, I don't know where he is on my map, but he is hitting on something that I feel like the church should listen to, you know? And, so yeah, and I still listen to him. Well, we have, we have limited time. And so I won't, I won't take too much of your time. So what was it you wanted to talk to today about? Well, I'd say the most, the theological issue I'm most passionate about is the creation account in Genesis. And it just fascinates me how all the different ways of reconciling the Genesis account with modern science. And the paper I sent you, you know, touched on it. I tried to survey all the main views that you hear in about Genesis. You know, there's the fundamentalist view that God made the world in seven days. And, you know, and then young earth creationism, there's old earth creationism and theistic evolution, intelligent design, some of these, you know, are related. There's branches off, branch, you know, there's branches off those big topics. And then, you know, the two creation thought where, you know, Genesis one is one creation, and there was a male and female, you know, male and female in general were made. And then Adam and Eve were made, there's that thought. And so I was just most interested in all these ideas. I liked guys like Hugh Ross, he's an old earth creationism, an extremely intelligent guy, even guys like Kent Hovind who are a little rough. He's a younger creationist who, you know, likes to get in spats with atheists and talk about evolution and younger. And it's just, it's a very engaging topic. And, you know, the other thing I like about it is it's not part of the central tenet of Christianity that it's somehow necessary for salvation for you to know what's going on. And so for me, that kind of frees it up where we can discuss it. And, you know, as much as I've read and thought about it, and I'm still open, you know, I still chew on all kinds of aspects and how science relates to the account in Genesis. You know, who's the literary Adam and who's the historical Adam? William Lane Craig just recently did, he wrote a book on the historical Adam. And he goes into this big mytho historical genre of Genesis and tries to wait, find, you know, who Adam was. Is he mostly a literary figure or is he historical? And of course, you know, there's good arguments for both. And that's, you know, yeah. So after I had, you know, exhausted my, all probably as I had, you know, seemingly thought of every sort of way to view the Genesis account, I thought of a way to reconcile it that I thought was relatively new. I couldn't find it. I couldn't find this idea that I laid out. And I honestly searched for a long time and I thought, well, why wouldn't this work? Why can't this new idea work? And what I called this idea was fallen earth creationism, just as, you know, just next to younger creationism and older creationism, because it didn't really fit those boxes. And I really emphasized the fall. And hold on one second. I was just, I just had my paper up and I wanna make sure I don't, I stay organized here for my, when speaking to you, but. Are you sure you shared a paper with me? Is that out on the internet that I can put a link to it in the notes? I mean, is it on Google drive or something like that? Not yet. Okay. But that is my next task. Okay. To place this on. And I, in fact, I took, you know, I took your time slots before, you know, I, before this obviously, and my dad has played an integral role. He's sort of my back and forth. My dad and I are just theological buddies. And we just go back and forth and back and forth. And we could speak hours on end. Our wives are like, oh, come on, not this again, you know, when we get together. And, you know, God bless them because, you know, we do, we'll get into it. And, you know, sometimes my wife will be like, now look, there's gonna be a lot of people at this event. Don't spend all your time, maybe talking to your dad about Genesis or something. And so I'm like, okay, you're right. You're right. I need to tone it down. And so, so we, you know, I just bring that up because he helped me craft a lot of, a lot of the thinking and, but coming back to what you said, yes, I plan to get something that you can link to as quick as possible. And, you know, hopefully before this, if you post this video, you know, before that, before then or soon after. Yeah. Well, I'll hold, I'll hold off if it's, if it's, because I already know this is an interesting conversation. And I think some people listening to it will be very interested. I mean, I have to admit, I got your email last night. I was home. So I just kind of skimmed it in a few minutes that I had. And I thought, oh, this is, this is really very interesting. And it sort of intersects in some ways with my, some of the secret, sacred self thinking that I've been doing because I, you're right. I had not, I had not seen this approach to that dilemma. And the, you know, when you, the way you state the problem is something that I have seen a certain degree of willful avoidance with theologically that lurks behind these issues. It gets raised sometimes, it gets raised sometimes by celebrity atheists with animal death before the fall. But, you know, fundamentally as, as theistic evolutionists and many will point out to a degree, our, our physiology is dependent upon decay. I mean, the largest organ in the human body is the skin and skin relies on cellular death to function. So these categories, these scientific categories of death are, you know, they, they play some, they play some funky things with the modernist image. So your fall on earth creationism, I, again, I skimmed it. I thought, whoa, this is interesting. This is a, this is a very new approach. Well, I'm, I'm, I'm excited to hear that because, you know, one of the litmus tests, you know, was to ask people, ask people that were, you know, that, that had, that ask people like yourself, that, that, that have chewed on this issue a lot before. And, you know, the, the big, you know, heavy hitters on this topic, like Mike Beehy and guys who've wrote books about, you know, you've mentioned, you know, you've mentioned Francis Collins on your channel recently. He's a big theistic evolution guy. He, you know, these guys are sort of like figure heads in my mind for all of these different ways to reconcile the genesis account. And what I found, you know, I found pros and cons for each of them. And like you said, there's, there's things that, that just are unavoidable. If you, if you subscribe to theistic evolution, like Francis Collins, or he likes to call it bio logos, there, you can't escape from the millions of years of death and decay that supposedly existed before humans came along. Or, you know, maybe some of the, the, the dark human history for the tens of thousands of years leading up to now that, that existed. And so, so, you know, you got to tread lightly in my mind before you go and say that that was God's creative process. That was very good as described in Genesis. Yep. And atheists make a lot of hay from this, these differences and even, you know, very, you know, John Vervecky, I would classify very much as a person of peace. You know, John Vervecky and part of his non theism for a lot of people, the, the image of a good God seems inconsistent with the level of suffering that one has to presuppose in almost all of the evolutionary narratives that we currently possess. So, I mean, these are, these are not small issues. No, no. One thing I wrote, I did, I don't think it's in the paper, but I know I wrote it in my book was that, you know, there are big issues in Christianity that, that, you know, different generations are tasked with tackling. And in my mind, this issue, the reconciliation of Genesis with modern science has been a big topic for the last 150 years, basically since Darwin's origin of the species. But before that, it, it, it, it wasn't, I mean, they, they, it wasn't an issue that, that, that, you know, sent shockwaves through the laity, you know, making people question whether they actually believed it or not. I mean, you know, one of the reasons this issue, this issue appealed to me was, you know, every time I heard a non, you know, a, well, an atheist or someone who just didn't believe in Christianity, it was one, it was a go-to topic that they would go to just to tell people why they didn't believe in Christianity. Well, I don't believe in it because I opened the book in the first chapter is fiction. The first couple of chapters are fiction. They clearly aren't true because I, I, you know, that, and, and, and so, you know, that causes Christians to, you know, we've had it easy in, in, in many ways, Christians, at least on this topic where we haven't needed to defend it necessarily. And so many of us are caught off guard. And I wouldn't say that that statement is true, let's say in the past, I don't know, 10 years, 15 years, but, but it was true for a while in, in, in the 20th century and the 19th and 20th century. And so, you know, it's, I feel like if, if it's going to be something that is brought up by people who don't believe, then, you know, Christians need to address it. And like you said, Christians are, are not, you know, they're not eager to, to touch on the topic necessarily. And they, it might make them defensive. I mean, it made me defensive when, you know, as a younger person. And, but I just thought, well, I, we have to, we have to think about this. This is the foundation of the faith. And, and in one of your recent videos, you mentioned that, you know, the, the, the story in Genesis are, you know, in many ways, the bedrock that, that helped you make sense of the rest of the story, you know? And I'm reminded of when Paul mirrors Adam and, and Christ over and over again, and in, to, in first Corinthians. And I think, and he clearly makes this, this, this, this comparison. And if you're going to compare Christ who we believe is real, well, is Adam real? And if Adam's real, well, then what else is, you know, how do we reconcile that? So, yeah, I mean, why don't you give us the skinny here? I mean, we only have a half hour left, so, and it's going to be, I mean, I can anticipate tons of pushback and skepticism and yeah, buts and pushing it away, but, so let's get, let's get the skinny. What on earth do you mean by fallen earth creationism? Okay. So, so the first thing I'd say, I guess, is that, you know, Adam and Eve are treated as historical by the, by figures in the New Testament. Christ, you know, alludes to the creation account by saying, you know, in the beginning, God made them male and female. The genealogies are present and, you know, Abraham's who's a Genesis character is in both genealogies. You know, you at least have to, you know, think about if he's, you know, if Abraham's real or other, you know, Genesis characters real, all the characters in, in Hebrews by faith hall of fame, you know, the, all those characters, the flood is also, you know, in this broad question of, of his historicity. So I, I think it's, it's, I argue that it is important to have a historical Adam because, because of these theological repercussions of not having one. It's not necessarily that scientifically I have a great argument for Adam being historical. It's that I think he's necessary for the, for the framework of Christianity. And it, you know, or if he isn't, it, it's a hard sell or it has been a hard sell. And so the way I reconcile that issue is by saying, okay, well, let's take, let's take Genesis as people have taken Genesis for the last 2000 years, you know, minus the, the most recent 150. It's true. It's, it could be seven days, maybe, maybe, maybe not. But let's just say God created the earth in seven days. He created Adam and Eve in the garden. He created a tree of life. He created a tree of knowledge of good and evil. He created the serpent. He created the scenario where they, you know, in which they sin, they disobey God. Well, I emphasize of, I emphasize the fall as the crucial event in creation. And most of the creation views emphasize, let's say the first chapter or first two chapters trying to explain, well, you know, day one was this long or day two, you know, it's in sequence. They have all these great arguments that seem to work. But in my mind, the fall is key. And if you think about what the fall is, the fall is this choice that Adam and Eve were given. And it somehow, you know, I don't, I won't try to flesh out that choice here right now, but totally, cause there's a lot to cover, but they, God wanted, our created an aspect of humans was free will. And this decision allows, it was almost like had to be necessary as to make sense of human nature, our free will. And so God gave us this choice, knowing that we would fall. And we did, we desired the, you know, it was desirable to us to eat of this fruit. And what the fruit seemed to gave us was odd. It made Adam and Eve ashamed of their nakedness. And then God describes, you know, when he kicks Adam and Eve out of the garden, he sort of lists things that are gonna happen to each of the players in that story. You know, Eve's gonna have trouble in childbirth. It's gonna be painful. And she's going to be submissive to her husband. He's gonna have dominion over you. The man is going to work at the soil to get what he needs. No longer a free ride. And brambles and bushes, you know, thorns and thistles. These, what I think is being described by God here is, these are the consequences of your actions. And because you have done this, a new fallen version of creation has to be made. A fallen creation that allows for you to write God out of the equation a little bit, so that you can look up into the stars and not just know that God created it. It's part of the decision that they made. And so there's a couple of perspectives to look at this. If you're viewing the fall, and again, this is under the umbrella of fallen earth creationism. So what I'm, yeah. If you're viewing the fall from God's perspective, God cast Adam and Eve out of the garden. And after they left, God being, you know, outside of time and space of the creation we live in created the cosmos. He created from the Big Bang all the way up until, let's say 6,000 years ago, when Adam and Eve, let's say came onto the scene. That's God's perspective. And from Adam and Eve's perspective, there was no Big Bang. God created the earth in seven days. And they didn't see, when they walked out of the garden, they transitioned into this fallen creation 6,000 years ago. And I imagine, you know, the banks, the riverbanks of the Euphrates are kind of like the wardrobe in C.S. Lewis, The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe. You know, they're walking along and the, you know, nice elements of the garden transition to, you know, thorns and thistles that hurt their feet. And pretty soon, you know, they're longing to be back in the garden. So they look back and there is no garden. You know, the children in C.S. Lewis's Chronicles of Narnia feel back and they don't feel the cold pine of Narnia anymore. It's just a wardrobe with coats. And so they had been locked out. I mean, maybe for lack of a better word, they left through some portal. And I think, you know, the best analogy would be the wardrobe in some ways. And so there's a lot of aspects here, but here's, that's the gist. That's the meat, let's say, of the idea, the idea that the very good creation is distinct from the fallen creation. And it's distinct at least in their descriptions by God and in Genesis. And so, you know, this ties back to what we've been talking about, these other ways to reconcile the creation account. Do you reconcile very good? Would God call what maybe we describe in our using, you know, mock science as very good? There's a lot of unnecessary suffering. And in my mind, the fall is the cause of that suffering. And by making the two creations distinct, the fall is causally prior to our universe, but not necessarily temporally prior to our universe, if that makes sense. Yes, yes, yes. I get what you're painting here. And it is fascinating. And part of the reason I really wanted to do this is, you know, I've been talking to Grim Grizz about, I mean, and developing on my channel. I mean, what is, my channel is sort of the third lobe, the third hemisphere of my brain. It's sort of become that. And the consciousness Congress out there in YouTube land is far smarter and well read and better educated than myself. And so when you describe this, it sort of relates to a lot of, so much in the ancient world, various flavors of Gnosticism, of dualisms, and so I really wanted to get your idea out there because the comments are going to be, the comments are going to be excellent because there's a number of people who listen to my channel are gonna hear this and they're gonna, now there's gonna be a lot of, yeah, buts, I don't think so. And there's gonna be a lot of attacking it sort of from a scientific perspective. I get that because it's sort of a, it's in some ways analogous to a lot of alien, you know, human beings were placed here by the aliens. And, you know, actually I've been, I've been using videos on it. That's true. But yes, you're right. So, but people are gonna take this in a lot of different ways. And I think actually that's exactly the kind of fruitful engagement that will, you know, that will test this and probably, I suspect, you know, you'll hopefully you'll have some of the joy that I have with my channel in that you'll get a lot of new ideas and they'll test your ideas and you'll have to respond to them. And I mean, that's the fun of this game. And it sounds like you already have that with your father to be able to go back and forth and challenge each other. And although at the same time, it's always a little unnerving to have this idea that is sort of like a child that you bring out to the world. And then the world says, ah, I had a friend once who was a, he was an early elementary teacher and he used to describe to me how parents would come in for the first parent teacher meeting. And they were just anxious to hear the teacher say, your child is the most brilliant, wonderful creation I've ever seen. And the kid, the teacher says, hey, child's doing okay. It's like, what, he's our child. So this kind of testing is kind of hard, but it's absolutely the best thing for what I love. I love the way you, I mean, I've got huge, I got huge questions about this thing, but I love it. I'm so high in openness, it's part of the reason, but I love it in that this is a fresh idea. This is a, and not only that, but you've nicely, I mean, you've locked it into a C.S. Lewis analogy, which of course is definitely gonna colonize me, but it's a, boy, it just kind of, it just kind of expands the mind, which is I think what you really need when a large significant public conversation sort of paints itself into a corner. And so some fresh insight and some fresh wind and some fresh thinking and some honest thinking is welcome. And that's what you're bringing to this. And so I dare bet some wonk out there, because right now on my channel, we've got all these people who are hot for orthodoxy. And so are eagerly paging through church fathers and rummaging through ancient heresies. Someone's gonna come up and say, ah, this is the, and that I think will actually prompt you for some, oh, well, let me check out what they wrote. You know, 1500 years ago about this. And I think it'll all make your arguments and your ideas better and stronger. So I love this. Again, I said, I scrolled through your paper last night, thought, oh, this is fun. It is fun. That's right, it's fun. And there's several, let's say I have an item, let's say I have a item, I've itemized a bunch of implications here of what I've described to you. And I'd like to at least touch on them because I think you'll get a kick out of them and find them interesting. Like how do we interpret this element of the Bible if we entertain the thought that something like FEC, which is what I call Fallen Earth Creationism is true. So would you like me to go through those? Yeah, yeah, do something, give me something. Oh, okay, okay. So if something like that's true, well, then, you know, the title of the first man and the first woman, you know, the mother of all humans, the title that Eve's given, I claim in FEC that the fall was so bad, those titles were stripped of them and they were stripped of them by placing them here 6,000 years ago, where now there's already humans here. You're not the first man in this creation. You are the first man that God created and you are causally the human that gave rise to humanity. But in this fallen world, you will not be recognized as so. And, you know, there's a few other interesting tidbits that I discovered later on in Genesis. So, for example, Cain, when he was cast out away, God cast him away, it says he found a wife and a city. And the traditional reconciliation of that verse or interpretation of that verse is that, well, Adam and Eve had tons of kids. So of course, Cain had a wife that was related to him. You can't avoid it, right? Well, in FEC, Cain avoids it. Cain, you know, possibly a son of God, marries a daughter of a man. And which brings me to my next item, the chapter five in Genesis. When the sons of, okay. When the sons of God came into the daughters of men, there's a few interpretations on this verse. And the popular one is that, I think this is true, the current popular view is that the sons of God are fallen angels or, you know, some type of, you know. Yeah. And I- Everyone always writes in Michael Heiser to me because, you know, I mean, and I know Michael Heiser, I've never gotten in depth with him because basically he's reading the Bible. That's what Michael Heiser is doing. And so you've got these other divine beings. Well, who are these other divine beings? They're not God, they're sort of gods. But how does, you know, I mean, cause when you really get into a lot of this stuff, things get weird quick. And what you're doing is bringing a little bit of science into this weirdness or maybe a little science fiction into this weirdness. And I think it's fun. I think it's provocative and I think it's potentially fruitful. So- Sure. Yeah. Honestly, yeah. If it gets people discussing and chewing on these issues, that's what I think, yeah, absolutely. But going back to the Nephilim, we were saying the most popular view right now is that they were fallen angels that came into the daughters of men. But there is another interpretation. And if you go back and look at the church fathers, there's a split. There are church fathers that don't believe that they were, you know, fallen angels. There are fathers that think that the sons of God refers to Sethites and that the daughters of men refers to Caneites. And that, you know, Cain's line is not, you know, being given, not being recognized as a God lineage. And so that's a, you know, back and forth, I can't, off the top of my head, I can't remember, but there's a few in each of those categories. And this is slightly different. This is, what I guess I'm implying here is that the sons of God refers to people who descended from Adam, who entered our creation from the very good creation. And that the daughters of men is referring to evolved up man. And the verse that I, there's a verse that I skipped that is very crucial. In chapter four, it says, and men began to call on the name of the Lord. Now, wait a second, Adam, you know, when did they not call on the name of the Lord? You know, previously. Well, maybe that's referring to evolved humans. This is when these men began to call upon the name of the Lord, when the sons of God now coexist with them. And, because we already know Adam and his descendants call on the name of the Lord. And so that's just a way you can interpret that verse. The, this, FEC has implications on the flood and, you know, is the flood global? Well, I would argue for a regional flood, which I think is a popular view, but there's an interesting tie that, or there's an interesting piece that FEC gives on the regional flood perspective, which is that the goal that God had in removing everyone but Noah, all of Adam, all of the descendants of Adam, except for Noah, is accomplished with the regional flood, if something like FEC is true. And I mean, there's no need to wipe out the Aborigines in Papua New Guinea, 6,000 years ago, if, you know, if they're not committing the horrible evil that's spoken about in the fifth chapter of Genesis. Or if in fact they're simply, oh gosh, this, I don't know, I don't know if you have any understanding of just, I mean, I can see Jewish, I can see people, I can see Jewish communities get really interested in something like this because some of these valences, some of these valences sort of gain resonance with all sorts of ancient theologies. Oh, I know. It's fascinating. I mean, yeah. So, well, like take, I mean, along that line, yes, the flood account, there is this element, and this is interesting, what God said, man shall not live forever. My spirit will not abide in them forever. Their years will be 120 years. I suggest that the reason the ages decreased is simply from interbreeding with evolved man who lived only 70, 80 years. And when you're interbreeding with, you know, when you live 900 and your spouse lives to be 80, your offspring are probably gonna be somewhere in between. And so, yes, I mean, you know, in some ways, some of the things I'm describing to you are clever, but you know, the interesting thing about some of these things I'm telling you, I did not discover these potential clever ways to view some of these elements until after I had thought, until after my dad and I had thought of the idea, just referring to what's happening with the fall in Genesis. So, there's another important point that I think I should make. There's evidence, or there's support. There's biblical support for the idea that there are two creations. We as Christians wait for a new creation. That's what the Bible tells us. That's what the New Testament tells us, that we await a new creation, a new heaven and a new earth. Now, wait, why? If this is the very good creation, surely all you need to do is reconcile it and Christ would reconcile it. But maybe we as humans do not know the extent to which the fall permeated our existence, permeated the creation. And there's an, I'm saying going into my next, my next, I guess, clever tidbit, which is that Moses is sort of viewed as the author of the Pentateuch or at least Genesis. Well, yeah. And in my mind, I'm gonna paint a picture here, and this is all hypothetical, but this is how I imagine Genesis being written, assuming something like FEC is true. Moses is sitting around with his think tank, and these are guys are the top guys in, that know what's going on. You know, they've remembered, they know what their fathers told them, they know what their grandfathers told them and so on. So they're putting together all the ideas. They're like, well, what do we know about the first things? You know? And so Moses is like, you know, he might know the most, but he needs these other guys to put in anecdotes. Well, through this collaborative effort, this collaborative effort was only achieved because Adam himself successfully passed on the story of the fall, okay? And the reason that might be important, let's say, to FEC is look at the description of the fall. It doesn't say explicitly everything that happened. I mean, science describes things that are clearly, you would describe as not good or fallen. And yet they're not described in the Bible. One of the criticisms to my idea that, you know, someone might say is these things, much of what you're saying is just not in the Bible. Well, maybe here's why. Adam lost the perspective that God had. Adam left the perspective, he left the garden, let's say, leaving along the banks of the river that flowed out of Eden. Maybe he's just strolling along with Eve along the Euphrates. And he notices when he turns back, not only is there no garden, there's just a bunch of tributaries that lead to into the hills. And he doesn't know where Eden went, but that doesn't matter. From his personal perspective, God made him, God made him. So when he sees some weirdo that only lives 80 years old, maybe that's doing something totally foreign to him, he doesn't need to reconcile that with his mind. He knows for sure that God made him and Eve was made from his rib, okay? So when he passed this story down, him and the people around him would be insulated much for a while of the larger creation. And so they wouldn't describe what happened in the fallen creation. They would only describe what happened in the creation that they lived in, the very good creation. And then that, yes, they could maybe describe things as they saw them when they entered the fallen creation. So we lose a perspective, but it's because the story came from Adam, if that makes sense. Yeah, yeah, yeah. It's Adam's perspective. Yeah. So I found that refreshing. To be honest with you, let me just say, I did, like many young men, go through a period where I was less, I took less of a traditional view. I just did, I needed to. Yeah. I was deep into the sciences and I just thought, this seems, I had the thing, a Francis Collins book on my bookshelf and other guys like that, other intellectuals that were sort of science guys, just immersed in science. And those guys are, I, so it's odd for me to say that here I am describing, or maybe somehow the picture is that I'm trying to, oh, reconcile this traditional view that many people might view outdated, but I'm not, that's not where the spirit of this idea is coming from. The spirit of this idea is just fun, or, well, it's fun for me, but really just fascination. How about that? Fascination is really where it's coming from. And so I guess I just wanna say that just in case, I'm not married to this idea. I really would just want to argue that at the very least, see this survey of ideas, young earth, older, theistic evolution, intelligent design, why not this as an option, at least? Yeah. Yeah, I love it. I don't, I see huge, like I said, I see huge issues with it. And so my point here- No, no, no, no. Yeah, my point here is not to debate it at all. I want to allow you to present it because I wanna get it out there because I want people to play with it. Because the point that you just finished making, which is something that I immediately thought of is, well, that's right, because another creation is coming. And in some ways, we've got issues at both ends of the Bible. We're not quite sure what's before it. And we certainly don't know what's after it. And again, almost everything, all the descriptions of before are evocative, much more than descriptive. All the descriptions of the new heavens and the new earth, they're all evocative, much more than descriptive. Lion will lay down with the lamb and no marriage or giving in marriage. And so this very much gets into apocalyptic. It gets into, no, let me, I just have to ask you one thing before we're out of time. Okay? This is important. Are you into psychedelics? No. I didn't think so. And that's really important to say because I know where this is gonna go. Right now, out in the broader world, it's like, the dude definitely took some mushrooms. He took some ayahuasca. Now he's got new, and I knew, I know, I thought where this dude is from. No, no, no, I don't think he's been on the mushrooms or the ayahuasca. This is a scientist looking at the Bible, thinking creative thoughts and saying, hey, here's an idea we can play with. Let's see how, let's see. And in many ways, I think that's sort of how theology should work. Well, here's an idea. Well, let's run it through the Bible and see what other things illuminate. And I just find this kind of thing just utterly fun. And I want more people to play with you. That's what I want. Okay. Well, let me make one last point that might be a good way, like a good thought to sort of end on. Okay. And that is just when Paul's describing Adam he's mirroring Adam and Christ. Christ, we aren't privy to all the wonderful effects of Christ's sacrifice. We are saved as Christians, but we still live in the fallen world. The effect of Christ happened in an event in his, or the sacrifice that Christ made happened at a point in time, but the effect that Christ's sacrifice had spans time. It transcends time. So does in my mind, Adam's fall. Adam's, the effects of the fall also do the same thing. And so I guess I just want to mirror that like Paul does because so it doesn't sound so foreign, this idea that maybe if, just like we can't see the, if all the fruits that are given to us due to Christ's sacrifice, and we also can't see maybe properly all the effects that the fall had. And as Christ left this, as Christ transcends this time limited existence, Adam similarly entered this time limited existence. So. I, and again, I see it on the other end too. In many ways, creation 2.0 begins on Easter. And in some ways, Yes. You know, Christ pulls us through himself into the new creation. So, oh yeah, I, this is so much fun. Okay, so maybe we'll have creation number one and creation number two. This is the language I use. The resurrected crisis creation 2.0, but you're basically saying, what was creation 0.5 or what was, you know, on the, and there is again, there is a huge history of imaginative thinking, especially before the modern age in terms of, you know, this is why the limitation of modern thinking has been so crippling on theology because it just put us in this little iron box. And at the same time, it limited heresies. So, I mean, this is just too much fun. Anyway, I'm sorry. I've got somebody waiting for the next one. So, I will send you this and you get whatever things you want ready to be put in the notes and we'll wait to publish this until you're ready because I want you to have some of my joy in terms of the using YouTube as the third lobe of your consciousness Congress. So, okay. Okay. Awesome. Sounds great. It was great talking to you Wes, wonderful. You too. All right, you too.