https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=_WqdrvNb8lI

 decide what to do with it. That's what we that's what I usually do. Sounds good to me. So how are you feeling? I definitely feel a lot better than when I originally Messaged you at that point. I had been awake like all night. I Can get insomnia insomnia. I don't know what the term is. I can have insomnia sometimes I Don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know Like sleep is so necessary for regulating your mood and and I can so easily Get out of that Cycle. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah, it's a sleep. Sleep is a really big deal. It really is So so where do you where do you want to begin? I mean, I really liked what He said it didn't get any traction on the discord, but I really liked what you wrote about about religion, I thought it was I thought it was sensitive and honest and Those are two good things Yeah that It was kind of funny because I sent you that one video or linked you that one video that I said I'd watched three times technically listen to because I don't ever watch him but And that's beside the point and then there was two or three that were after it in a in a kind of like they all fit together and It was weird because like I'm never up-to-date on anything that I'm listening to I always fall terribly behind for whatever reason and I'd actually started listening to those after I wrote that thing and It Struck me how they all all the videos sort of coincided with that piece that I had wrote and It's really weird because it it I Didn't even know that I was necessarily thinking about it, but it boiled out in a dream which is where all my my weirdest thinking happens and so I I Remember I woke up at 5 in the morning and I ran in here to my laptop and I just wrote out Like so many words and there was zero punctuation to it and it was just randomly rambling and in When I woke up the next morning and read through it I could see the thread that I had and then I started slowly editing it and making it where other people could read it and And and then Started watching your videos and they all started like piecing together in really weird ways and I don't know I don't know what that is super density Well, why don't we why don't we start with your story tell me a little bit about growing up the family that you grew up in My growing up story is His clunky Well, I mean I think I should preface I think I told you previously that you know I'm atheist and like so have like these disconnections with which that I don't necessarily know how to bridge certain gaps And I think a lot of it stems from my childhood necessarily by the way, you know as brought up so You know firstly My parents were not super religious at first Like we didn't go to we didn't go to church But my grandmother was religious and my grandfather too, but my grandmother was the one that I had the most interaction with and she would tell me she was southern Baptist which Reflecting back on it seems like very how would I say like materialistic religion like everything's very literal Like when there's thunder God dropped a book, you know when when it's raining He was taking a shower or something so like everything was very very literal and and Tangible yet not tangible, you know, so I had this kind of disconnection of like this stuff isn't really here And then I remember when I was about five years old We always had Christmas at my grandmother's house and the whole family would collect my aunts and uncles Everyone gathered together and they're sitting there and they're telling us about Santa and they're telling me Santa Claus and And they're explaining to me that he comes down this chimney and here's five-year-old me and I'm looking at the chimney And it's like the flu is like the size of a small dinner plate and I'm like as far as I know Santa Claus is rotund. How is he getting through here? And they say oh he just does and I'm like now I want to know literally How does he get through here and and so my mother and grandma they kind of explained to me That his body's like Plato and he can push his way through so I start imagining like a love craft Ian, you know thing pushing through and like in like an octopus is the way I've envisioned it and I Was like that is creepy. So so now I have Cthulhu Santa, you know coming into the house in the middle of the night So that was very odd for me But I was like, okay magic, you know, it's it's a it's a nice catch-all for explaining things that we don't understand Of course, I didn't think of it in this detail at that time, but you know, it's stuck with me and then on Christmas Day I Got it was probably in the next year. I don't really know because you know childhood is screwy, but I got a gift and it was a remote control like truck thing and You know parents will give you some from parents some from grandma and then some that are from Santa and they messed up Because the one that they gave me from Santa would not fit through a chimney So I was like you're a smart little kid I was a little bastard I questioned everything so So then I was like, wait a second This remote control truck is not Plato What's going on now and I wouldn't let it go and so they pulled me to the side and they said look Santa Is not real, but don't ruin the magic for all your cousins and and and whatnot So now I'm sitting here Sitting aside watching all these other people believe in something that isn't real that my parents have told me that isn't real and that sort of affected me a lot and then About the time I was seven or eight my parents Joined a religion that was was like very literal Judeo-Christian It was like like a messianic Jewish thing, but But sort of inverse like instead of messianic Jewish. It was like Christian, but they still adhere to Like feast of tabernacles, you know, I thought it was like the thing where like we had the Thing like we had that And we would celebrate Passover and like all these Jewish holidays, but we would use the anglicized titles for them and So we could celebrate Christmas anymore And we weren't allowed to partake in Christmas and in typical Christian holidays like Easter was gone Christmas was gone. And at this point, I can't remember if there's other holidays, but That's beside the point and but there was still the big family get-together that occurred And so now I got to sit on the side and not participate in Christmas And watch the people believe in the things that I didn't believe in so it just it was like it was like an extra layer of disassociation from this this weird thing that's going on and And And then ultimately by the time I Grew up they just kind of faded from that religion and stopped going so it's like it I don't even understand the value in that it's just like layers and layers of just being disassociated from the ability to believe in like the other things that people believe in and So, I guess I'm like I'm technically a millennial But I'm just like right on that threshold between a Gen X or in a millennial so I'm still from the generation of atheists that it's it's just generalized skepticism versus the more updated atheism where it's like The new atheism isn't about skepticism it's about Unseating the previous power so that they can ascend to the point of power So it's like so like you'll see like intersectionality, you know They want to use atheism to tear down the West so that they can it's just it's nonsense but it's not sort of the atheism that that I grew up with and So like now I even look at atheists. I'm like y'all are all freaking religious like everyone's religious everywhere I look like people just have these these really strict religious beliefs and I'm I I don't know. It's weird. Hmm That's very interesting so college high school I Don't know I have this this Unnecessarily overblown like anti-authoritarian bent to me so Like I did not like school Even though they considered me one of the smarter students I Think a good example is I failed art class even though I was like The art teacher considered that I could draw better than her like like I could draw infinitely better than her And I'm not just to brag I'm just using it as an example because I don't even draw anymore But I did not want to be tall told to draw a freaking bowl of fruit Like I couldn't be interested in that. I'm like, it's a bowl of fruit, you know and so so I'm told to draw a bowl of fruit and instead I ended up drawing like some Nonsensical like dragon whatever, you know, whatever teenagers are into and then you know ultimately fail because it's not a bowl of fruit So so I ultimately ended up dropping out of high school because I hated it and then I'm extremely dyslexic and so numbers are like really hard for me and Like I struggle to read a lot. Yeah, I read I actually read a lot I just do it slowly and clunkily and And then my dad he wanted me to go to to college so bad And my my dad's an electrical engineer. So it's like numbers all the way down And he enrolled me in a bunch of this stuff and he like so badly wanted me to be be an engineer or something stem because that's money right It just directly translates to money. This is a degree to get paid. And I went up there and dropped all the classes and he was so mad at me. But I mean, that's just that's just me. So I've always, you know, kind of Done my own thing and I think that also Ultimately feeds into My inability to Adhere to other people's rigid belief systems. I mean perceived as rigid. I don't know how rigid they are So, what have you what have you been doing for work I'm actually a rancher. We run dairy cows goats we were doing sheep for a while, but I got out of sheep, but in my my wife also She works and Makes great money. I don't know. I mean work is work Yeah, like I do it do what I do. I just but it's not something I Necessarily think about a lot and whenever someone starts talking about their work. I'm always just like this is such a boring subject So you I mean you obviously watch YouTube or listen to YouTube What's what's the life of your mind? Like what kinds of things are you interested in? um well, obviously somehow I got started listening to you and I think Like at this point it's pretty cliche to say that you know something started by hearing Jordan Peterson, but And to be honest like I Distilled his stick out really quick and and moved on from him because he doesn't he's pretty repetitive but I think what got me is he was he was on the Joe Rogan podcast and he explained God to me in a way for the first time that I could ever ever understand it because like I'm sort of a hobby psychologist like I have like a lot of psychology books that I've read and and Actually a lot of economics books by I consider economics like a subset of psychology like the people who add too many numbers to it End up getting lost but that's beside the point What I'm trying to get at is he the psychological significance of God is what he was going for and that really worked for me because it was like his own Joe Rogan and he said God is a collection of all the things that worked He more or less explained it in an evolutionary process. So he says, you know if you got a village and the guy who did the things that worked the what the best that everyone tries to emulate is the hero and Then when you have, you know everyone from within the various cities You know all the things that correlated between the heroes gets distilled into the legend and And when all the legends have all their stuff distilled down into one eventually you get to the God now It's like that makes freaking sense. You know that actually makes sense to me, you know, it's it's the the ideal of the ideal of the ideal it's it's the highest point to which you aim at and That spoke to me because that's always the way I've looked at the world, you know, you know one of the biggest differentiating factors between like someone who is Extremely like left-wing socialist type and then someone who's like, you know over here it's it's hierarchy versus equality you know that sort of intersection and and and I Not intentionally. It's just the way I am I tend to see people as winners and losers and so when I see someone who's who's failing, you know, I might try to To to tell them, you know or help them or you know advise them and whatnot But you know, I still in my mind categorize them as loser and and you know They need to figure out a way to help themselves and you know people who are winners theoretically They're doing something right. You should try to emulate them. And so it's like, you know, what's the absolute top of the hierarchy is Is the ultimate ideal and so when he explained it that way it made sense to me and And well, I'm using a lot of his terminology that I didn't have before abstractly. It's it's the way I viewed the world and and then from there I started listening to Jonathan pageau which I Being a very artistic minded person like like I'm so dyslexic if I'm reading a book and there's a number there My mind will say big number or little number like I won't even see the number. It's it's weird. And so when he approaches everything in this very artistic way and and everything is Looking for everything is like associative and and structural and the way he speaks about things It just worked for me. And so it sort of unfolded this this conundrum a little bit more and I don't know It's kind of funny like I listened to you Speaking with Jonathan like that was the most the most exposure that I'd had to you as you speaking with with Jonathan and I Remember you were kind of I don't know if it was necessarily taken it back, but you you had trouble necessarily Understanding the way he was he was talking about like poly polynathias. Is that when you believe in a bunch of God? I forget poly theism. Yeah Yeah, Jonathan was hard for me to really understand especially at first is like where's this guy coming from? Yeah took a while That's weird because he works so well for me, but I mean everyone's different But so in him talking to you, you know, then I kind of Became aware of you like nebulously like I don't think I immediately started listening But um What was it oh yeah, I just started I started having this really crazy dream And I was trying to like understand it and So I know that Jonathan Peugeot talked about his discord and then like this Facebook group and I just refused to go on Facebook I don't there's like some sort of barrier there for me that I will never go on Facebook But discord I didn't know what it was I was like sure I'll try discord I tried going on this discord server and it's pretty much dead like there's a couple of Green names, I guess they're moderators who Moderate each other in there and outside of that. There's not a lot going on and it's and I'm not trying to be rude it's just I got bored of it, but and I wanted more and At this point I think I'd started dabbling and some more of your videos and trying to understand and I like that you use CS Lewis a lot because I've only read one CS Lewis book, but It altered the way I think and so therefore, you know, like I respect them Until we have faces. Oh, yeah That could very well be his best book. It's this is best novel Well see the thing that I Think he put He explained in a way that my grandma couldn't you know like when you're seeing other people and you don't want to ruin their magic and there's that point where I can't remember the ugly sister's name, but she's staring across the river at psyche and and in psyche mind What or or well? Oh, yeah, I can't remember She had a weird name. I've just probably mispronouncing it in my head. She's the narrator too right and She's looking across the river and psyche thinks that like I don't remember exactly how she described it But in my mind I associated it with like heaven You know, like she believed she was in this great place and then the sisters saw that she wasn't or perceived I think is the important way to see it see it because that's I started to understand belief a little bit better there Because I don't think it's I used to be the annoying atheist who went around trying to kick the crutches out as I perceived them as people of people who bleed because I perceived it as weakness and I Think it was reading I got into a stage where I read like almost everything Nietzsche wrote and When you read him through He is the most misquoted and miss most misunderstood writer. I think in the history of the world because People like atheist quote him and atheist quoting him is is comical for all intents and purposes because And I mean obviously obviously he's misunderstood because the Nazis predicated their whole like Society on on his on misunderstanding them, but I don't even know how I got on this nonsense But the idea that that You know, you have to be more respectful of other people's beliefs was was born out of that until they have Facebook and so you using a lot of Cs Lewis, I guess Gave you validity in my mind. I don't know And then so you mentioned a discord I went on your discord and it was full of a lot of very nice people There there are a lot of good people there a lot of understanding people that I can Bounce ideas off of and try to understand things through and I even invited a One of my friends from Twitter over there because He's his I found out his name. His name is Charlie for all these years I just called him TJ which is short for his screen name. That was thought journey but like we would start discussing things and he would get like way out of my Understanding of religious stuff and at that point I'm just nodding. I'm like, I don't know you lost me And so when I got in on that discord server, I immediately thought of him I was like they can answer some of your questions go talk to these people And so he got on there and ended up doing a conversation with Jeff Joe Jeff or Job's yeah Jeff it was Jeff I'm pretty sure He had hair Air or no air. Yeah two groups Yeah So so what what what are you looking for? I Think that's the part of my confusion Like I Guess it was two years ago now. I Just I had this like, you know really powerful dream and it was strong enough that it it like made me wake up and I cried which was like weird for me because like I for my whole life has been have been a very unemotional person and it struck me really deep and Then I started running a fever And I went back to bed and My wife asked me if I was okay And then you know, she felt my head I fell back asleep and and went into another iteration of the dream like from another angle And this happened like four four or five times where I would analyze the dream from another angle and and step back from it and reanalyze it and even within the dream itself, I was going into a third person and and Like doing an analysis and breaking it down it was just like this really weird fractal like breakdown of a lot of things and and Then I woke up from it and then it was real and then I woke up from it again and it's like this weird staggered back continual waking up from it until finally when eventually I woke up for real and Shortly after that I started writing and I I wrote an entire book in three weeks and Which is weird for somebody who's dyslexic, you know, I've I've never had the artistic outlet of writing in my whole life I always I would draw Occasionally, I would you know do like clay if I had access to it And then just like guitar playing a guitar or my bass guitar Or my drum set when I had it whatever I had I had plenty of outlets and I had never tried writing before and And I guess I guess I should preface it a little bit with About four years before that Has about 30 just randomly I needed a new outlet to explore ideas more and so I started I became a GM for like D&D games and It's just a great way to I Was I was presenting them with Scenarios and then evaluating how they would explore them, you know what I mean? So for me for them, they're playing a game and for me, I'm running an experiment and and sort of and so I'm like and I would I would present them with moral quandaries and And ethical questions and and peel it away in layers and just see see how they would work and so My games would never turn into the those typical like murderfest right XP things that people that always talk about like, you know, it'd be it would be like Weird analysis of things and it was and I enjoyed it and my my group enjoys it because we've been together for like eight years now so So obviously I was doing something right But a game takes a long time to unfold you play once a week yada yada yada and so like you don't get to explore every idea you have and and my brain's like a Shotgun going off in every direction simultaneously all the time So I'm having way too many ideas that I can possibly work through with my little thought experiment game So I Set down after having that dream and I designed a premise in The way that it would be for a D&D game and I say I use D&D like people called dr Pepper coke it's it's not necessarily Dungeon the Dragon as it was set in the future ironically And I set down a premise and then I was like I'm never gonna get to run this game so let me just Invent it as I go so I started I just started writing And next thing I know three weeks later. I had written a book and in in writing it it was really weird because every night I would have a dream and then I Do this really weird thing that when I first wake up it takes me a long time to like Get fully out of the hypnopompic stage so I can like I could sit there How would I put it Like if you've ever lucid when you lose a dream like the dream is really powerful But you have very little control over it like you can become self-aware or you can you know? Theoretically hope to go in a direction and kind of steer it But when you first come out of the dream, it's like it goes sort of the inverse You still have the dream machine, but it's much smaller and it's much weaker and I have much more control over it But I'm not fully conscious and it's like I'm still sort of asleep and and So during that phase I would do like a lot of exploring of ideas and then I'd immediately wake up and start writing and And I would just Write like just prolifically like and the object it took me three weeks to write it in about a year to edit it So you could imagine it was pretty like stream of consciously Stuff and I wrote 18 chapters in three weeks and then all of a sudden I came to a dead stop and I didn't know what to do next because It sort of ended in a question and like the whole thing was was building this long question You know, and I didn't I didn't know how to answer any of it and then It was really weird about I'd say it took six months later. All of a sudden something snapped I sat down and wrote the last two chapters and it was it was I think it's pretty good like obviously It needs like a second and a third draft and and there's a certain amount of stuff that I understand inherently about it because it's my mind and I didn't necessarily portray it right and so on and so forth and And I tend to like abstract things out to their Abstract things out to their their finest grain so I might write a sentence that's preachy instead of Necessarily exploring it through several paragraphs to lead somebody into you know having a conclusion And I also I think that I write very Mythologically old-fashioned in the sense that I'll personify a system, you know what I mean? So it's like Like there's no systems it's all people representing systems interacting and I don't know I don't know That's just the best way I can think of it But after that It triggered me to just start writing more and The weirdest thing in the world I started writing poetry which I Guess I had an aversion to because it said like the word poetry even sounds effeminate to me I'm like, can we call it something else? girl writing this crap, but I started writing poetry and then I started two other books The first book I would say believes a lot with the beliefs a lot deals a lot with the nature of belief and Like contemporary problems like like identity crises the The meaning crisis is going on and a few other things that like deals with them and like this big a big amalgam and Like some of it feels like I was writing like a manual for my kids to And then the second book I would say deals a lot with the nature of belief and then the second one It also deals with belief but it's it's kind of stuff that I learned from the first one because in the first one I Kind of I had this this one main character and this other main character sort of like have like a theological discussion and at the end of it the the atheist Couldn't disprove God He also couldn't prove his position and I think there's a certain amount of Scientism in the world that it's very frustrating where people people think that they can prove stuff and And they really can't they really can't it's it's sort of like Like the way Karl Popper says that there's two kinds of theories There's a theory that you falsified and a theory that is exposed to possibly being falsified So it's it's sort of like this A humble position like you don't you don't know absolute so I guess it's you know, like the pragmatic evolution of truth or belief or whatever and So, you know he the The religious guy ultimately Sort of kicks the the substrates out of the the atheist Belief system and and the tool that I used to do it was was the infinite monkeys nonsense where if you put infinite monkeys on a on a typewriter to one of them will type out Shakespeare, right and and this Frustrates the hell out of me as a thought experiment because it's absolutely unprovable It's absolutely unprovable and they use an absolutely unprovable point to justify so many belief systems Simultaneously saying you can't prove God and And I'm just like I just started realizing that so many people have no idea what they're doing No idea. It's like like No idea it's like like you know for me science Is has has been reduced to like these minute foundations like You know even gravity the theory of gravity. It's like yes What goes up must come down on earth and then once you get out into space the crap stops working, you know so it's like they don't even really know and Then and then so they got this they got the foundation and then they put another layer on it And then they put another layer on and they put another layer on it and let's say you're on layer 10 and You've dedicated your lifetime to research to get to layer 11. You don't want anybody questioning layer 3 because that would cause your Jenga tower to fall over and And so like that sort of realization it's like And you have a lot of people Who have built on top of placeholders? You know what I mean like like you you come up you experience something that you can't really explain and then you give it a name to explain the thing to a title to the unexplainable thing and Then it sort of gets I Don't know absorbed into the collective psyche to where like now if you say, you know field everyone's like oh field like, you know Magnetic field no one knows what it is And I Was reading this book called God's debris by Scott Adams of all people but it was really thin book and it sounded interesting and He believes in Simulation theory which to me is just creationism for atheists, but whatever he He Was I going I Don't remember now I lost my train of thought well, what do you want you started with the books and the writing and the People don't know too much and the placeholders like field We don't know what a field is, but we can once we have a word for it. We can kind of play around right? The field that that was that was the thing in so in the book he correlates Magnetic fields to this thing that we just accept that's invisible that has an effect on the world and we don't really know why it does It but we gave it this arbitrary label and and then he leaves it hanging with this invisible force That has an effect on the world, which is obviously make it an illusion to God Yeah, which which people write off as silly And it's like why do you write one off a silly and not the other and not the other and it's like Like a magnet you can push it up against another magnet or push it away and you can see it instantly and then so it's fast So if one is slow, then you pretend like it doesn't exist. I Don't know But it's it's just you know, I'm not saying God's a field I'm just saying the idea of belief in invisible invisible things. It's like But uh, yeah, so that was interesting well lots of invisible things Rule this world I mean money money is at Money is an invisible thing. It's an idea and it's it's you can think of it lots of different ways. It's a debt chip and rules the world in many ways Well makes the world go around love is an invisible thing. I mean most of the things that rule us are invisible things, but they're They don't stay invisible They manifest they manifest exactly. I mean You know, you know emotions manifest in different ways and and that's I Guess one of my my big hangups is like You know like the the Kantian duality where you got the subjectives, you know separated from the material and You know, I'm very much You know, I'm very much a mind person like I'm Like I can not see the world sometimes because I'm so deep in thought And it drives my wife my wife and saying she'll be like why didn't you X? I'm like I didn't see it Unless it's like shooting a laser at me to get my attention I'm not gonna see it because I will be deep in thought about something and that's just the way it goes So So I guess I guess what I'm getting at it's like, you know science is all about materialism yet it seems to be sort of collapsing in a lot of ways because you know when you start getting into The more like quantum stuff where they they realize like it's supposed to be the disconnected observer yet They've realized that just by virtue of seeing it. They've altered it and so they can't be the disconnected observer So they can't get out of the equation. So it's like things are just breaking down and breaking down so it's like, you know the foundations that that I had relied on are breaking down and then it's like it's I've never been good at being super materialistic because I am so so I Don't dreamy dreamy. I guess is a good way to put it. So it's like I don't know. I feel very disconnected. Mm-hmm and Like one of those things that I wrote about in that book was talking about, you know, the mediation between the collective and the individual and You know, I'd read this book by Alan Bloom it was called the closing of American mind it was apparently written when I was born, but I Found it because I was talking about Jonathan Heights book something about the coddling of the American mind and as someone had told me oh, you know He's sort of expanding on the ideas from from the closing of the American mind So I was like, well, you know the way I think I always go back to this the further furthest back source because it's sort Of the concept of Lindy compliance the longer it's been there the more worthwhile it is to to read and apparently it had sold like a million something copies so I was like sure and I read it and one of the one of the things that really struck me is where he was going into Like up until reading this book, I'd never had a lot of respect for Rousseau for whatever reason for some reason I had written them off as like to like I don't know I Got after reading Confessions and he'd had six children and and giving them all up to adoption at a time when the survivability Rate was like in the teens. I Just I kind of was like I don't give a shit about what this guy says Because you know like my kids are like the most important thing in the world for me and for someone to be able to Give them away like I couldn't fathom it and so I lost respect for him And But and That book the closing of the American mind he had like he touched on a critique that Rousseau had given to Adam Smith and the whole concept of the American idea that goes into individualism and he says gonna be paraphrasing it because he writes loopy, but There's something like If you predicate your entire society on reaching comfort and security what happens when you reach it and And that's sort of the problem with modern society is that we have Comfort and security like across the board. It's like what's the biggest threat of your day stumping your toe? I mean, that's about it and and So I'm laying this over like, you know Maslow's pyramid like Maslow's pyramid has this idea that if you have food and then you have comfort and then you have Family and then you have this that you're gonna reach some sort of like intergalactic oneness and it doesn't ever happen instead Like at some point it infinitely stratifies into more and more petty nonsense where it's like well today I didn't get this incrementally small Amount of pleasure out of this and therefore I'm depressed, you know, and and so society has become modern society has become so Petty and meaningless that it's it's I think Ultimately, that's what triggered a lot of the dreams and a lot of the writing is because you know I'm worried about my kids You love them What are you worried about them for I don't know what to give them You know cuz I don't I didn't ever have it And you know, I dealt with it by sort of isolating myself and becoming like you know a strong person, you know, I like I like to strengthen my mind and strengthen my body and And do things to be the best, you know that I can be and when I went in when and where I can and But I don't know what I try to give them that but you know Everybody else that I see that that sort of worked from the foundations that I had a lot of them go the wrong way you know, and I see a lot of like Like the whole concept of an incel this entire category of of boys who it Pre-gave up like like, you know the concept of You know when you're when you're faced with a hierarchy that's too steep to climb a Lot of people will just simply give up And not even start and that's kind of what an incel is. That's like, oh I'm just gonna go play video games and Do the other things that they do as opposed to trying to to Move forward and get better at anything, you know And so I tried to you know drill it into my kids and Not drill it It's more subtle than drilling but it's just the idea of Inculcating I guess would be the word just trying to to make sure that they grasp a lot of these ideas and a lot Of the stuff, you know, I'm writing in my books that I write But uh Like the third book I started Is Like because I write I don't write with an answer in mind I I formulate a question and hope That something will will manifest and answer it and The way the book starts is I only got three chapters in and I had to stop but It's set in a near post-apocalyptic future because I tend to usually write in the future alternate history and There's basically this this guy who is an incel like the modern conceptualization of an incel he's he's Given up on life and he spends his day scavenging for pornography He lives in a woman's bathroom and he's he's smattered the walls with all these like terribly lewd pictures and he has a or a doll like The masturbation devices for all intents purposes and he keeps her tied up in one of the stalls and will take his anger out on her periodically it's something like exploring like, you know what it is to be an incel and then he was part of a group and He ultimately had killed this other guy's wife, but he was part of like a Group and so this guy finds him after and he's gonna use him as a tool to find the others and ultimately I don't know what's gonna happen. But like as I was exploring like this guy's mind and Inevitably if I explore something too deeply I start dreaming about it and it made me super depressed. I had to stop Yeah Cuz but it's something that worries me, you know, cuz I have daughters too and I have sons and I have I've got six kids so I've got a lot to worry about and and It's stupid this stuff that makes me emotional What is stupid about all of this is some of the most important stuff in the world, it's not stupid I Don't know. I guess I'm just frustrated with myself because it keeps boiling out of me Well, you'd be insane if you weren't worried about your kids you would either not love them or you'd be insane because you have every reason to care for them because this world is not a safe place and And your children, you know given you know not knowing you well or your wife just listening to you my Assumption is you're both very good parents and you love your children and you've you've given what you could To your children and you've raised them the best they could and they're probably they're probably doing well and they're gonna go out into this world and And the world is going to do things to them and things that you don't want to have done to them So no, you're very sane and you're very loving and your fears are very real and The difficulty that you have is that you perfectly understand that you can't stop this Yeah And then if you can't stop this what then Yeah, I don't that's exactly I mean I think I even said it to you like Our tech or whatever method I think it was discord of Wishing that I believed in heaven because it would be like a Thing See it like Over Christmas my My 15 year old daughter was was talking to this boy and in there, you know, it's Like she's too young to go do any real dating stuff like, you know You just have to be realistic about these things and she's She's had some You know, I don't know middle middle child syndrome where you like you act out in different ways to and you know she'd gotten in trouble at school and we had to deal with some things and and she was a major influence on me writing that first but one of the characters is is like an amalgam of some of the worst parts of hers and the worst parts of me some of the worst parts of my little brother and my oldest son just like various people coming together in a in a in a thing and The first time she tried reading the book She got to chapter 4 where she encountered this character She got so mad But ultimately she ended up reading it and feeling a lot better And she said it changed the way she thought about a lot of stuff that meant a lot to me And but anyways She had been talking to a boy and he worked at HEB and that's a grocery store here and She'd been talking to previous guys and I didn't like any of them, you know, it's like this guy's a douchebag this guy You know, it's a loser this guy, you know, whatever whatever whatever And then she's talking to this guy and actually liked him and then on Christmas Eve. He was killed in a car wreck So so I had to deal with with her and then Later on that same day Kid and my my kindergartener she's five and A kid in her class was ran over. Oh So so I got to deal with you know her understanding this stuff You know the loss of this, you know this guy who Theoretically, you know potentially could have one day been, you know part of my my family in some more substantial way Probably not, you know, it's just it's just something that I thought about and then sure and Then you know, it stresses me out and then It was like Just before New Year's one of my other daughters, you know, I was going to pick her up from work because She hasn't gotten her license yet And there's this hill I live out in the country 20 miles from the nearest city And there's this hill and we call it blind hill and it's it doesn't have a dividing line on it and people drive fast in the country by default because you know You don't you don't have to worry about the the authority of the cops there to stop anything. So you do what you want to do And it's nighttime and I'm coming over this hill and This person like, you know theoretically there's two lanes, but there's no dividing line And so people often come over in the middle and so instinctively I'll move over To the far side as I approach the hill in case there's an idiot. Yeah And this guy is not only coming in the middle He's coming more in my lane and he has his brights on and he's a big giant truck that sits high so I can't even really see and there's a mailbox here that's housed in like stones like like masonry I don't know what you want to call it and so I have to Dodge this guy and I end up like jumping off of this other person's driveway and going into a ditch and I and I recover You know, I'm experienced driver and I'm fine and like like my heart didn't even race like I was just like, oh what a dummy you know, yeah, and then like It starts turning in my head. It's like, you know, my daughter's about to get her license She would not have been able to handle that situation and it's just like I think I Think it was like the night or the couple nights after that like whereas it was just invading my dreams and like so many possibilities were spiraling out of control and that's when I Ended up messaging you To try to just like let go When your when your hands aren't big enough to hold the world whose hands are And what kind of world is this Yeah, I know It's just frustrating and like I Think for the past year or so After writing that first book and really exploring the ideas because It's hard to explain when you write like that. It doesn't feel like you write it so when you read it later, you're exploring it and you're learning stuff out of it and so I was like reading it and trying to figure out different stuff and Like I felt like There's an interesting twist in the book that it's weird that there's twist in it, but apparently there's twist in it and there's this character who is a This rich guy who's seen as this wonderful Philanthropist and whatnot, but he ultimately turns out to be like a manifestation of the free market without a moral structure to it and so so It's kind of like the idea of Of taking out the morality of feeding somebody's desires like for instance You know the theory of the free market is that you're just fulfilling other people's desires And so it's like you take Greed and derive goodness out of the greed like that's like that's the basic foundation But but what if what if everyone wants heroin? Well, well, then is that your moral moral obligation to not give it to them because you know, you would destroy everything if you gave everyone heroin And he's he's ultimately the character who? Sells everybody whatever they want completely devoid of any sort of moral Balance on it and There's remember there's the religious character and the atheist character her in a debate and there's several other characters and every other character the whole way through the book is deceived by the Philanthropist who comes off as benevolent, but he's really like it. He's using it as a Like a Trojan horse He's given him what they need but also feeding them Into things that they don't need that they that they want and it becomes really destructive for a lot of people and The one person who could see through him and called him a charlatan towards the end of book was the religious person Because he's like because he still had you know morals And I started sort of realizing I was like god that you know the world The world needs morality And morality is derived from you know, the art which is Religion which is something that I've never believed in so it's like religion in the classical sense like, you know, obviously early I sort of started seeing everything including New Age The idea that that proper morality and class classic religion are In some way Inextricable from each other. Yeah, and so I started telling my wife. I was like, you know Because she's atheist too, which is you know, it's like I almost wish she wasn't so that could be like Explained some things to me but but So, how does she feel about this about what you're going through She doesn't understand it. She doesn't really Like I Don't know like I probably haven't even told her as much just because I feel like she wouldn't understand it And but I I think she's like, I don't know. I don't know. I don't know And but I have said I told I feel like the the world needs religion because you know, I see like Like, you know, I cited in cells an example earlier You know that the identity crisis where people don't know even know who they are anymore and you have like these you know the transgender in like rapid onset stuff where people are trying to fit in by not fitting in in this weird paradox of just trying to I don't even know like they don't know who they are like and it's like if It's kind of like in that that that that piece that I sent you it's like the unifying lens You tend to use the word framework and for some reason I picked up the term lens it's it's the thing that allows everyone to Kind of align into the same direction and move towards the same ideal And with that lens shattered, you know, the analogy I made was everyone has just enough lens to see themselves So it's like that idea of the over individuation of everybody where they're getting so disconnected And if you're too hyper individuated, I think that's when they run into the identity crisis where they're they're having and I they don't even know who they are and you know, I think it probably moves into solipsism or just like That other word disassociation where you can't even you can't even properly interact and and so if if you Indivisual individually yourself so small that you vanish Then you have to start like trying to project what you think other people want and in in rapid onset, you know gender dysphoria It's like it's a social contagion in the sense that right. I don't think it's real. I I think they're just trying to To do something else. I don't know. It's weird to me. Well, it's it's It's real Because of the nature of How we know ourselves and how we are constructed It's real but but you have to understand That that stresses and strains our individualism and our materialism because that word real for us is so Emergent out of matter as individuals or individual experiences so on and so forth. And so the rapid onset The rapid onset dysphoria is because the I mean the the The postmodernist have real points to make and And we are social we are deeply socially constructed but not merely socially constructed and these things are all tied together and so That's why over the course of history and religions and societies and cultures There's so much diversity because there are many ways that these things can come together But I Really love the language the over individuation. I think that's a I think that's a I think that's a really helpful helpful term in this And you know again, I think you know, it sounds like Boy, there's so much good stuff in this There's so much good stuff in you in this There is I mean, I I you know, you would think You want to give your children good things? Yeah, that's you know, that's that's that's exactly what a father should be And you realize the limitations of your strength of your capacity and you understand the realities of this world and and the difficulty that you face is that your Worldview does not have the capacities to extend trust beyond your capacities Exactly, I think that's the Best way to put it like Like I was talking to a friend of mine That I met on Twitter and She's like a Reach recent religious convert and she is trying to become Christian and As she just talks about how like the ability to Transfer some of the weight You know off on to to I Think she said Christ but it's just the idea that like you don't have to necessarily Shoulder the burden yourself and like I don't know how to un-shoulder burdens Well, and and there's as you as you well understand there's perception and Reality and so, you know in your note to me Your It So in my experience as a pastor I Do know people and stories where Via a Dramatic religious conversion people demonstrate and Bear witness to an enormous capacity to trust and the subsequent emotional relief that that trust affords But for I think most of us It's it's much more of a slow-going process where You know as you know my conversation with with Sam. I Mean we find ourselves believing what we're believing and we know enough psychology and sociology to understand that those Experiences and those realizations are in fact at least partially formed in us by our Experience our past our how we were parented what we've immersed ourselves in so on and so forth I mean, it's the whole basis beneath ideas of Christian formation and To get to a point of Wanting the emotional Freedom freedom that that worldview and and the religions afford You know unless it's given as a gift, you know miraculously whatever you do with that word But that's the that's the you know because I see the majority cases that you know we grow faith and And and it builds over time and it comes through Christian formation and practices and it comes through community I mean all of the things that the church does for us That's how that's the normal path and you see people for whom there They skip the normal and they have it and you know, yeah, that's like all that miraculous now, you know laws of physics I'm not talking about that. I'm just saying that usually doesn't happen. This is the normal path but at the same time I Always because I am a believer in the miraculous I never Discourage people from asking for audacious things that are nor are ordinarily not given and And those things include a an emotional an emotional relief That you've not yourself earned But the thing about this thing about gifts are is that they're not purchased and they're not earned and they're you know they're just given and part of what is terrifying about Christianity and especially my tradition of Christianity is that we are we are fundamentally Recipients because we don't have the capacity to acquire and secure and and I my reading of Jesus is that that is actually the realization of that is actually the key move in terms of Grace and reception There's there's in Luke 15 there's this there's three most famous stories of Jesus talking about the lost coin and the lost sheep and then the lost son and in each of those stories the the God figure in the stories does The irresponsible audacious thing of you know leaving the 99 and looking for the one lost and the father of the two sons does what in the eyes of the village elders is irresponsible and and morally wrong by Impoverishing threatening to impoverish the vision because of the Because of the sinful and rebellious demand of a bad son and he does this of course the older brother is pissed as hell and not willing to That's the prodigal son the older brother is pissed as hell and in no mood to forgive and and basically Has his own rebellion against the father Based on the radical generosity of the father now that's Luke 15 and everybody loves camping at Luke 15 but the very next parable is one of the most difficult parables of Jesus to understand because it involves a king who has an embezzling steward and that steward is caught an embezzling and the king does the irresponsible crazy generous thing of Warning of allowing the embezzling steward to know that his days are numbered without taking The in a sense the keys away from him not showing up with the security guards with the boxes saying clean off your office now And leave the keys here he lets this he continues to allow the steward in a sense access to his authority and the steward goes through and basically continues to steal writes down a lot of the The The debts that other people owe of course creating gratitude in the minds of a lot of the debtors of the king and Everyone expects the king to come and say, you know, I'm gonna you know, you're gonna die for such embezzlement and the king basically says to the steward Wow that's amazing and everyone's like This is not a moral parable But my reading following a scholar named Kenneth Bailey who did a lot of years in the ancient near in the in Living in Lebanon teaching in Lebanon He said his conclusion of that parable is why on earth would the king why on earth would the king? acknowledge the shrewdness of this crook and His reading of it is that the the crook basically says in the parable I'm I'm too weak to dig ditches and I'm true proud to beg so instead of banking on my own shrewdness, I'm going to bank on the the reputation of Generosity that the king wishes to continue to promote in other words he banks on the mercy of the king rather than himself and every time I mention that interpretation of that parable I get lots of Sometimes sometimes skeptical but sometimes angry notes from Christians that say that's not right, but that's exactly the point of the parable that God gives Things that we don't think he should to people that we imagine are undeserving Right, and that's why in my mind the place of recognizing Our own poverty is the best place to be in terms of our relationship with God and so I think whereas I really feel for where you're at emotionally and I completely understand and There's absolutely nothing I can tell you to say No, you're not seeing the world right. The world is really a lot better than that. It isn't I Wouldn't believe you anyway, that's right So I am NOT gonna work on that which is usually what people do. Oh your kids will be okay Oh bad things won't happen platitudes. That's right. No, I I there's a there's a man Sleeping right out there outside my door right now And there's a pile of shit right in front of my office that he laid two days ago And he is laying there during the day because he has gotten His life into such a mess that this is the best he can do and so he tries to stay drunk 24-7 to manage his world and the best he can do is sleep out under a church Eve's with a pastor that for one reason or another isn't willing to just kick him into the street Despite the shit the turd that he laid right by my door, which I don't feel particularly generous about at the moment but and You know and and so but this is the world It really is and that blind hill, you know So, yeah, yeah, I get it and you know my video about why I'm a Christian I mean what you just laid out is exactly why I'm a Christian because Maybe I'm a coward, you know, maybe someone would say that's a crutch. All right It's my crutch and I'm gonna keep it because I don't know that I'm gonna keep it because I don't know that atheists offer me any Reason if the world is as they say it is I don't have any reason to say. Oh, what is that pride? movie make it better So no, I get it I get it I get it and as a Christian minister I just say well What you you know, here's an option this my option is what I've done which is I say You say you look at God and then and then you know after you're a Christian It's not like oh once you're a Christian that everything went well. Oh, no, it's not at all the case bad stuff continues to happen but at least I have a framework within a community and a tradition That allows me not only the degree of emotional comfort But even a tradition of philosophical justification for imagining that despite everything that's going on in that man's life right now There remains hope for him redemption their redemption and You know, I'm you know, so a lot of people said well pastor you should go out there and tell him it's like, yeah I've been around the block here with people plenty and I know people well enough to know that there's no magic words that I can say That would just suddenly you know, he'll go to AA and he'll reconcile with his family and whoever I don't even know this guy's story yet. That'll that'll come in time and so I endure and I tolerate the turd and the mess and Because in time a relationship develops and you know, these are these are things that I've been through These are these are things that take years but I I do believe that this world is Is Is such a thing in which yeah till we have faces but what a powerful book You know, why are holy places dark places? Yeah, that book was it that was a good book so I feel you man I Guess I appreciate being felt Yeah, when I think I saw one of your videos recently you're picking apart Sam Harris's and you're Picking apart Sam Harris's and you're you're you're talking about his worldviews and shifting his eyepatch back and forth and Like I've never heard the eyepatch analogy but that's something that I've I've been running into for a long time now like once once you sort of Something clicked into place a couple of years back and now I can't unsee like everyone has this eyepatch like you know, there's this like How everyone Like if they're they're in extreme danger or something's like like in dire whatever The most staunch atheists will be like, oh god, get me out of here You know, it always it always boils down to that like it's almost like on a genetic level to utter those words when the the proverbial shit hits the fan it did the words come out and So there's a certain degree of inescapable you know flipping the eyepatch back and forth for someone who believes their atheists and it was like earlier, you know, I was talking about a simulation theory and how it like no matter I've listened to people talk about it and read a little bit about it and there's no way that I can't see it as creationism for atheists and The the scientists have projected their themselves so hard into God that they made God a scientist because they believe they're being experimented on in a simulation Or forgotten if they want to go with the is it deist when God doesn't pay attention to you? I forget So it's so you're either a save file in a simulation that's been forgotten forgotten or you're actively being experimented on and it's it literally and Because I'm very Abstract and all my thinking and I zoom out on everything It's just it just everything has ultimately fallen again and again and again into the same patterns people just give them different names And I'm I think the big difference with simulation theory is you know Like okay with with, you know Christians, you know, you give a certain amount of your emotional Whatever to to you know God or to Jesus or whatever to to allow you some relief and in Simulation theory is more like Buddhism where you get into the you just don't think any of it matters You know, it's like yeah. Well, it's just a simulation anyway, so it doesn't matter if I do this for that and and You know one either Gives you the strength to move forward and in towards your higher goal or the other one lets you Check out and wait till the movie gets better, you know and that seems to be the dichotomy for the most part and there's a few degrees of in between but I Don't know No, so yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, I I you know I Sometimes feel a little I don't want to be Don't be too hard on Sam Harris. He's a human being Yeah, we're all we're all talking about ideas. And so, you know be brutal with ideas and generous with people But yeah to oh we don't know that the movie might get better that's like Well, if we're if we're if we're really gonna if we're really gonna Place our chips on Psychological hope well, then you might as well actually build a framework around it to afford it rather than Just wishful thinking that's the best you got that people here's the worst part of his nonsense is he says that We have to act as though we have a free will It's like if you have to act as though you have a free will But you don't it gets to this like When things get overly deterministic and you've deterministic and you feel like you have no power over them Like I have trouble understanding why people don't just kill themselves like if if You can see down the path to a certain degree. You're like, oh I'm at heading downhill and everything's getting worse It's like how this scene this movie you boom and just you know, get it over with and so I have never ever in life been a deterministic and I've never been able to wrap my head around the concept because There's just too many times in my life where I've been faced with some sort of dilemma and and had to think about which one I'm going to choose and and I've chosen one I'm like, how do I not have free will and in Sam Harris? It was talking about what was like epiphenomenology Like where he thinks he's just like this disconnected like Writer on the back of a crazy elephant. I don't understand him I mean It just seems paradoxical to even be able to Conceptualize epiphenomenology if it exists, you know what I mean? I don't get that one at all I Don't know I think I've rambled a long time. Well, I think it's it's it's been good rambling and I I Know you're very gifted What Ramble well, I don't know. I haven't you know, your writing was good and I your books sound engaging I don't know if you're you're gonna publish any of these things or try to trying The definitely try because the I mean the the incel story. That's that's That's gripping. That's it's it's terrible That's that's gripping that's it's it's terrifying but it's ripping I Told my wife I'm a a method writer And in because Like you're you're creating a Character and allowing it to exist in your head you know, because the only way you're gonna get to their internal dialogue is to let them think and it's Yeah, I had to stop I started drinking a lot which is ironic because the The character actually because it's post-apocalyptic like, you know, you could just throw whatever science you want in there I had him like drinking Too much and it was causing him to develop a thyroid problem. So his neck is all swollen up And so he directly associates it with drinking and his mother died from it, but he keeps doing it anyways you know sort of that that Idea of not brave enough to kill yourself, but you're not gonna stop it either yeah, you know that dark path that he is on and and I Remember I just kind of one day like Blew up at my wife like I was angry and and then I realized like oh my god. I'm This character and I just stopped writing the book right there and I'm like four three or four chapters in but the first Two chapters like it goes deep and dark fast. So oh That's it's yeah, no, I think you've it sounds like it sounds like you've been given a gift and Gifts are again, this is part of Christian theology to gifts are never really for yourself therefore others and I know it So no, I so well, I you know there's a there's a story in the Gospels of a paralytic and The Jesus is in a house and there's so many people around you know everybody's bringing their sick and they're crazy people to Jesus to have him deliver them from their sickness and craziness and These friends can't get through and so they climb up onto the roof of the house and they start removing the roof tiles And they drop the guy on ropes on a stretcher down into the middle of the house Which is never heard this story. Oh, yeah, it's a great story and You know, I don't know why I don't know why they can't make good Jesus movies because I know it's like Mission Impossible Jesus Christ, that's right I think part of the problem one is all the literalists want them to everyone to do it literally and and you really can't so they drop this guy into the middle of the house and You know, it's just got to be bedlam going on There's critics of Jesus and I mean the whole culture wars manifest and Jesus is right in the middle They remove the tiles they drop this guy in and I imagine the house is so full I mean people got to back out as this thing comes from the top and you know One of us would say something like okay boom healed get him out of there We'll get on with business. Jesus doesn't do that Jesus stops and says to the guy on the stretcher Your faith has made you well now. It's like and this triggers everything because the religious leaders are like What the hell did he just say? we stoned people for saying stuff like this, you know and and Jesus didn't have to say that and what's crazy about what he says is that it's not the faith of the Paralytic that set that whole thing up It's the faith of the paralytic's friends who had the audacity to climb on the roof remove the tiles and send him down and and so for for years commentators and preachers and people have noticed that in a sense and And then of course the religious leaders are like how dare you say something like that Jesus says well Do you tell me what's easier to say, you know, his sins are forgiven or you know, you're Jesus I think I said it wrong your sins are forgiven I was like you can't say that and Jesus says what's easier to say your sins are forgiven or get up and walk And of course he gets up and walks it Scandal, but it's the faith of the friends that in a sense is borrowed by the paralytic Who knows with whatever level of volition and Jesus says boom your sins are forgiven and so I'll I will I will I will lend you my faith and To whatever degree you experience it. I don't know but I will lend you my faith and And I will pray that that I don't know God's using you. I mean it's I'm here's another crazy thing about Christian theology that you'd seldom hear from Christians this whole idea of the Holy Spirit and You know Christians are always asking for the Holy Spirit and that becomes a whole thing But it only Christian conversion by the Holy Spirit only makes sense If the whole if God if God's Holy Spirit is working on people who aren't yet Christians And I would assert working on people through working through people who are not Christians at all and maybe never will be and so that's part of Christian theology too. So I will loan you my faith and I think God is God is working on you and what he'll do I don't know but it seems like stuff is happening and it seems like I Can see good things. So I'll just give you that for whatever it's worth Are you familiar with? Jonathan Peugeot's Explanation of st. Christopher and how he thinks he's the patron saint of the end times. No okay, well this this is one of those rare things that really really set in with me and You know that that thing I sent you to read the 600 words Yeah, and at the end it talks about the dog-headed man. Yep. Yeah, that's saying that's saying Chris St. Christopher. Yeah, right and and His explanation like the whole story. I'm not I'm not telling the story any differently. He says, you know St. Christopher goes to this king and he wants to fight for him because he's supposedly the strongest man and then you know He asked who's stronger and the king won't tell him and so he says I promise I won't leave and so he does the trickster Move where he you know tricks the king into telling him the king tells him. Oh, you know Satan's stronger mean I'm scared of him. So they then he goes and serves Satan, you know Which I identify with because you know at a point in my childhood I listened to like devil music and and you know that cliche rebellion and You know for a while I did tattoos and When I was practicing and learning how to do it I actually you know had tattooed a pentagram on myself so it's like, you know, I went I went there and I was that person for a while and then You asked who's stronger and he goes and he says Jesus and so he goes Tricks the devil and goes and he gets there and he finds out that he can't serve him Like he doesn't know how to do this. It's typical praying and this this typical structured Thing because you know, I consider myself very chaotic and I don't fit into structure I think that's part of the idea of the you know, why I'm so anti authoritarian It's like it's it's it's inside me in a way that I haven't been able to extricate it and just exist normally it like I always end up rebelling against something and so like I really identified with that story and Because I don't know that I can enter properly into Whatever whatever, you know, I can't but you know, so this priest tells them only can't pray you can't do this well, just ferry people across this river and Then one day a child comes to him and when he carries the child across he feels the way to the world and it turned out to be like Jesus and When I When I let my wife read that that thing that I sent to you at the end of it, she says it sounds like you're trying to create a new religion and I Didn't I kind of laughed it off but like I think somewhere in my subconscious like I'm trying to to get everybody back Because I mean People the world needs it like really bad like right now. Yeah you know the mediation between the individual and the collective is so out of whack and then Like there it's extremes like even if you look at you know, the concept of intersectionality and they talk about They make their collective and individuation like it's it's it's it's paradoxical and broken and you're reduced to these to these little Immutable characteristics in a way that you erased yourself into a collective that isn't there I don't know like there's so many things just evaporating right now and I would just like to see Like I don't know like I remember when I was younger the world seemed more structured and proper and and it was a thing against which I could rebel and now it's like it's a puddle and it's like I Got to help rebuild it so that I could rebel properly Because it the world is so frustrating right now like I just see It's like I Don't know. I don't know any better way to put it than that. Like it needs to be rebuilt So that I have something to throw rocks at because right now I just feel lost Well, you want me to pray for you Yeah, I mean I'm definitely not gonna turn it down I like the theory of Some of the the pressure being alleviated Okay, I'll pray for you appreciate Lord, you know all things and I believe that you are the God of all providence and That obviously strains relationships and trust when things that We certainly don't want to happen things that we think shouldn't happen happen and We don't know what to do. And so Lord I pray that you would You would be with Voth That you would Or I think you're I think you're using him. You're certainly working on Stuff in him and I pray Lord that you would continue to do this work and that you would give him a sense of comfort afford him afford him a piece that perhaps he has not earned and Lord that is that is in a sense the The reality of the Christian faith that you afford us things that we do not earn And you afford them to us not because of our capacity but because of your generosity so I pray Lord that you would offer him that peace and That you would protect his children and that you would work through his dreams and his fears and his gifts and his story and that you would bless the world and Afford the world a a Better order through it so hear my prayer in the name of Jesus. Amen I Didn't realize you're gonna do it just then. Yeah. Yeah The funny thing about prayer is that you know, if if you don't believe it I'm just talking with my eyes closed It freaks some people out I'll be honest. I don't know necessarily what I believe anymore. Yeah well, that's probably a pretty sane and Accurate thing we're all You know, we are we are really though I mean the more we look at ourselves the more we have to admit we're we're by no means in control of ourselves And oh yeah, it and and who we are and what we do is by no means straightforward. So That's just reality. I'm I'm far too Introspective and analytical to lie to myself. I'll try to sometimes but I ultimately end up Seeing right through it Yeah, I You praying reminded me of this I did go to church until I was about 13 or 14 From for about seven years. My parents made me go and I remember this joke that I guess pastures the term you said any in He said he was Talking to this friend of his and he says he prays for this and this and this and this and he lists off a really long Long list of things that he prays for every day and he's like And so he's feeling like a terrible person because he's like I don't have the time to pray for all these things and he's like Trying to better himself and then he talks to this guy again and he's added a whole bunch more to the list He's like do you just pray all day? How do you have time to do this? He says I write all the things down and I place them in this bag and then I say Lord bless that bag And That always made me laugh because it sort of kept she was the The dichotomy between someone who's trying and someone who's who's like, what do you say? Going through the motions Bless the bag. Here's the list. Yeah, there's the list for me You got this buddy, that's right. Well, this was a pleasure and I will send you this recording and I Appreciate it. You can do with it. Whatever you want. You can share it with your wife. You can delete it. It's completely up to you Alrighty. All right. Take care later. Yep. Bye. Bye