https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=_ZqZ4odmitg

 Hi, this is Paul. It is Friday afternoon and I made a video with this cool thumbnail that you're not going to see. About six of you saw the first 18 minutes of it and then there's no sound after that and I realized that my fan sort of puts a little bit of noise onto the microphone and so I muted the microphone and I forgot to unmute it for the whole video. Ouch! Hate it when that happens. Anyway, it was in no wait no ads and a few of you saw the first 18 minutes. I hope to redo it. It was a couple articles that I'd read but the problem was that I had I've already sort of moved on mentally to the second video I wanted to do. I wanted a couple things and so that one's gonna replace this. Kenology just put out a video with Andrew Tate and Ken and Nietzsche on the cover. Good thumbnail and very interesting video that I wanted to do some work on along with Aaron Renz, Substack, Newsletter 79, The Teachings of Neo-Pagan Masculinity. Kenology's video is All Men Are Lost and I gotta get this sound wrangled. Can't miss the first few seconds because she says Barbie is pro men. Woohoo! And I like Kenology a lot. She has a very compelling channel. I don't watch all of her videos but when I do watch them I usually come away pretty impressed by her thoughts even though I've got some pretty significant differences and some critiques but let's get into it. Barbie is pro men. Yes, yes, I said it. I said it. And here's why. Salutations Little Charlotte's Web there. Yeah, yeah, she does make videos about different things but she's there's a ton in this video. And I wasn't going to actually go and watch this film. I just went on a whim. I was a little bored. I was feeling a little bit lost in life as of late and so I just decided and happened upon a cinema and went and watched it. I'm going to be honest, it did not blow my mind. It was just a film like any other film. I really didn't see anything or find anything terribly except- And yet we're here making a video about it. By the end of the by the end of this video she sort of changes her tune telling people to go watch it. ...about it. I think that everything to do with Barbie has really got a lot to do with the name, the heritage, the history, the nostalgia with the significance of the toy itself. Okay, now part of one of the points that I wanted to make in my original Barbie movie my original Barbie movie video and I want to now that I'm back in Sacramento I want to spend a lot more time sort of walking through this video. Now, Kodology doesn't have at least access at this point to sort of the metamodernity concept. This gets into the whole thing about once you have a name of something, back in the days of spiritual warfare, Frank Peretti books, one of the real keys in the Christian charismatic movement was once you get the name of the demon you have power over it. There's a lot of truth to that in sort of this way that we're talking about spirits. Once you get the name of a spirit you have a degree of power over it. You have a handle on it and so to get into the whole meta, to get back to the metamodernity, Paul Anleitner's been working on this too on his channel especially on his podcast. Once you get a sense of metamodernity one of the things that you need to do once what post-modernity does is sort of take the legs out from everything and metamodernity because we need once again to try to recapture and have the ability to have ideals and morals and to have them not all undermined by post-modernity. The metamodern move is to once again look for usually something in mass culture even though mass culture is sort of fragmented and this sort of focuses forces things back into modernity. So what you see with these metamodern movies is that they're looking for something to begin the conversation with and something like Barbie has enough cultural substance that it can be used broadly enough to at least work from because post-modernity is sort of swept everything away and whether it's Barbie itself or a critique of Barbie it's at least a place to build on and a place to stand on. The significance of the doll and of course the absolutely phenomenal exceptional out of this world marketing and promotion for this film. Okay and so Buzz itself is another one of these platforms to begin a conversation with because there's at least enough substance there that you can talk about it that across enough of a spectrum whether you think it's a good thing or a bad thing it's at least a thing and you can start with it. It has been something that I think Hollywood is going to try and emulate again and again and again with films like this. And I think that's true as well. One of the what happened with post-modernity I remember an article that Tim Keller talked about and what I used to do with Tim Keller sermons was I'd always track down where they were from and one article that was written in the 90s talked about the fact that in post-modernity again one of these at least platforms you can build on is popularity and money. And so if well marketing the heck out of something that's going to lead to money well we're all going to follow that and that's obviously been a something that people have done for a while. Additionally I think everything that Barbie represents as a doll in so far as beauty standards are concerned in so far as body positivity is concerned it resonates with a lot of people in. So again the critique is something that enough people can say oh Barbie is horrible even though they wanted them as kids and that's broad enough in the culture. The modern world and with everything to do with especially the narrative around feminism today the narrative around woman and where we are going of course this film was going to do well it is perfect. No no no no no they marketed the heck out of a lot of movies that flop and so you can't just attribute it to marketing. There's way more going on with this movie again I said it with my video this is an important movie like it or hate it it's an important movie and it's I don't know if it'll be as important as let's say The Matrix in 1999 was but I think this was an important movie. For the zeitgeist everything to do with the film sort of just comes together like a spider diagram to the center of Barbie and so I can most definitely understand why it did so well and why it is doing so well. I can't for the life of me figure out why kidology always uses this this fuzzy mic on a clip but that's her schtick. Even though as a film in and of itself it is nothing terribly special so that's not me saying and again no it's it's special it's special in the way that these postmodern platforms are special. Yeah there's plenty you can pick on in the film in terms of the plot. The script etc. What I found most interesting was my experience in the cinema. It was very very strange because okay and this is also very meta modern in that the sensibility again is the key word and the experience what's what's key is the experience that I have in the movie that's and and then also grasping for this communal experience. The the communal aspect so one of the things in the video that there's so much that I said so much that was never recorded one of the one of the things in that video is the question of the individual and the rise of the individual and and how that rise of the individual has left us with loneliness. So often happens this might be just bringing these two videos together in some sort of way. This has never happened in a cinema before. When the credits roll. No it has happened in the cinema before. Somebody started clapping and then suddenly everybody started clapping. I have never experienced anything like that. I don't know if this is just the culture in the no it happens and it happens in movies that connect with people. Happens in America. North of England where I have just relocated but I was quite surprised because as I said I didn't think it was exactly you know an eye-opening film. I mean and again this is where when you sort of notice that it's a thing and that's the language we used in sort of this after all of the acids of post-modernity have been around what remains is a thing and so then when you have a spontaneous eruption of applause people look around and say oh it's a thing this is important there's something here. Now it's helpful to try to figure out what that something is but yes the Barbie movie is a thing it's an important movie. You know I watch Meryl Streep films I expect a lot. That's an interesting statement. So it was very strange but then it sort of made sense when I started to reason with why this was happening. Why this film spoke to so many especially young people especially women. The cinema was. It's interesting as she goes through that it's always woman not women but woman as sort of as the category. It's noticeably packed with a lot of young woman a lot of Gen Z millennial woman more so than men it seemed as if boyfriends had just been dragged along more so than wanting to go and see the film. This father wanted to see the film. But it was fascinating to see this sort of act of female camaraderie clapping together people clapping as if they'd sort of achieved something. It was like and again in a culture now that is devoid of communal experiences in a culture that is not going to church where you will have communal experiences much more often where you have a body that you participate in regularly where you sing together where you stand and profess together you know in some churches you might have a procession together. I mean all of these embodied communal things that are still in the church world for individuals now in the world that's an issue. Like yes we've achieved something we've achieved something with this film. This is and I find that and she's right in that people have a sense of yes this is a thing this is a movement we've achieved something but I look at it and think oh my what how low your standards are. You've you've paid probably way too much money to see this movie and you had a moment and that's it the moment is gone. So I just actually today finished watching Jesus Revolution which is out on Netflix and there's a there's a scene in this movie so Greg Lowry who becomes eventually becomes sort of this this big evangelist who do crusades all around the world he comes out of this movement and he had he was raised by an alcoholic mother a dysfunctional home was sort of lured out of military academy by a hot girl they started playing around with psychedelics but that all sort of went wrong. He had a scare in the movie when you know the one dude who was high was driving this VW bus I mean there's a lot of cliches built on top of this to try to make the movie work and now again there's a there's a there's a uh after post-modern there's a metamodern element of that that the films have to all trade in these stereotypes because these stereotypes are all that we have left of communic culture so then he meets um Lonnie Frisbee and he goes to church and then he um he walks somebody comes into the church and he walks out of the church and it's this it's this really important moment so his girlfriend pleads with him to just give it a chance and and he says I don't know it might be real and he says back to her she says that to him and she says back to her that's the problem Cathy Cathy with an E look I can't I just can't be let down again I can't be left and then after that he's going to go to the ocean and he's going to um he's going to get baptized and that's going to start a whole new a whole new thing for him but again you have this question of okay I've I've tried out I've tried psychedelics I've done this I've done that I need something that's going to last you know I can go to the Barbie movie and I can have this experience but something has to endure and of course this is part of the reason I did this channel because I knew people were going to be having experiences watching the Jordan Peterson biblical series but there's going to have to be a community there's going to have to be relationality there's going to have to be something here that endures Brilliant film this is great and it was at the time very strange but I think in terms of everything that we are sold as post-modern consumers it makes a lot of sense And I think it's post-modern yeah but increasingly meta-modern consumers because part of the difficulty of consumerism with post-modernity is it's is it's tough to build something on very little on very little I mean that that is ultimately what we all are today in the modern world we are individually and it's so funny in the modern world where post-modern consumers are how about in the post-modern world individuals who have replaced spirituality or spiritualism and essentialism with materialism not just in terms of us consuming things but even within ourselves and our identities our identities are increasingly founded on the material world on aesthetics on becoming an aesthetic on changing our aesthetic and changing our identities continually in order to revitalize ourselves in order to become a better newer version of ourselves we place now now what's interesting about this especially watching this after Jesus' revolution is that a big part of the counterculture was the push back against materialism the push back against modernity and again wanted something experiential existential and and you see that sort of come around again right now values in our possessions in having things material things because this is exactly the critique that the hippies had against their parents generation now of course their parents generation grew up in the depression and survived world war two and so they were just after you know after 10 years of depression and five years of war they were just exhausted and it's like all i want is a quiet suburb and material security and i'm you know it was it was very much a post-traumatic frenzy of order and affluence and please let me rest after everything that i've endured in the depression and the war but of course their kids didn't experience the depression in the war all their kids felt was prosperity and the constant urges of the parent uh Kathy's father his love interest you know first denies you know can i marry your daughter no and and well why not well because you don't have the money and the security and you don't have all of those things that you need but of course that generation grew up with all of that they could assume all of the affluence and so some of them but again you've got half of them that could sort of assume the affluence because they lived it and the other half of them were living the the dysfunctional side of it maybe mom was a modernist a modernist barbie in the daytime but she drank herself to sleep at night and the other side were just working like crazy and hounding their kids to follow along in the productive way so that they too can experience the prosperity and the comfort that now post-war america can afford you that seemingly make us who we are and in that we become sort of very fragmented in our own internal identity and psychology because we have an identity or all these different identities that are founded on things that are quite baseless and i think and and again so this this difficulty of identity that she talks about here is absolutely post-modern because there's no sort of commonality to build upon and so it's all it's an experiential identity and it's so fluid and so transitional and and so experiential and and so then people have exactly what greg laury is complaining okay i got high but so what i can't live high and even if i wanted to um that you don't you have a you have both registers and it's like the the registers need to be in sync and and it needs to be durable and lasting it needs to be something i can count on and that's of course what he's looking for from kathy and a relationship is i i want something that's enduring my father he thought at that point that his father left him he finds out later that his spoiler alert that his mother left him left his father or at least the man that he thought was his father wasn't really his father and when asked for justification for this the mother says because i knew what was going to happen because nothing lasts and so there you go but you have exactly the same thing with identity today i'm this tomorrow i'm that the next day i'm this other thing and i mean far more radically today i'm a man tomorrow i'm a woman next week i'll be a furry and i'll be a cat um you you tire of this because it is just so exhausting and so much work we can see how terribly that is playing out at the moment with celebrities sort of going through what i like to call a humanization process the likes of ariana grande or doja cat individuals who are not playing into that sort of parasociality of being a post-modern consumable product which is ultimately what modern celebrities are but in terms of so in other words the profelicity of the celebrities is built upon a certain image that is consumed and marketed and so and so you've got a few celebrities that are going to sort of be their authentic selves but you know where exactly is that secret sacred self underneath this is the problem when i have a video that that gets that gets dropped out because um so david brooks in his in his in his essay complains about the loss of morality i really have to redo that video complains about the loss of morality because of this turn inward and basically the secret sacred self it has to be authentic to whatever that secret sacred self is down there but that that secret sacred self is basically the reflection in the bottom of a well that people are looking at then the water isn't exactly always still barbie the barbie film and all the actors involved and all the people involved have done an exceptional job in playing into the post-modern consumer experience and ultimately presenting it as something political part of the difficulty is that you have modern post-modern and meta-modern and those are those are categories that definition and what people often want to say or should say is contemporary which might be modern post-modern or meta-modern but it's of the now and so they'll often say modern or post-modern depending but what they want to say is now to call something revelatory and something for the people and of the people okay and again that revelatory or for the people and of the people that again is this whoosh it's an experience it's something that captivates them in the moment but the moment doesn't stay and if you go through enough of those moments and if you begin to realize that like like like like greg laury who doesn't have the money that cathy from a stable home does doesn't have parents to fall back on he can't rely on his mother everyone's you know looking for this kaleidoscope and he's just like i need something solid and of course the church and the gospel will become something solid for him people and it's intriguing to see when everybody in the cinema applauded it felt as if we were trying to create this community of strangers of people who had just consumed a film who had just consumed a bucket of popcorn who just consumed a slushy and a film ticket and and that of course is not a community i'm trying to remember because everything's sort of scrambled by my trip um peter limberg's doing some substack work and he engages with some of this less foolish is not a community it's a sub stack the stow is not a community it's a zoom account with recorded sessions posted on the youtube channel there's a sense of community surrounding them but there's also there's also a community of practice around ongoing practices associated with them such as collective journaling however i do not use community to describe them i will only use the word community with those i commune with if you have a regular zoom event poof a community if you have a discord or slack poof a community if you enable comments on the sub stack poof a community many people are trying to make online money to um money online tag the word community onto whatever their hustle is they use the word to evoke a sense of community hearing the word feels nice if it had a smell it would smell like flowers if it had a taste it would taste like homemade butter tarts if it had a personality it would be bell blissfully singing at the beginning of beauty and the beast people instrument instrumentalize the word creating a felt sense of verisimilitude of community that's all and that is not a community the corporate world is particularly guilty of instrumentalizing the world and they do community memphis images such as um come to mind the art form of choice for modern corporations conveying generic productive docile people being together so then he picks up on an article the thesis on terrible communities the family the work uh the school work prison these are the classical faces of this contemporary form of hell this is again a an attack on modernity because modernity was built on all of these institutions they are at least in they are at least interesting because they belong to a bygone depiction of community evolution and are presently merely surviving on it there are terrible they are some terrible communities however that fight against the existing state of things and the simultaneous quite attractive and much better than this is is i'm reading terribly because i'm in a rush because i wasted an hour plus making the video of it failed and i've still got that video in my head so when i start going through this the elements of that video that never got recorded get pulled in and i have to sort of try to not have too much scrambled eggs come out of my mouth boy that is a horrible metaphor saying all communities are terrible as harsh and disrespectful to all communities where love support and good work exists still there is something about this premise i find freeing often something feels often i find myself in a setting where community is supposed to be while i do find enjoyment and experience social nourishment we're gathering with good people something is missing from many gatherings in the subtle loneliness permeates my body and i think ketology touches on this because she she notes that well people are having a sense of community and so now we have the community of people who have seen the movie barbie it's not a community that's a category and there's a world of difference between a category and a community and it's exactly that world that the great the great laury character is is striving for and looking for and trying to trying to participate in it was very much a temporary high it wasn't real it was very synthetic notice the language the temporary high it wasn't real it was synthetic this is exactly what the greg laury character is complaining about and looking for in the church now later in the movie the line at lani frisbee and connie things aren't quite as good as they things aren't quite as beautiful as they appeared to be from the outside and so he's going to leave the calvary chapel community and greg laury in this touching scene begs him please stay everybody leaves in my life and connie sort of bends over and says you know we'll always be your family but we are leaving and you know there's a lot in that movie that's a little bit fast and loose to fit into a two-hour hollywood christian feel-good movie and as christian movies go it's a it's a much better cut than most christian movies but it's really a very interesting movie but jesus revolution is not as important as the barbie movie very artificial but it is sort of the only thing that is really holding us together which is ah it's the only thing that's really going to bring us together post-modernity has eaten away at everything quite sad and harrowing to think about this idea that we are being held together by very finite material things by products but aside that again that's the critique of the counterculture against the 50s from all of that and my general feelings about the film one thing that really did stick out to me in quite an interesting and i would say positive way was how poetically i think the barbie film represented masculinity the film very interestingly forefronts the dilemmas of the modern man in the which is very interesting because of course there's this um there's the scene with america ferrera who you know ben chaperial talked talked about it as a very cringey thing but i think a lot of women in that sermon in that speech said that's exactly the challenge of being a woman and i think ketology is right in that the film also had a lot of the challenge of masculinity various manifestations of ken as the counterpart barbie since 1961 ken and barbie are essentially the inverse of adam and eve ken's existence i think that's a super interesting they're the inverse ken and barbie as adam and eve oh see this is the kind of stuff i go to ketology for it's like insight because especially when you think of again the the barbie movie opens with little girls smashing their doll babies and now they're going to have ken and barbie and now they're going to work out those things they're going to work out you go from traditional where they're where they're preparing themselves to raise little babies now they're going into modernity and maybe i'm going to have to get a cheap ken and barbie for props here or something um now they're going to have be ken and barbie and they're going to work out what the modern baby-less world looks like and and again you know there's a there's a pregnant barbie but that one doesn't do so well because that's not the working out of the of the of the universe of ken and barbie is contingent on barbie and as such all his meaning derives directly from her the film did a very interesting now one of the interesting themes of this video is that she notes very well that ken is super ken is really parasitic on barbie ken cannot live without barbie which is of course very genesis-like the job of presenting ken in this light him gaining validation exclusively from barbie seeking her validation her approval how his day is made when barbie just oh so looks at him her success was his success and therefore his worth was ultimately reduced to her worth what the right which is sort of you know which is very interesting because again you have to see barbie and ken through the eyes imagining the world view of a of a child playing with these dolls just like you had to imagine the world view through child children playing with baby dolls i mean that transition is from the traditional to the modern and it's very clear and of course in the mind of a little girl she doesn't know a man she's there's dad out there of course but she doesn't know men as maiden suitor let's say and so those are the things that the little girl's sort of playing out in her hands with her dolls film did very well and i think very importantly and rather uniquely did was present barbie as taking this dynamic for granted whilst she takes it for granted she simultaneously depends on it for her validation you're only and that's super interesting and again that's modernity she takes it for granted but she's still dependent on it for her validation and so of course when when ken you know sort when she sort of has a threat a sense of ken walking away hmm you know i i want you what is that phrase in the movie such a good long distance low commitment casual girlfriend because that's exactly what ken was ken was the long distance low commitment casual boyfriend really an exceptional person or an exceptional woman if other people look at you and tell you that if they acknowledge and respect you as being that you are only a prime minister or a judge or i don't know a model if people recognize you as such okay now that recognition is so critical because what happens with sort of modern barbie is modern barbie is in some ways a man she isn't a man of course but it's it's a masculine world that she is attempting to establish herself and drive herself up in the hierarchy in it's not the feminine world it's the masculine world and so the dynamics of masculinity are in play now i don't have kicking myself over the mistake that i made in that other video oh ah grim gris is going to make a clip out of that um i want to switch over to this substack from erin ren which i thought was absolutely outstanding and he has a video of it not a video but a recording that he put on his youtube channel newsletter number 79 the teachings of neo-pagan masculinity originally published on august 14th 2023 one of my big themes has been the disconnect between men turning away from traditional authorities and institutions churches politicians teachers etc towards online men's influencers like jordan peterson joe rogan and andrew tate i spent a lot of time exploring what the okay and that's true and i i think the world of erin ren i the work that he's doing is just so full of insight um i think it's you know vitally important here we go windows rearranged online influencers are doing and what they are saying so that we can understand them and their appeal better and perhaps in some cases elevate our own game in response and attract more of their young male audience to the church today i want to continue that by looking at the vision of neo-pagan masculinity put forth in books by two men's influencers jack donovan and ryan landry i'd never heard of either of these guys jack donovan and the way of men the way of men is a short book by jack donovan published in 2012 it is a semi-famous book and has certainly sold a huge number of copies as it has 5300 ratings on amazon only slightly fewer than tim kellers the reason for god it appears to still be moving copies donovan is an interesting figure to say the least he's gay but rejects the label because he thinks the word has become coded to refer to a set of effeminate behaviors he rejects now it's so interesting i didn't know this that so many of these masculinity guys are gay and there is something that has to do with profelicity with because of course men are are deeply attracted to the visual and so then if you're a gay man and you want to attract the attention of other men you're going to use the visual signals that are going to attract the attention of gay men and that's of course is going to be a little different than for heterosexual men who are not looking to attract the attention of other men in that way but are at the same time vying with them within competitive hierarchies he prefers the term androfile and wrote an entire book on that subject that's since been unpublished a significant number of online men's influencers are gay he's also explicitly neo-pagan worshiping thor or some such he was previously an ordained priest in the church of satan and involved with various organizations in the alt-right though has since disavowed the movement if anyone deserves the term pagan masculinist it's donovan interestingly despite donovan's bizarre personal history the way of men is essentially a mainstream book for example he interviewed brett mckay of the art of manliness when writing it and has been featured on that site several times although it has some themes i reject this book is basically safe to read i'm sure it has been bought many times by ordinary people with no idea about donovan's background one of the things i i really like about erin wren he's his own man you know talking about this especially some conservative evangelical communities that you know he really he's really a part of it could have some cost but wren wren says things like he sees them i i really respect that yeah donovan's take on manhood is essentially rooted in the basic evolutionary psychology framework that's common to most online men's influencers and that is so key i i listened to this a couple of times already and that's something that you know for peterson for many brett weinstein it's all about uh chris williamson it's all about truth is from this evolutionary story now of course you've got the question you've got the question morality with respect to these things but that's that's sort of become the that's how you can it's sort of a a little shifty way to try and derive morality from and is in his view our instinctual masculinity developed in primitive times when humans faced mortal dangers the traits men had to develop to survive in this environment are what come down to us as masculinity the most important concept in donovan's book is his claim that quote the way of men is the way of the gang unquote that is the natural milieu of men is with a small group of other men the hunting party the war band the street gang a sports team etc donovan writes quote a man is not merely a man but a man among men in a world of men being good at being a man has more to do with a man's ability to succeed with men and within groups of men than it does with a man's relationship to any woman or group of women unquote now remember what ketology's just said about ken and barbie now of course this is a gay man and if you don't think past one generation or you don't have the money to you know sort of this is the huge ironies of our modern times i mean i haven't watched the handmaid's tale but if there's if there's anything resembling it it's surrogacy where women are just simply valued for their reproductive ability and paid for it i mean and and that's a product not of conservative communities that's a part of progressive communities it's just the way the way that things just sort of zip around now are just astounding so but but is i love the way i love what arron does with this while recognizing that men do often form gangs i'm not sure i buy donovan's view of the gang as the fundamental unit of masculinity and in other words you know the the gayness isn't so so if all of them and there's very much a gay vibe among the kens in in barbie land even though none of them are gay because of course at least they're little girls playing with them in the 60s and 70s maybe if they're playing with them to now everybody will get the gay you know the gay ken thing but you think of a community of gay men well that's a gang there's there's no there's no feminine energy that has to sort of begin to to keep the gays you know to break up the gang energy let's say however there are valid points here one there's a communal element to masculinity virtually all discussion today about how to be a better man focuses on essentially individual actions eat better work out embrace the grind impose your will in the world get married and have kids etc i'm as guilty as anyone of this but human beings are social and political animals not lone wolves manhood is pursued and developed in a community of men iron sharpens iron now this is super interesting and he's right he's he's really right they're all two manhood is defined by a man's relationship with other men and this is where it's fun to take the ketology video and this piece and put them next to each other because what happens at the end of the ketology video is that all there is is the individual all there is is the individual and not so scholars like anthropologist david d gilmore have noted that manhood is an earned status it's not just about hitting a particular age to be accepted as a man requires that a man perform in the activities and traits of men there's a standard that must be met and the people who primarily determine whether that standard is met is other men not women women merely reflect whether men have already determined as jordan peterson put it quote girls are attracted to boys who win status competitions with other boys now you can overplay that point but the truth of that point can't be denied and and what interestingly enough happens in barbie land is that all the kens have no hierarchies with which to compete all there is let's see if i can all there is is beach and again now part of the essential element about barbie land is again this is life seen through the imagination of a modern 10 year old girl that's what barbie land is it's not there's there's not a reality to it this is life through the eyes of a child and and the movie sort of looks at that and blows it up and and says okay this there's something ridiculous about this because it's life through the eyes of a child but there's still elements of truth in it because it's not that children don't see or know truth it's just it's a childhood truth where obviously there's no genitalia you know you you done you undress your ken and they you know they play with this in the movie there's no genitalia on ken there's no genitalia on barbie it's it's at least you know in the modern world where you're sort of keeping children from sexuality at a point um you know there's that it's not really a sexual landscape and appropriately so unquote in other words donovan's book is about the way of men not the way of a man and now this is interesting because we're again back to this individualism oh this is from the previous video where are we at here the community offers help on the basis of local traditions and economic favors which often differ greatly from supply and demand laws of of the free market in an old-fashioned medieval community where my neighbor was in need i helped build his hut and guard his sheep without expecting any payment in return when i was in need my neighbor returned the favor at the same time the local potentate might have drafted all of us villagers to construct his castle without paying us a penny in exchange we counted on him to defend against brigands and barbarians village life involved many transactions but few payments these were some markets of course but their roles were limited you could buy rare spices cloth and tools hire the services of a lawyer and doctors with less than 10 percent of common 10 of commonly used products and services were bought in the market most human beings were taken care of by family and community there are also kingdoms and empires that performed important tasks such as waging wars building roads constructing palaces for these purposes kings raised taxes and and occasionally enlisted soldiers and laborers now if you read the history of debt by graber you get into this question of money and what's clear is that money is in the realm of the king and part of what has happened subsequently is the creation of the individual this changed dramatically over the last two centuries the industrial revolution gave the market immense new powers provided the state with new means of communication and transportation and placed at the government's disposal an army of clerks teachers policemen and social workers at first the market and the state discovered their path blocked by traditional families and communities who had a little love for outside interventions parents and community elders were reluctant to let the younger generation be indoctrinated by nationalist education systems conscribed into armies and turned into ruthless urban proletariat over time states and markets use their growing power to weaken the traditional bonds of family and community the state sent its policemen to stop family vendettas and replace them with court decisions the market sent its hawkers to wipe out long-standing local traditions and replace them with ever-changing commercial fashions yet this was not enough in order to really break the power of family and community they needed the help of a fifth column the state and market approached people with an offer they could not refuse become individuals marry whomever you desire without permission from your parents take up whatever job suits you even if community elders frown live wherever you wish even if you cannot make it every week to the family dinner you are no longer dependent on your family or your community we the state the market will take care of you instead we will provide food shelter education health welfare employment we will provide pensions insurance and protections this is this huge transition that happens and now we go from you know little girls basically getting you know working out what it means to care for a baby to little girls working out what Ken and Barbie are and do so the video that didn't get made I deal a little bit with Hillary Clinton's Atlantic piece on the weaponization of loneliness now I found this to be extremely ironic because I think probably two of the most high status lonely marriages in America are probably the Trumps and the Clintons I wouldn't care to be in either of those marriages and so she she writes this piece on the weaponization of loneliness and it just comes out as a political screed you know it's all that's all Trump's fault it's all right wingers fault it's all and what we really need is what what more modernity that's a big part of the loneliness to begin with Barbie doesn't need Ken Ken doesn't need Barbie but there's hauntings of something that of memories that they once needed from each other now David Brooks piece how America Got Mean is much more nuanced but is some ways equally flat-footed because he wants to get back to institutional formation but that that institutional formation really doesn't work I played a clip from the Tammy Peterson Louise Perry video where Louise Perry I'm gonna find it again I'm remaking the video I lost now so here Louise Perry is is talking about her work 15 are sometimes still at home so they still are in their communities they still have their parents around but you know as you said in your book is rape a power or a sex-driven crime boys that are I mean how old are the men I wonder that are doing the assault also young probably under 20 yes I can't remember the figures off the top of my head but yeah definitely skewing in that direction I mean but yeah it's one of the pieces of evidence I think for rape being motivated by power by excuse me the the classic feminist line from the second wave is rape is about power not about sex it's not the idea being it's not about sexual desire it's about politics really yeah I don't think that's true there are some cases where I think that's probably true you know if you look in the workplace for instance you know that's an amazing line rape rape is about politics really I see junior men sexually harassing senior women the sexual harassment always goes in one direction so I think that in in cases like that you can see that there is clearly power at play in the power offers opportunities for harassment but I don't think in general that is true or not the whole story one of the very good pieces of evidence for that is that the the age of victimization for girls or girls mostly women tracks pretty much perfectly the age of peak sexual desirability and the age of perpetration for men and boys tracks pretty much exactly the peak of sex drive I don't think you can really explain that through the power analysis I think you have to be thinking about this as an aggressive expression of sexual desire and if you think in those terms then my argument is that we need to be thinking quite differently about what the solutions are to sexual violence because the interventions that are generally proposed by feminists are all ideological it's all to do with teaching boys in particular at younger and younger ages teaching them feminist politics essentially and hope that this will prevent sexual violence again it's just I think Grim Grizz has a clip of me hearing that for the first time that I just couldn't it's just the most absurd thing in the world we're going to teach young boys feminist politics and that'll fix it it's like have you ever met a human being do you know what do you know what it boggles my mind is that barbie doesn't need ken to be happy or to enjoy herself and ultimately she doesn't need ken to live now okay and this is well this is modernity they're both individuals and the state is there to give barbie everything she needs well obama had that famous there's this famous campaign that basically the woman doesn't need a man because the woman is married to the state woman as a government one of the guys in our meetup has a story about how the the government giving food boxes to women destroyed native american marriages because they didn't need men and when it comes down to this loneliness crisis that hillary clinton wants to write about well the answer is more government and better government it's like no um i'm not saying better government is a bad thing but you're using the wrong handle here why do i find this important and why do i find this interesting young modern men are lost in my opinion when it comes to trying to find meaning beyond modern woman either as something to strive toward or as something to scapegoat and this is absolutely nothing new young men have always depended on woman as a rite of passage into manhood and masculinity whether it was the young that's a very interesting graphic for that point aristocracy traveling to the continent in order to become men going to brothels or what have you getting married and producing an heir and these rites of passage are about garnering a sense of meaning and worth see she's wrong and ren is right because men didn't just sort of you know bludgeon and take women men went to sea men men went away from women you know they they joined the navy before women were in the navy they might go to brothels but she's just hitting all the points where men and women touch but men were doing all sorts of things with no women around and that's how they're establishing their hierarchy ren is right it is about understanding your masculinity about competing with other men in pursuit of manhood the common denominator has always been woman and their intent no integral role in what it means to be and become a man the barbie movie shows how stereotypical kin played by ryan gosling embodies the young modern man coming to the realization that the young modern woman he garners and has historically always garnered his sense of identity from has no genuine interest in him as a necessary component to her dream life and story she now again remember barbie land is a fiction of a prepubescent american girl and to understand the movie you have to understand that is a function of barbie land and so you can't sort of take it as canon it's a fiction of a prepubescent american girl a prepubescent american modern girl she is a modern woman who is finding and discovering herself in a world where feminine ideals are obsessed over where beauty is king or queen okay why because of the hierarchy among women i mean go through the supermarket if you still go there and if they still have magazines the other supermarket aisle had women's magazines with women looking good women are competing against each other for men where perfection and literally going to the ends of the earth in order to reverse the dreaded reality of aging are at the center of her world of her world in all of this and in the journey the odyssey that barbie is going through ken doesn't feature whatsoever as a central component to that he doesn't feature in barbie's story similarly to how nowadays men as necessity don't readily feature as urgently or meaningfully in the lives of young women the lives and stories of modern women specifically younger modern women are very different from our predecessors and this is the first time in recorded history that something like this has happened i don't know that she could know that she's probably right that's something as sort of revelatory in so far as the autonomy in so far as the choices in so and again all of this is a function of modern government and the modern nation state and money as far as the education of young woman and i mean not just a small group of women not just aristocratic woman but all woman is concerned and that is what makes it truly revolutionary it is as exceptional as barbie land stereotypical ken does now of course remember what barbie land is but it's modern what a lot of young men have done when faced with the sudden realization that beautiful and young woman aren't like the ideal sold to them by their legacies of their fathers their grandfathers and of course photography ken turns against that which he feels wronged by he turns against young and beautiful modern woman i think this realization is very difficult for a lot of men to really grasp and to understand especially in a world which is no friend to real modern woman are not a monolith they are not conventionally beautiful they are all manner and variety of beauty they are all manner and variety they're real of weight they are ultimately brains and want to be perceived as brains before they are deemed bodies and even when they want to be objects when they want to be objects of desire for men this is often done in the way of self-objectification or self-sexualization that is not in the service of men as an end in itself but no because they were competing with other women and even if men weren't around they would still compete in those ways now aaron had there are a few interesting things in that article that i want to point out here is where the typical feminist objection could rise can't women be strong can't women be courageous this seems to be something evangelical struggle to respond to and i believe accounts for part of why piper defines masculinity the way he does there are several extended biblical passages that discuss the relationship of men and women in different ways such as saying by saying the husband is the head of the house and the wife is to submit and when it comes to characteristics like courage the pickings are much slimmer given the general biblicist approach of evangelicalism if they can't proof-text something from the bible they struggle to advocate it and some feminist writers can simply respond with an example of gynocentric interruption like debora in judges it's a super interesting paragraph and then he says this donovan has different responses to this objection because he's pagan and he's not you know so he's not christian he doesn't deny that women can be strong courageous etc strength is a masculine virtue not because only men are strong lodon even affirms that men are generally physically stronger than women but because men and only men are judged upon on their strength he writes women can demonstrate strength but strength is a quality that defines masculinity greater strength differentiates men from women weak men are regarded as less manly but no one really cares or notices if a woman is physically weaker than her peers although you will see women playing in that hierarchy but not very much but that's again partly because women are in barbie land in some ways playing with masculine hierarchies it is similar for courage if a man who displays a man who displays courage when he should display courage earns the contempt of his fellow man a man who displays cowardice when he should display courage earns the contempt of his fellow man a woman who is courageous may be praised by others but if she isn't courageous if she runs away she's not going to be judged as deficient in femininity donovan writes both men and women can be game but status for for human females is rarely dependent on a woman's willingness to fight demure polite passive women are attractive to men and are highly well liked by other women it's a surprise that we don't talk more about loyalty and again ren is so good with this stuff which i would have considered a preeminent virtue of primitive male gang he does mention it the word appears eight times in the book he but he doesn't list it as a separate tactical virtue i wrote about it in my newsletter 58 where loyalty is the coin of the realm and and so again i think ketology has it wrong that there's a lot more going on here now i'm about out of time and so i have to really jump to the end because ketology leaves ken and barbie as individuals and it's you know she basically leaves in kind of a she's trying to she's trying to end in modernity so much of the the meaning crisis voices are trying to address the meaning crisis by sort of skidding back into modernity and even when you know i think peterson sort of bridges that sometimes peterson can be very meta-modern but often what i hear from him is sort of a skidding back into modernity same with sam harris and the and the and the new atheists they're skidding into modernity instead of when in actuality they're probably at the cusp of becoming much more meta-modern in this women won't save you now the barbie movie did something that the manosphere has not been able to do and that is why i think that this film now part of what she does really correctly a little early on is note that the manosphere part of it is still a little parasitic towards women but if you look at someone like donovan who's a gay man he's like i don't need women at all at least of course he's thinking within one generation he's not thinking intergenerationally is pro-men and rightly so the barbie film doesn't tell men what they want to hear it tells them what they need to hear stereotypical ken is forced to reckon with his insecurities with his projections and with his lack of truly knowing who he is or wants to be he's obliged to do this because he isn't truly fulfilled or fueled with purpose in the patriarchy there are only so many horses that can fill the void before they are sucked into it and that's hilarious that he is probably not going to find himself he's probably not going to know who he is now against this gets very existential down into the secret sacred self ken is an individual he must save himself and and of course so this this ken crisis is in some ways a redux of the 1970s woman who finds you know had put all her eggs in the in the monogamy basket and finds herself divorced without a career without a college education and so when her daughter grows up out of this divorce she's going to admonish her daughter you go out there and you get an education and you get a degree because you can't rely on a man to take care of you because just like greg laury's complaint they'll always leave you and so well if we can't trust individuals of the opposite sex to stay put then the most godlike thing around us that we can trust is the state and then well politics becomes our religion so david brooks again it's sort of this you know modernist skidding to avoid the the gulf says well you know everybody sort of took this turn towards the secret sacred self a cluster of phenomenally successful books appeared in the decade after the world war ii making the case as rabbi joshua loth leibman wrote in peace of mind 1946 thou shalt not be afraid of thy hidden impulses people can trust the goodness inside really a turn against an augustinian worldview this book topped the new york times bestseller lift for 58 weeks dr spock's first child rearing manual was was published the same year that was followed by books like the power of positive thinking according to this ethos morality is not something that we develop in communities it's nurtured by connecting with our authentic self and finding our true inner voice people are naturally good now if you read brooks book the road to character he's got a whole chapter on augustin book brooks himself has reportedly become a christian and is much more adopted augustinian world view and again augustinian anthropology and again jordan peterson as i've said before leverages in some ways in augustinian anthropology that um that we are not naturally automatically easily good we don't need moral formation this is what this this is what the counterculture said we need to let people get in touch with themselves organization after organization got out of the moral formation business and into the self-awareness business by the mid 1970s for example the girl scouts founding ethos of service to others had shifted they're no longer taking care of baby dolls you can get um you how can you get more in touch with you what are you thinking what are you feeling one girl one girl scout handbook asked because that of course is the source of everything oh and then we get down to the political according to researcher ryan streeter the director of the domestic policy study at the american enterprise institute lonely young people are seven times more likely to say they are active in politics than young people who aren't lonely people who feel disrespected unseen and alone politics is a seductive form of social therapy it offers them a comprehensive moral landscape the line between good and evil runs down the middle not down the middle of every human heart but between groups life is a struggle between us the forces of good and them the forces of evil this manichaean tribalism of politics appears to give people a sense of belonging for many years americans seem to be awash in culture of hyper individualism but these days people are quick to identify themselves with their groups but they remain individuals in terms of how they act politics appears to give people a sense of righteousness politics also provides an easy way for a sense of purpose politics overwhelms everything political movements are fueled by resentment by feeling that society does not respect or recognize them so again we're very much back into the everyone is now ken and barbie needing the adoration of everyone else this leads into freddy freddy deborah's piece on anti-thera the anti-therapeutic where what we all need is the adoration of everyone it's sort of it's sort of narcissism writ large but again for ketology everyone is left to themselves and where will they go and where will they look in the short term that this is something that is going to take him a very long time if not a lifetime as it ought to for everybody your identity oh okay so what so here it is now the identity crisis is here so he is a lifelong endeavor it is not an aesthetic it is not a temporary thing it is not something that you discover at a particular age it is and so she's basically an existentialist here and it's all up to you and you're going to spend your whole life again introspecting cultivating my identity cultivating my profilicity cultivating all of this so to be seen by others no it's that and you're going to be back in the loneliness crisis or the intimacy crisis as mark lefabeuil likes to call it i think it's i think he's right with that just riddled with more wobbles with more downs than ups with unimaginable and unpredictable changes and alteration and this little speech reminds me of sort of the the stoic grandiosity of the new atheists that you have to believe that you are just this short-lived animal and yada yada yada and there's nobility in believing this grim fate and owning up to it and cultivating your identity but in the end you die alone and you will be forgotten that's good news it is far more difficult far more complicated far more grueling than the easy way out in either simping after or having control over barbie or a mod why do it why do it why not because that's people have why not just live in the moment of the experience for as long as your your paycheck can endure by the end of the film all the kens are acknowledged as kens whose existence on purpose has been contingent on the barbies and their world barbie land ignored the kens as individuals in their own right up until the final scene and this is something which political feminism has done to men since the 1970s political feminism sees men as a monolith it sees men as purely that which is everything that women have been known to and have been conditioned to fear men are the enemy they are that which has to be controlled subjugated ignored by the end of the film barbie acknowledges ken his feelings and his individuality for the first time she hears his struggles so ken gets to be an individual now too struggles without condescension without disdain or ridicule she apologizes for taking him for granted for refusing to acknowledge his humanity fully and truly but what i found the most important and the most crucial was that barbie does not and will not save ken she will not be ken's eve either in saving him or being blamed for his damnation in this he will have to find his own way to his identity he will have to find his own masculinity without her without barbie without modern woman and when i've said this i have been taken out of context it has been a bit misconstrued as me saying that men need to go their own way no men going their own way is completely and is all about woman men going their own way is the ultimate extreme example of men seeing woman as the enemy it is the same as political feminists who are political lesbians because ultimately they're and i think she has a point higher existence revolves around their enemy it revolves it's finally parasitic was around that friend enemy distinction women are friends men are enemies and in this it's the most extreme form of an enemy and in that i do believe that your enemy is ultimately the the essence of your entire existence and life if you are making such extreme choices based on them if your enemy forces you or at least you perceive your enemy as forcing you to make such an extreme decision you rarely have no control or agency over yourself what when you wear your buttons on the outside everybody else gets to push them forever this isn't a happy ending for the kens but it is an important and a very real ending for them it is the it's not a joyful ending but buck up this is your existential duty bear it proudly ending that the kens and i believe young men today really really need there is no past to yearn for nor is there any woman who is obliged and so it's individualist atheist existentialism again deeply modern and so again we have this up up up up up the meaning crisis is ahead of us post-modernity no no no no no let's stick with modernity affected by patriarchal norms to save men from themselves and the world i would say that young people generally lack the insights of philosophy books the use and oh now we get the sermon encouragement of their own cultivated critical thinking and an education that isn't stuck in the stalemate of the industrial era and its marketable demands men are noticeably suffering dearly and it is because of this that the likes of gurus of don't tempt me to be a victim experts of earthly gods rarely appeal to them and direct and guide them often into very dark and very counterproductive places many young men have realized that young women are not going to save them and so they look for other people to save them they look for the likes of andrew tate to save them or at least a while ago they would look for jordan peterson to save them poor jordan so pass makes me think of that ryan shaw oh oh unfortunately although in my opinion fortunately you are the only one who can save yourself oh is that good news or bad news maybe if you're a narcissist you think i'm up to the task i'm a christian minister i think no definition of a christian is someone who trusts jesus more than they trust themselves you are the only one who can put your life into such a position that you can garner meaning from yourself and your efforts in so far as your efforts in creating and building relationships with other people are concerned and in that you are essentially the only one who can give your life meaning and so if you're an idiot or if you're an addict or if you're just lazy sorry too bad for you you can give your life and ensure that your life has meaning for the long term and not just temporarily and that is a very difficult and very scary thing to come to terms with it is the ultimate existentialist plight that realization that nobody is going to save you that there is nobody but you as nicha the main culprit of this mess wrote rather ambiguously albeit rather infamously god is dead god remains dead and we have killed him how shall we comfort ourselves the murderers of all murderers what was holiest and mightiest of all that the world has yet owned has bled to death under our knives who will wipe this blood off us what water is there for us to clean ourselves i'm not optimistic if you're your own savior and lord i'll say that but i thought the movie i thought the video was good i really like ketology i like her i like her videos um i think ren has a better story to tell obviously when there's the video that the video that i grieve but my time is done and this at least will be out on monday sorry for the video that fell stillborn leave a comment let me know what you think