https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=jugwCxdncp8

 Alright, Eric, why don't you tell me a little bit about yourself? Well, a little bit is hard I guess the way that I'll start with is that in my early 20s I was a preacher for a small congregation in Wichita, Kansas okay, Church of Christ if in case you're interested in that and and I was there for about five years. It was my early to mid 20s and For various reasons that I mean I can write I I don't have to get into I ended up in Huntsville, Alabama where I met my wife and I'm currently writing fiction But I also still preach and do various things with the congregation that I'm involved with now It's not like I guess sometimes people see that I'm not a full-time preacher anymore sometimes they think well, I must have left and I didn't do that but That's kind of my short story What made you turn from preaching to writing fiction? Why fiction? Probably because that writing fiction was what I was involved in all the way back like when I was in junior high. I Love stories. I wrote all the time and It's actually kind of one of the things that I really wanted to do for my entire life So it's it's writing fiction is just what I've always Is one of my loves that I've always wanted to pursue and that's what I'm currently pursuing right now. Have you sold? Have you been published? Have you sold many books? so I Self publish I started my own publishing company It's a lot easier now in this day and age to do that. Oh, yeah, and I mean I've sold a modest amount of books myself Part of what I'm kind of learning about I guess the self publishing model is that to make the same amount of money you don't necessarily have to sell as many books Because you don't have as many people taking cuts out of the pie so to speak but also it seems like it's kind of the like I guess around the turn of the century there was kind of the the the Dime novel kind of just write as much as you can and and sell as much as you can and I think that that's kind of That's the self publishing model and I I haven't quite done that yet so it seems to be like maybe that's the the way to make money is just Continually produce and I'm still working on that continually producing party. But what kind of fiction do you write? So I write some alternate history slash satirical kind of books about former US presidents Interesting. Yeah, and and I also write some children's books like I've written a children's horror story kind of like a along the lines of a goosebumps kind of novel and Well, it's not a novel. It's like a short story and and I'm working on a children's fantasy story right now Oh Cool cool. Yeah, now is this is this your day job or do you have a different day job to make money? It is it is currently my day job for you mostly because my wife is taking the brunt of our Responsibilities well Many wives have have had their husbands take the brunt so Yeah, well there I suppose he's she's been very generous Allowing me this space in order for me to try to pursue this so kudos to her very grateful to her Wow, wonderful. Wonderful. Yeah, what would you have on your mind for our talk today? So I had a lot of things on my mind. I one of the I've been I've been listening to you. I somehow found you because the YouTube algorithm sometime because I had been listening to a lot of Jordan Peterson stuff and I think I found you a little bit before you started doing the Talking about his talks with Sam Harris. Okay, and and I don't necessarily want to like It seems like you've moved mostly on from that stuff, but a couple of things that have come up more recently with your you were talking about Jordan Peterson's interview with the Dutch. Yeah, I can't remember the name of the website but There was something that came up that I was trying to place together Partly with his discussion with Sam Harris When Sam Harris and him started talking about love and It seemed very odd. I can't remember. I think it might have been like the fourth Interview or debate or whatever and Sam I think Sam was the one that brought it up first and They started talking about love and then also in this recent interview that that you kind of broke down a little bit Jordan Peterson talked about When Jesus had to talk about what was the greatest commandment? he brings up love the Lord your God with all your heart soul and mind and Then as soon as Jordan Peterson says that he shifts from love to I can't remember what what verb he Shifting really to duty. Yeah to duty. Yeah about the logos and And I had been thinking about that for a while I had just it was a random sermon like I think it was that I was sitting in in November and the preacher brought up that verse because it's a very common verse to bring up and For whatever reason because he brought it up and I had been thinking about a lot of these things it like hit me is like That's that that's um It's a strange thing, especially if you're dealing with God number one. How do you move from? This is the way the universe is to loving That thing which makes the universe this way and that that that seems like a really odd Like when I started thinking about it that way it's really odd and then I started thinking about what does it mean to love God like It's much easier when you accept that kind of God number two personal right God, right, but even so I Like it's like we use that language and I don't even know if we really know what we're talking about Yeah, and and I guess I wanted to just maybe prod you a little bit about what you thought about that like how do you make that like I've been thinking how do you make that bridge from God number one like maybe the acceptance that you need to do certain things in order for you to prosper like in various rules that like Jordan Peterson comes up with or the way that maybe a an Atheist will come up with certain rules for life, but then how do you make that jump to? loving that thing which makes The world work and what on earth do we mean by love right because? We in our culture we tend to have when we hear the word love What's so even within words especially big words like love for which there are at least four Greek words That get translated into love for us or at least the the domain of love so there's even within the word love there's a hierarchy of of Values and meanings right and in our culture when we say love we tend to forefront the emotional Experience so and we can love inanimate things like I can say I love Yosemite National Park right when I say that sentence I'm saying that Yosemite National Park conjures up within me a feeling right now Someone would also say well, okay if I love Yosemite National Park when I visit Yosemite National Park I'm not going to litter Because if I would go into Yosemite and I would litter that would not be in keeping with Loving the park right so so there now we have an inanimate You know place like Yosemite National Park, and now we have an action and and we can say well I let's say I decide I'm going to volunteer now that the government is shut down and nobody's keeping the latrines clean I'm going to volunteer in Yosemite National Park I'm going to drive in there with my truck and pick up a load of garbage and haul it out of there right because I love Because I love you love the country or I love something along those lines. It's Jordan Peterson uses the term like was it motivating I Can't remember he like he he talks about like God as like maybe the motivating spirit or the motivating Something and and that that makes sense in terms of love because love If I love something it's going to motivate me to act in a certain way right so um but there's an interesting thing about love when I consider that because from a biblical perspective I think about like the letter to the Ephesians in revelation where The Ephesians are doing all the right things and yet Jesus tells them you've lost your first love so you can do all the right things and not love and Somehow miss it right and that's no that's a difficult thing when you're just dealing with law I guess is kind of that's the domain of law right? well, you can say I followed the law, but Yeah, so I don't know if that makes sense what I'm saying it does and yeah, so let's get to the I think it's the Church of Laodicea. I'm just starting up logos here to take a peek at that passage Well, there's a few of them that like well Laodicea isn't that one the one they they think that they're they think that they see well And they think that they're rich And they're in fact they're blind and but I was thinking about the Ephesians where it says You've opposed the Nicolaitans. Oh, you're right. You're right these various things, but you've lost your first love I'm aware that you have persisted steadfastly Endured much for the sake of my name and have not grown weary Right, but I have this against you you have departed from your first love. Yeah Yeah And like the things that he lists about a church like if any of us were in a church That had that list of things that the Ephesians were doing we would say that's a great church But Jesus says you you lost something along the way, which is fascinating to me But it also like it's interesting too like In like learning from my marriage There's a difference between doing very well There's a difference between doing the right things all the time and my wife feeling like she's being loved Uh, they often coincide But if I just went through the motions my wife would probably tell me at some point You're I don't feel loved or I don't feel like you're in it or something along those lines. So love There's something beyond just doing the right thing which is interesting in The in like talking about Jordan Peterson. I was thinking about um, I saw just a portion of like his patreon q a I guess it's not patreon. I wonder where he's getting his questions now. No more patreon But uh, I only got to see the first part where he announced his like 12 more rules. Yeah, and It's interesting how He's he's essentially disseminating rules Or law that um people react to in various different ways like some people will say Well, this is just common sense So why do you need to make these kinds of rules at the same time? They'll say how ridiculous to have These rules or how ridiculous to so it's it's almost like a contradictory kind of um uh reaction to those various things but um And maybe the reason why Church people or people who are church that like they look at Jordan Peterson they see What he's doing with um, and maybe why we're attracted to it so much too Is that a lot of his laws it seems to me? Are like what paul says the purpose of the law in galatians is it's like it's a tutor to bring you somewhere else or to bring you to You know to bring you to jesus essentially for in in terms of galatians I was thinking like uh Jordan peterson's rule about pet a cat I can't remember exactly how but it's essentially the same rule as don't muzzle the ox when it's uh When it's when you're plowing the field like it's about showing kindness to an animal And it's not really about it's the rule that jordan peterson's rule isn't really about cats And the rule about not muzzling the ox isn't really about oxen It's about something deeper inside and like in like even his first rule stand up straight It's not you're committing a sin if you're not about posture great Right, and it's about something behind it and then that relates to What I think about like when jesus Talks about the law in the sermon on the mount and he says you heard it said You know, there's various things like don't commit adultery. I tell you instead Anyone who commit or who lusts after a woman Has committed adultery in his in their hearts or the person who is angry is guilty of hellfire or or however He puts that in and I I think he's saying essentially the same thing as in galatians is like these laws Aren't just here to just follow the law You are supposed to learn something about yourself in following the law and learn Something beyond or learn what the law was pointing to um I feel like i've kind of just been rambling a little bit But no, but you're well the difficulty is it's It's hard to talk about this stuff, right? Because you I think you're right and i'm tracking with you in that The I had someone leave a comment, you know, why why it's always why is it always misery deliverance gratitude with you? Someone said that Why not some other things and it's like well, there's other things too. There's there's creation follow redemption restoration There's there's lots of little lots of little things but part of the reason Right part of the reason at least homiletically with sermons. I usually end with misery deliverance gratitude is because of very much what you say in that You know love the lord your god with all your heart soul mind and strength the the idea here is clearly that That which we give to god is Is our complete self? And and I think that's I think that's what You're correct in terms of the the letter to the church at ethesus in terms of you. You've lost your first love Uh, you've actually I was I was looking I just pulled up I just pulled up logos to take a little take a little peek at it and the Let's see. You've you've The you've let it it's it's an heiress active in terms of you've you've you've let it go I wondered if it was a middle or a passive voice, but it was an active voice. So Clearly Boy, this stuff is so you know when you when you really when you when you start digging down Let's say what are we really talking about? What what is the? What what is the goal here? And well, let's we can jump over into Systematic theology and let's say that the goal is union with christ Okay, and That other and there's there's lots of different ways that this gets phrased in the new testament and then In christianity, it's let all of your life be worshiped Well, what does that mean that all of our life be worshiped when we're working that's worship? but what does that mean because we associate worship with Depending on your tradition it might be kneeling or or laying prostrate or or sitting Contemplatively or standing with your hands up but the the goal is that Is that we Have the kind of union well jesus says it a number of times in the gospel of john That that we are grafted into christ the way that jesus is grafted into the father and again when you try to That that's very abstract language. Well, i'm using a metaphor the grafted metaphor from a tree right but the the idea is that the If you think about god creating the universe for glory and our rebellion basically we we We we are we are non-glorious and we are significantly non-glorious sometimes And the goal of god is that the universe? Be reach its glorious potential So what does that mean for us well and I think loving yosemite So when you go into yosemite the reason you pick up the trash now now me I have a high I have a high tolerance for chaos which gives testament which is testified to by the messiness of my office in front of me Doesn't bother me a bit but right why I clean up yosemite is because well because what because Not only do I want yosemite to be glorious for me, maybe the garbage wouldn't bother me Maybe i'll turn my back from the garbage over here, but I want glorious I want yosemite to be glorious for my neighbors and the other visitors And then of course jesus not only says love the lord your god with all your hearts all mind and strength and love your neighbor as yourself But he also says love your enemy right and what's interesting about that is that the The enemy is someone for whom specifically you do not have an emotional attachment to right Yeah, and so you you do have this You do have this vision of all of the universe Becoming Basically becoming glorious reaching its glorious potential and then that will have to be manifest in every aspect of life Yeah, that's the goal that's that's the consummation. Yeah Now as i'm as you're saying all that i'm like wondering also if If love is a necessary thing uh because Doing the right thing doesn't always produce good results, right? And so you need a motivating factor that's going to make you do the right thing regardless of whether it returns back to you or Or you get the or you get the things that were promised to you like I I wonder if like sometimes Like that's also an objection to like, you know jordan peterson's 10 12 rules for life or to the bible or to all this other stuff is like Well, if I stand up straight How is that like how maybe that won't make me more courageous? Maybe my life will get worse if I clean up my room. Maybe um You know, maybe if I do something or I you know, or like my life will get worse and it's very possible that it might and so um What is the thing that's going to motivate me to do the right thing or live for rightly? Everybody Despite the fact that maybe You know the lord giveth and the lord taketh away. That's kind of a that's a god one kind of thing god's going got the Whatever it is if you believe in god or the universe or fate or whatever it is it gives it takes away Are you know, are you going to be like jobin accept it? Yeah and continue to be righteous or act rightly? or are you just gonna get bitter and Decide to do all these other things. Yeah So what so there's have you ever heard of bounded set and center set Theories, I don't know that I have okay bounded set is kind of like laws So don't do this do do this don't do this do do this and you're inside or outside the group based on Whether you keep those rules, okay centered set is The relationship you are having to a center point so So let's say well you're having you're having struggles with your wife And someone says well, you should buy your wife flowers sometimes But then your wife begins to figure out the only time you buy her flowers are when you've screwed up somehow, right? So then you know and and that's where kind of this law base versus versus love and that's why Christianity has usually put an augustin and many others have usually put love at the top of the hierarchy Because what love is is love is? Selfless commitment for the welfare of the other it's you know, it's your welfare at my expense That's what love is and see now when I say it in that way it shifts it from emotional center Right, you know, I often say that Everybody wants to be loved A lot fewer people want to love now people sometimes like to love because well that can feel good Yeah, but when When someone has hurt you when someone has betrayed you and you have to ask the question What does it mean to love this person? Right that question is not the same as what should I do towards this person to make me feel good? Nor is it really what should I do towards this person to make them feel good? it's What should I do for this person or towards this person? In terms of what is for their welfare and again if you have a child A teenage child in particular even a young child, you know that often The loving thing is not necessarily welcome on their part given the limitations of of how they can see their world so This and that's that's part of the reason that I think love has endured In christianity at the top of the hierarchy and that's why jesus uses. What was the standard answer? That's not and That's not a new thing that jesus brings to the conversation love the lord your god with all your hearts all mind and strength and love Your neighbor as yourself that's the That's the duty and then that of course gets That then interprets the crucifixion the crucifixion story Right where the crucifixion is an act of love towards enemies, yeah So so why do you think jordan peterson? Shifts away from love to duty like in that uh That interview what is it because just because love is a harder thing to To describe and duty is an easier thing I think one of the one of the reasons is that he's he's correct in seeing that a generation of emphasis on entitlement has made people bitter and You know if a feeling of entitlement is just one step away from feeling resentment And and that is a very unhelpful dynamic that is Pretty deeply entrenched in our culture and I think peterson rightly notes that the a feeling of duty Leads to actions of responsibility which yields Feelings of meaning and feelings of meaning are really powerful. I mean nice to receive things But in in a sense jesus words, it's better to give than to receive There's a lot of truth to that but it's also harder to give than it is to receive often Yeah, I think I think peterson's focus is on that but I think actually the the deficit that peterson has in my opinion in terms of a fully formed christian worldview is that Finally You have to you have to get into a metaphysical relationship Have christianity fully engaged in that we The the way the again misery deliverance gratitude our final Our final posture towards god is one of gratitude not Fearful dutiful obligation. It isn't that that isn't there. It's just within a priority It is it is always it is always god who moves first and it's always god who acts first Now what happens in a secular frame is that There's no one left to save the world but us and and people immediately Default to duty Right, which is completely understandable. And again when I talk this way what's difficult about human beings is that we consciousness so easily is monofocal that If I say duty and I say gratitude We have a hard time keeping those two things in our head at once And so if you hear a lot of gratitude you think you're just going to be lazily Receiving and feeling thankful. Well true gratitude is actually Not unlike duty in terms of how it is acted out Yeah, so so in saving private ryan You know tom hanks character gets to the end and He his squad has been torn up and he's now shot and matt damon has been saved And and tom hanks looks up at to him and says earn it now Now there's no earning Right, he's gotten because he's already received it Yeah, right there. You have the dynamic where now for the rest of his life The matt damon character is thinking have I given enough sufficient for the Sacrifice that was given to me to save my life. There's deep christianity right there in that story because because and and it's not just a sense of because if here's the tricky thing because if you have the sense of Well, I have to earn it as duty Resentment can be nearby If it's beauty if you look at what tom hanks did to save him and you say The beauty of that sacrifice the beauty of that courage the beauty of that Not only do I want to live up to that but I want to embody that And then you have I think emotionally All of the lights getting lit up because it's it's it's sacrifice and it's Meaning and its mission, but it's not It's not terror Or selfishness it's still love for the other And and I think it's in that way that you begin to see the gospel And and I think peterson because he At least at this point has been reluctant to fully engage something like the resurrection Because the resurrection fundamentally changes the crucifixion Crucifixion without resurrection is a totally different picture. Yeah, and and so I think that is part of the reason why There is our new testament prophet seminary used to say as preachers at some point you have to decide Are you going to preach grace or you're going to preach law? Mm-hmm now part of what we're struggling with as a culture is there's been a lot of entitlement and so We confuse entitlement with grace and that's what bodhoffer was getting at in terms of cheap grace. So There i've talked too long. Oh, that's That's okay. I really I appreciate your your perspective and that's I I um, i'm glad that this is recording because i'm probably gonna want to go back over some of that too Um, I did there was one other thing that I wanted to I guess kind of maybe shift a little bit I want to make sure I kind of cover this because I was thinking about talking today And an interesting thought came up to me and and so I want to make sure I share it. It's related in part to uh, the other thing that I mentioned was I I kind of wanted to talk about brett weinstein and his uh view of religious texts And you know, he has this view that basically from the bottom up that religion is an evolutionary viable thing that is the reason it survives is because uh, it Because it exists and and so clearly it survives because it has an evolutionary Uh benefit must it must have afforded us an adaptive advantage right and here because evolution does not Allow wasteful things to endure right and but so his perspective though is that the world is so different either because of nuclear proliferation or because of internet social media and the speed of information and everything that uh, How he puts it some ways like uh iron age religion is not sufficient for Today or that's at least that's I think i'm being fair and summarizing. That's how he he views that and um, I mean clearly as somebody who Follows the bible and i'm the same way is like I I have a different position on that in part, I guess because um, even though maybe um maybe you know the way in which we communicate or the speed or I guess the massiveness of our bombs the way that we can kill each other or other kinds of things That it is different the question is is it really all that different from the The stories like I when when he says things like that he says like we could kill every like we could clear the entire planet Well, that's the story of the flood like it's not like it's not like uh Iron age people weren't aware that They could be completely wiped out as well and that the moral systems that developed I guess you could if you want to accept this kind of like um evolutionary idea about religion and i'm not completely against it because I see a Development of religion going from the old testament all the way to the new testament as well Or a develop or a development of a deeper understanding of of what man ought to do uh, so uh So the um It seems like the important thing is the principles and I think uh people like brett weinstein Are dubious about how do I interpret which principles to keep and which principles not to keep while not understanding that that seems to be like what um religious people are always engaged in like that seems to be Whenever there's a bible study and I like at my church. I just recently did a bible class on the northern kingdom of israel I taught that And the the entire question throughout the every king every story about elijah or ahab or this is okay What how do we take this really weird? story about ancient kings and prophets and What does it mean now? What does it mean to me now? What does it mean to this church now? and uh That's that's the the story that we're always engaging in It's not like we believe uh when elijah calls fire down from heaven That that means we should be calling fire down from heaven at every moment or something like that There's there's something else for us to get from those stories in a sense and um and one of the things I was thinking about with um with uh, uh communication And how communication is so different now. I I think about this passage in the ecclesiastes I should have I guess I should have looked it up, but there's this part in ecclesiastes where solomon or the the the uh, the preacher says Don't speak ill of the king or else a little bird Will go and tell him and if that's not twitter. I don't know What it is And So i've thought like the bible you should write the bible predicted twitter, right? It's like i've thought like if somebody somebody could write a book about uh king solomon's ancient wisdom for modern information technology like Because like a lot of these things that you find in ecclesiastes or the proverbs about how to interact with people how to You know answer a fool or how to do all this other stuff like I think a lot of problems in social media is that we don't follow those Guidelines we speak too hastily we answer a fool when he shouldn't be answered and we we do all these kinds of things like if we just and so like when I think about that is like The reason that we have problems is not because those are outdated ideas, but because We've abandoned them and they would really be helpful if we followed them And I and I say that to myself too is like because man social media That's probably the part of my life that I get like the most frustration with and like every once in a while my wife I'll talk to my wife and she'll and i'll be visibly like upset or something and she's like What did you read on twitter now? and And i'll be catching myself like i'll like sometimes i'll like tweet something snarky And I like I think about like just five seconds later after I hit enter. It's like I shouldn't have done that I shouldn't have said that you need the undo button on twitter right the five second delay Oh not pull that one back. Yeah Yeah, and and the only reason that I regret it is because i'm not following proverbs As well as I ought to sure. Um And I don't know that a better a better um System of morality like can I just come up with it? um on my own And um, I don't think I can and that's the odd thing about brett weinstein's. Um, uh Project is that he's working within an evolutionary Framework and he's saying we can and he also says something along the lines of like we can uh We can do something about it, but if we are creatures bound by evolutionary restraints How can we think that we're going to? Overcome this like even if we do it's it's It's how evolution Made us to do it. So it's it's an odd It's an odd thought. Um No, that's what I oh, uh I there was one so I want to get to the thing that uh, Maybe those are a couple of things that I was thinking about but Another thing that I was thinking about just like old stories and the idea of like Is our world much different than what it was? You know at some other time I was thinking about I had read I had read last year Uh don qui jote And amazing book, yeah, it's a great book and I and and the thought occurred to me like a couple days ago about how much The book of don qui jote is about dealing with a lot of the problems that jordan peterson's talking about A lot of the stuff that the that like all the controversies that we're dealing with in the western world Um, you have a man in his 50s who is enamored with these old stories of of nights of of like these stories of how to live forthrightly as jordan peterson would say and he's he's living it and The question is is that is he a comedic figure or is he a tragic figure? and different people have their different ideas about it and um, and there's these parts where Uh, and and so from the perspective of the reader is like he's delusional but Is he delusional or is the rest of spanish society delusional? Because then like there's the where the priest and the barber start coming up with these ideas and and the and I had to learn this as I was reading is like the barber was almost like Uh a doctor in those days. Yeah, so you have the religious practitioner and the scientific practitioner both in this like agreement to to um Bring don quiote out of his delusion and one of the first things they do is they burn all the books Take out all of this information this bad information that's going to influence him to act this way He's been reading all those he's been reading all the all that chivalry stuff get rid of that, right? Right that all that toxic chivalry stuff And then there's another point at which uh, they make this plan to uh, the priest dresses up as dulcinea To try to convince like well, we couldn't get him out of his delusion So we'll just we'll get to the end and we'll complete his delusion for him. So like they work against their own uh priorities and their own morality in order to like convince him or get him out of that and so there's and and um you know and and the backdrop is a lot about like the spanish inquisition and a lot of the other things that um, there's this moment where uh He don quiote and sancho come upon these prisoners that have been captured by the spanish inquisition And he frees the prisoners and then one of the prisoners then attacks him after being freed and and uh it's like this It's this story where and I guess when we talk about stories, it's like we want a good guy. We want somebody That we can and and and don quiote. You can't hold on to anybody everybody is Is messed up in a certain way In certain stories you feel like oh, I feel exactly like don quiote and other stories. You're like no he is crazy burn his books like And you're you're like constantly shifting from one position to another and and um and I can't like when I think about like, uh, all these different things like sometimes i've talked about like, uh, you know a lot of this stuff is like the woke inquisition like and is uh you can't say certain things or unless you'll get the ire of various people and and even if you do Like even if you like take a side for somebody like you free the prisoners uh Sometimes they'll come back and attack you anyway Anyway, I I just thought that that was an interesting or that I had that thought that um We don't really live in a different time Than or with with really new things happening. It's it's the same things just in a slightly different context And that's I think maybe the value of ancient texts like the bible Because that's proof that like the flood story it's proof that We have been concerned about What it you know the act if we take certain actions, will it destroy everybody? If we you know and and uh And like in the flood story if we fail to If we fail to rein in our appetites and the yeah perhaps in the in the pre flood was Was was jealousy violence? Everyone is destroyed. No, that's right. That's right Yeah, and so like these books that stand the test of time and the bible is definitely one of those and I and I would definitely say is imminent among all other books, but uh The books that stand the test of time like don quiote is like over 400 years old. Yeah, and he's describing A time that's very much like ours in some ways. Yeah, and uh And uh, it's just it's interesting to me like we could learn a lot from Yeah, a lot of these books but we have like this um almost uh Uh, I don't know self-centeredness is like no I don't need to listen to all these old stupid people back then. I've got it figured out as if The next generation coming after us isn't going to say the same thing about us anyway, I I uh I think I uh, yeah, I wanted to make sure I got some of those thoughts in no the the um the um One of the so so early on, you know when I first heard peterson There's I was interested he he would do it. Here's a here's a There's a whole bunch of things that were just didn't fit into so I was interested but the speed that the video I saw early on that really captured my heart was a A talk he gave back at harvard later on When he talked about the value of a classical education and because he was what he was saying in that talk was Very similar to a talk that I had given my kids when they were thinking about college and I said, you know I don't care I don't care how fancy and highfalutin the name of the college you go to is I really don't think that matters when you go to college. You should leave college You should be able to think you should be able to write you should be able to speak and you should have exposure to the to the classics because there's a you know, there's kind of an Evolutionary crowd sourcing that happens in classics and I think you're you're right. I I read donkihote for the first time about Oh five six years ago and I read that and I thought oh How have I gone through life? not reading this book because exactly you're I I thought There's so much in this book that is so applicable to our time and and how could this have been written to an age that is so different from ours and And that's all you're reading into it. Yeah, but you know, but part of what these classics do is that they You know, it's not just and and this is this is where people get stuff wrong about the bible It's not just what the book has it in a flat sense It's the change the book produces in those who devote themselves to it. Yeah and And so donkihote it was just like you said there were so many parts in it and I thought This is this is incredibly Relevant to our world today. Now. It could be that if I had read that as a high school kid I wouldn't have known anything because I didn't know enough of the world Right, and I have that with the bible Because you know when I was a kid I learned these bible stories and you know, fortunately Bible stories that make it to that make it to children's sunday school are not politically correct, you know, there's yeah There's death and as a little boy, it's like wow, this is great. No. Yeah, I agree judges was like my favorite book That's right. Yeah, samson and yeah, you know, what's you know, you're a little boy So it's like what's that business with delilah? Just you know, forget those girls go back to the lion and that's right Yeah as a teenager. It's like a delilah And and so you're exactly right I think brett brett weinstein is is brilliant, but when it comes to When it comes to the turn he always makes of well now we see this so therefore that well, it's like Okay, tell me which Tell me which things from the bible are obsolete And you're exactly right in that when he says that it's like Actually, this is built into the bible take take some time some time and compare the laws in Exodus to the laws in deuteronomy and just make a careful study of those and you begin to see oh there's been development And and then you look at and if you the more carefully you read the bible the more you see the development and change The question isn't will we change the question is where can we find wisdom? that will That will counter us in our change Yeah, that will that will stand against us and say, you know, I think you know same-sex marriage is a is a big topic and it's it's ripping denominations apart now and for you The intellectual dark web all same-sex marriage, blah blah. Okay. It's number like, okay now i'm old enough to remember 2012 and all of the all of the talk about civil unions that that talk went away Yeah, so Okay. So everyone just decided this all of a sudden. Okay How do you know and and this is where again I really appreciate peterson because peterson makes the point we just got the pill Yeah, we don't have any idea What this is doing And we won't have an idea about this Probably for a few hundred years Yeah, yeah that we're gonna have a whole lot of other ideas And so, you know, I like to point to the amish and say well look at the amish I mean they take a very radical view of not changing within this little box and It's handy to have a religious group like that around because if you look at them and you look at us you can begin to say Well, you know, i'm not about to keep the phone in the barn or ride a ride a horse and carriage, but I can learn from them. Yeah, and because i'm i'm in the midst of the flow right now and And finding a reference point outside of me that can give me orientation is incredibly valuable And the best reference points we have are in our past and the best Resources from our past just so happen to mostly be religious Yeah, which is fortunate for us because religion tends to be exceedingly broad So it it doesn't answer our questions, but this kind of well some of these things are obsolete. Okay, which ones? Right and on what basis will you make that determination? so it's I and So so what do you know? It's it's it's it's a forever problem. And again, I thought peterson in the in the In the sam harris debates said it so well when he said yeah change We have no idea what will work. So that's a huge problem. So stay the same. You can't do that We have no idea we have to jettison. There's huge problems on both sides peterson when he said that I was like Dead on right. That's exactly right. We have no idea what we're doing and Right again for me If you want to have examples of that read history Yeah full of examples so yeah of like societies that have That decided to go their own way and and just leave everything behind Yeah, there there are examples of that too. Yeah, it's it's all it's no That's what the whole thing is right. It's no it's so yeah I I I love listening to his stuff and I I learned tons from him But whenever he makes the certain move to well We don't have to do what we don't have to do this evil programming. Oh, so, you know what evil is Right tell you can tell me in any given moment. What is evil and what is not? Well now you're in sam harris's category. It isn't that obvious Yeah And as in terms of a pastor you see that in people's lives. Well, I've fallen in love I've fallen out of love with my wife. Oh, okay. Well, what does that mean? Right, are you on board with that? Um, you know three generations from now the decisions you make right now are gonna impact these people not yet born Have you given any thought to any of this? Well, but but and what you begin to see as well. I'm orienting my entire Decision around my what feels good to me right now. Oh, okay So is that well and then there's like that's That's truer than All this other time and all this other like that's it Yeah I I know that like we're getting close to time. So I I just locked the room. So the next guy doesn't come in Okay, so I guess he's like, oh, you know, oh well, that's good I um, you know, I There's this uh, I guess maybe to kind of like put a little thing on this like i've recently been reading through jobe And i've read through jobe a whole bunch but one of his friends makes that makes this point and sometimes we don't give the friends enough credit for How right they are on a lot of things and one of his friends. I think it's bill dad But I might be wrong. Yeah, uh says something a lot along the lines of we listen to the fathers because we're here for we're but here for a moment and And how can we know anything? and that's part of the whole thing is like the whole reason to even go back and to consider what all these other people said and did is because we're here and gone and um And and we've got we've got to hold on to something that's larger than us and bigger than us And and our religious traditions are one of those things um So, uh, we jettison it at our peril. That's right If only there was an institution where people devoted themselves to the wisdom of the past and held each other Accountable to try to apply it to their lives, right? I find such an institution I don't know. I don't know somebody That sounds like a good idea. Somebody needs to start one of those needs to start one of those Oh eric this was this was so much fun. I appreciate it paul. It was a lot of fun for me, too I'll send you i'll send you the recording and and you can decide what you want to do with it. Okay. Sounds great Okay, take care pleasure to meet you Yeah, it was good to meet you, too. Bye. Bye