https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=HeCU9VR9XEs

 Awesome. All right, Daniel. All right. So, tell me a little bit about yourself. Yeah. You're open to sharing your story. Yes, you betcha. I'm up in Canada, right, right. The southernmost part of Canada in BC by the capital here. Okay. Vancouver Island. Beautiful, beautiful place. Yep. Yeah, so started listening to your channel pretty much right when we started doing the Jordan Peterson stuff. Really? It was probably, you know, if it wasn't your first, it was your second or third Jordan Peterson video. And yeah, the place I was in pretty much, it was good to listen to you all the time. So it worked out. You put out so much content. Yeah. I could sit and listen to you ramble for hours and hours. So it was good. My apologies for all the rambling. You're very gracious. I enjoyed it. I know some people say they listen to you sped up and it's like, yeah. Normal speed. Yeah, it works for me. So where'd you grow up? Grew up close to Vancouver. Okay. Yep. I was born in Victoria on the island here and then moved to a suburb of Vancouver when I was four or five, I think. And then moved further out about an hour inland from Vancouver into Chilliwack. Oh, okay. Yeah. And grew up there. Moved back here when I was 20. Moved out of, you know, moved out of Mom and Dad's and came back to the islands. Did you go to church? Did you go to church with your family growing up? Yeah. Yeah. Born and raised in a Christian home, as the story goes. What kind of church? You know, we kind of flipped around a little bit where you have all my people are Mennonites. So my mom and dad both had kind of left their Mennonite churches and we kind of, we went to some Mennonite community church kind of churches and went to some just evangelical generic things. We wound up going to an Eevee Free Church. Met in a school gymnasium for most of my teenage years. And yeah, it was good. Lots of good people, but I could never figure out what they were doing. That's a great lie. So people would talk about things and I wouldn't be able to connect words to concepts. And when I got to be, what, 12 or 13, Sunday school was kind of a little... I guess, then talking seriously about things and you know, it's a high IQ kid and homeschooled. So had a little bit of a... Oh, you were homeschooled too. A little bit of an attitude when it came to getting information. Yeah. So yeah. Why did your parents homeschool? That's fairly, you don't seem that old, but that homeschooling is a fairly recent phenomenon. So your parents must have been sort of... Fairly, yeah. They took a lot of flack from a lot of people for it. Yeah, I can imagine. Yeah. My brother went to school till, what I think, a few years in public school and my mom pulled him out. He wasn't doing well. They were holding him back because he was reading at like a grade five level when he was in grade two. Yeah, yeah. He wasn't getting along with the other kids and so my mom pulled him out. When it was my turn, she just said, nah, we'll keep him at home. So they did that for up until I went to public school, no, private school. Never went to public school at all. I went to private school in grade 11. What kind of a private school? It was like a, I think it was a Pentecostal Christian school. So they were a little different too. Not too different from what I was used to. I'd been to a couple of Pentecostal churches and the evangelical world is all kind of a little bit soupy. But, you know, chapel was interesting, a little more charismatic than the Mennonites anyway, that's for sure. Yeah, yeah. So did you go to college? Went to the one term of computer science. One term of hardware and one term of software. Yeah, figured, did the hardware stuff and figured this looks like it's going to be boring. Maybe I should do software. Did the software stuff and thought it was going to be boring too and I'm losing my mind sitting in front of a computer all day. So I grew up with computers as a hobby and it's better as a hobby. Better as a hobby. So when you didn't do college, what did you do for work? Went into tiling. Tiling? Yeah, when I got out of school, actually it's funny, I went to grade 11, I went to Christian school and then grade 12 they had a school that was like an experimental project between the school district and the local university and they were doing university courses and high school at the same time. So I went in there and got started in computer science there and then went into plumbing. When I got out of that for a year and a half and thought, nah, I don't want to work for a living, I want to go do computers. Then I went through that and thought, nah, I don't want to do this, I want to work for a living. So when I was plumbing, it always looked like the tile guy said the easy trades. I figured I'd try that. It's a lot cleaner than plumbing. It's cleaner than plumbing. You don't have to go into the corral space ever. You do one service job plumbing and you don't want to do anymore. I totally understand that. So you listen to a lot of YouTube when you're, are you still in tiling? Just quit forever. Really? When you're in trades, there's always a point you want to quit forever and it's like the mob, they always drag you back in. But yeah, I had this brutal summer. I took on this job that I thought was going to be a big job and no concept how big it was going to be. And it just spiraled out of control and doing 70 hour weeks, like stressing out like crazy. So now I'm kind of taking a break and reassess. Okay. Reassess where I'm going, what I'm trying to do. Okay. Okay. Yeah, so I ended up listening to a lot of YouTube. When you were tiling? When I was, well, not actually when I was working, I would listen to tiling or listen to YouTube when I was at home because I haven't had a life forever. Okay. Yeah, I started kind of isolating myself when I was a teenager. You get into your teenage years and you get awkward. Yeah. And I figured this is too awkward. It's not worth it. So I started getting myself off from people bit by bit and ended up with very few friends and not much of a community at all. Moved out of my hometown back to the island, to Victoria for a couple years, started tiling and didn't make any friends. My brother lived out there, so I had my brother that I would talk to. My uncle and aunt lived out there. I stayed with them for a little while. But once I got out into my own place, I didn't have anybody really and didn't know what to do. Got into drugs and destroyed my whole world. Came back to live with the folks and that was about 10 years ago. Moved back to Chilliwack and stayed there for most of 10 years. Kind of trying to become a person again. Did you do a program to get off drugs or just living with your parents? No, just living with my folks. They found out pretty quick once I moved back. Hang on a second. I got someone at the door and I got no one to answer. Sorry about the interruption. All right. Daniel, Daniel, Daniel. You're a good guy, Paul. Thanks. So you got on drugs when you were away and you went back, moved back home. That's often the case that if you've got people around you, if you've got some support, you do better. Yeah, yeah. It seems that way. Yeah, so yeah, like I say, it didn't take too long. Once I moved back home, my parents figured it out. So that was fun. But it was good. It was good. Lived with them for a few years. Ended up going to work at a little Christian summer camp just up the street from where they were living. I actually knew the family from when I was a kid. So I went up there and worked for them cooking for five years, which was actually great. Wow. Didn't really make any money to speak of, but it was fun and it was good to be there. They were good for me. And I was there that they had all kinds of disasters happen with their management. I was able to help keep bailing out the ship. So it was good. But yeah, that was five years. Then they kind of stabilized and I was starting to feel like I should probably move on and get a real job. So went back to tiling and did that for another five years. Now I feel like I should get a real job and move on again. Okay. What kind of real job are you interested in? I don't know, man. I don't know. You've done a lot of different things. So yeah, a few. A few. Yeah. Yeah. At this point, I don't know, at this point I want to move to a tiny island and try and sell seashells to tourists. Once I get some rest, we'll see. Yeah. Yeah. So how did you, I mean, what kind of stuff were you listening to on YouTube and how did you find Jordan Peterson? Let's see. It was listening to lots of, lots of culture war stuff when I found Jordan Peterson, like lots of the buck I was saying. Started to get a little, little anxious about cultural movements with the whole, seeing the whole movement past the gay marriage thing to the transsexual thing. And you can see it, start to see a trajectory going and get a little, a little concerned and then start to see, well, when you pay attention, you start to see all kinds of weird things that pop up in the pop culture world. People getting all upset about speakers coming to speak. So I started to get quite anxious about all that stuff, worried about all the feminists are destroying society and whatever. So then Jordan Peterson came on talking about C-16 and he's so dynamic that you can't help but keep watching the guy once you see him, right? So I soaked up, soaked up a couple of years of Jordan Peterson, probably two years of Jordan Peterson YouTubes till I pretty much felt like I'd listened to him and he was just saying everything that I expected him to say. And then right around that time, I bumped into your channel via the algorithms. So I had another two years of rambling to listen to. So what about my channel have you found helpful or, I mean, why keep listening? What parts of it, what aspects, what kind of things do you think about? Well, you know, for me, I'd say it's what I wanted Sunday school to be when I was a kid and never got to flesh that out a little bit more. But you were, you've been doing a good job, I think, or at least trying very hard and obviously getting results in explaining religious ideas and language that people who don't really understand religious language can grab onto, which I found very, very useful. Like I say, talking to religious people when I was a kid is like one of Peterson's smart 13 year olds, I guess. And growing up, I still, you know, I'll talk to my parents and every once in a while, read a book or listen to a sermon or whatever, tag along to church sometimes and can't make heads or tails of what people are talking about. So, yeah, between you and Jonathan Peugeot, I got two different perspectives that I could grab onto and say, OK, this is I think I can kind of see what they're talking about a little bit. Maybe. OK, that's kind of the deal to try and figure out what's going on, you know, try to figure out what's real. You know, I really like Jonathan's. I mean, when I first started listening to Jonathan Peugeot, I was like, what is this guy talking about? It was really hard to understand him at first. It was like, he's saying all this stuff and what does he mean by this? And after a little while, you start to get it. It's like, OK, I kind of see, I kind of see where he's coming from. And then you begin to then you begin to see how his perspective helps make helps understand some other things. It's like, oh, this is interesting. So, yeah, that's what I thought. Lots of things, too, that at first, let's see, where's he going with this? Talking about every once in a while, you'd say, oh, he gets it. OK, I should pay attention because he's tracking with me on something. So I should listen to him. So you're so you're you're done tiling and you're you're looking for change. What do you what do you want? What do you want for your next for your next chapter for yourself? I want to go home. How old are your parents? Are your parents still well? Yeah, they're doing well. They're they're in their 50s creeping up on 60 now, I guess. So about my age, they're doing well. Yeah. That's good. Yeah. How's your brother doing? My brother's having a hard time. He's he's kind of more like me. Never never figured out the figured out religion. And he went off and did his own thing, got into the military and. Ended up. Injuring its back and getting discharged and he's dealing with Veterans Affairs for forever and ever there. They're paying him out and trying to retrain him and he's dealing with his. Issues from that. That's he's having a hard time. Wow. Wow. Yeah, my little sister, too, for. For whatever reason. For whatever reason seems to be having a hard time, too. She's she's never. Never left the church, but she seems to. Have a hard time finding a church that she feels like she belongs in now. For whatever reason that is. Well, churches are churches are complex. They. They really are. And you know, I know a lot of people. A lot of people. It's it's a struggle for a lot of people because churches are full of people and people are messy and people can be petty and opinionated and. Churches are all full of regular people, which means that they're petty and opinionated and try to control others and try to get their way and they want the whole institution to do a certain thing. And I mean, that's it's it's it's a it's a complicated business. Yeah, for sure. For sure. I'm sorry to hear that your sister and brother are struggling. It's that's hard. And I'm sure it's I'm sure your parents worry for them. Yeah, yeah, it's not easy for them. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Well, parents worry often because the parents know that parents won't be around forever and they and parents take care of kids that parents always worry for their kids. But, yeah, at some point they partly they want to see their kids doing OK because they sort of want permission to to not be here to take care of them. Oh, yeah, for sure. That's how it should be. Yeah. It's a very common thing, especially when men die. Men who have wives who are still alive, they they worry about their wives, you know, who's going to look after my wife. And yes, that's pastoral. Well, they're here in the church. We'll all look after them and we'll keep an eye on them and make sure they're doing OK. Yeah. My my grandfather got cancer when I was a kid and, you know, they they ran him through all the chemo and whatever, but snuck the stuffing right out of him. He was, you know, maybe seven in his seventies, something like that. And after that, a few years after that, his health went down. Pretty I guess it went down pretty steadily after that. He was he was. He looked like he was he was about ready, about ready to go. And he hung around for a good 10 years. We were all sure just because my grandma was still still kicking. He wasn't going to go. Yeah. And he sooner than he had to. Yeah. Wanted to look out for her. And she's invincible. She's coming up on a hundred now. And she's really he's got fractured bones in her legs and her back and she can't see and she can't hear and she's still alive. She'll never die. Wow. Wow. Yeah. Yeah. Well, that's something else for your parents to do, huh? Yeah, exactly. Wow. Yeah. Yeah. So does your sister live with your parents or in the same town or? No, my sister's in Vancouver. OK. She's a she's an artist working in animation. Really? Yeah. So she's she's got to be in the city. OK. Yeah. Good for her. Good for her. Wow. Yeah. Yeah, it's pretty cool. Well, you work like dogs, apparently in animation. They're slave drivers and everything. You wouldn't think it. It looks like it's so cute. But I believe it. I remember seeing I remember seeing a documentary on Walt Disney and, you know, had all these animators that was back when, you know, every everything had to be drawn by hand and lines of animators like factory workers. Yeah. Wow. Wow. Well, you've got it. You've got an interesting family, you know, you and your sister and your brother and your your different stories and, you know, the homeschooling and and. Yeah, you know, it's. People. People aspire to have such generic lives, but but that certainly is not the is not the story with your family. No, I guess not. I guess not. Little little more generic starting to sound good, though, Paul. Well, yeah, that's just it. We like predictable. Yeah, we like we like knowing what's coming. You know, there's mapped and unmapped territory and and we want to kind of have that balance too much map territory. We get bored too much untapped unmapped territory. We get anxious. And so we're always, you know, regulating between boredom and anxiety. And but, you know, you know that because you tiled until it's like, OK, I'm done. Oh, yeah. So now now on to something else. Well, I'm curious what. So you have any inklings or ideas what you want that something else to be? I'm not sure I. On the one hand, I ever since I was a kid, I've been convinced we're all insane for not just subsistence farming. So I might just I might just see how much food I can grow and see how that goes. I don't know. But it's probably not very practical. There's, you know, I lived. So when I was a missionary in the Dominican Republic, I worked with Haitians and and the Haitians, they picked coffee, they cut cane. But that was that was for cash. And what many of them what almost all the Haitians I knew really lived on was a little garden, you know. So what the what the coffee pickers and the and the cane growers would do is they would be crappy bits of land like these Haitians. They would garden these these slopes that were I'd walk out and be like, holy cow. And every now and then you'd hear about someone who took a tumble because they felt but they garden these slopes and they were they were basically mostly subsistence farmers. And I'll tell you, it was when the rains came at the wrong time or, you know, they would they would want to they would often want to plant their guandules, which are which were beans. But then they they sometimes want to do the malanga, which is arrowroot. And they'd because it was at least a tuber. So you could count on it. You got to rain at the wrong time. You wouldn't lose your crop. And boy, if they had a they were they were always just, you know, I'm going to take this money, I'm going to plant this and I'll come in and I'll sell stuff. And right. It's it's a life. It's a life. It's not an easy life, but it is a life. Different set of stresses. Oh, yeah. Oh, yeah. Yeah. Yeah, it really is. But at the same time, you know, they lived outside, you know, they believed in God. They prayed, you know, they lamented when the crops didn't come in. They praised when it did. You know, they had plenty of meaning in their life. I saw no meaning crisis among among the Haitians. Just interesting. Yeah. But but most of those Haitians, if they'd have a chance, you know, to get to the U.S. or Canada, would would love to do so. But I don't know if they got here. I, you know, I've seen immigrants come and. There's a it's so interesting because they, you know, they appreciate the money. They appreciate the material security. Maybe their kids will have prosperity, but I think they a certain deadness comes in and they sense that. And I think in some ways, we're so much more used to it. Yeah, and I think that's, you know, where, you know, where drugs come in often. And I think people I think people take drugs sometimes because they want to feel alive or they want to dead. And so Daniel was right in here and he had a beer that he confessed to me that he stole because he goes into these he goes into these, you know, little corner stores and they have these little ATM machines in there that tend to rip you off anyway, because they have high priced things. And he'll put his card in and they don't want him in the store. So they'll pull the plug out right after he, you know, is waiting for the money, which cancels that, you know. And so then you're ripping me off. So I'm going to take this can of beer. And, you know, are you really going to how hard a time you're going to get me for robbing a $2 can of beer? And I just. Yeah. Oh, oh, life on the street. Yeah, yeah, I'm. I'm so fortunate I never wound up on the street, Paul. I don't know if I would have made it. But lucky, lucky for me, I've got the fantastic family. So that's huge. It's huge, man. It's huge. Well, and the fact that your parents took you in instead of kicking you out. Because usually when people show up by the time people show up at my door, you know, I'll sit down and I'll start having a conversation with them because, hey, if you want if you want 10 or 20 bucks for me, at least I'm going to get your story out of you. I'll trade 20 bucks for your story. Yeah. And because nobody was hatched. So so I want to know, well, what what really happened to the point that nobody else in this world will loan you 10 or 20 bucks and you have to knock on a church door and talk to a total stranger. Something happened. Yeah. Yeah. And and in many cases, there's just a lot of sadness and brokenness. It's many of the homeless, many of the homeless people actually have family that live in the neighborhood. Yeah, I believe it. They burned out their family so badly that the family just had no other choice but to put up a wall. So, yeah. Anyway. Yeah, I'm always always amazed that I didn't done that to my family. Something something incredible. I would imagine as a Tyler to, you know, when you're working in the trades like that. You know, you get. You know, that Chris Sarnade wrote that book about, you know, front row and back row America. Same goes same is true for Canada that, you know, there are folks, a lot of folks, they hold down a white collar job. They get a regular paycheck or a service work job. They get a rather paycheck. They pay their mortgage. They have, you know, health insurance. Boom, boom, boom, boom. Then there's the other class of people that they're working trades. So when work is good, they're making money. When it's bad, you know, it's just subsistence all the way through. Oh, you're back. I'm back. OK. No, it's just the front row and back row nature of our societies. And, you know, as a Tyler, I imagine you got to know a lot of back row. Right. Right. I. I imagine that's true. That sounds sounds like a good. Good description. You meet so many different kinds of people in trades, but. Yeah. Lots of people who are in the in the back row or the standing room only section. That's for sure. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Well, I, you know, of course, I grew up. My father, my father had a church with a lot of back row people in a back row part of town. And this this year in Sacramento is a back row part of town here, too. But I. I've been blessed by it because I don't know. Again, people in the back row don't seem to have the same meaning crisis. People in the front row have. They're not immune from it. Maybe. They're not immune from it, but I don't know. I don't know. Yeah, I don't know. I don't know what to say. See lots of people who are in the back row. See lots of people who are. Now, I missed the part where you were talking about the book with the with the front row in the back row. So I don't know exactly what. What way you're using that term. Well, so the guy named Chris Arnade wrote a book called Dignity that came out a little while ago and a bunch of people were pestering me to read it. So I read it. It was basically this guy was a this guy was a Wall Street. He worked on Wall Street, making tons of money. But I find this sometimes with people. And so he worked on Wall Street, made tons of money, but he liked going for long walks and he lived in New York. So he started going for long walks through parts of town that people would tell him not to go into. And there's certain kinds of contrarians that if you tell them not to, they will definitely do it. And so he started spending a lot of time in neighborhoods that people who work in Wall Street don't go in. And he began taking his camera and just having conversations with people on the street and got to know the drug dealers and the homeless people and the prostitutes and the and, you know, and. And basically started building relationships and then found this so interesting for him that he had enough money saved up from his Wall Street job that he started going through all kinds of back row communities in America. And he said, you know, the two institutions that survive in back row America are McDonald's and churches. And when he said that, that's just dead right. Because, you know, I'll tell you, I know a lot of church planters when they plant churches, they go to Starbucks and strike up conversations with people because if you want to plant a church, you sort of want to plant a church in a community that people will have enough disposable income and the motivation to get a tax credit to donate to a church. People don't hang out in McDonald's to plant a church. You hang out in McDonald's to plant a church, number one. Most of the people in McDonald's already believe in God. Number two, they don't have any disposable income. The kind of church they go to doesn't have the same kind of salaried relationship that front row churches have. You know, front row churches have budgets and salaries and benefits and these are churches pastors like to work in. Back row churches, well, they bring in money, but the pastor begs and cajoles and promises and swindles money to keep the church going. You know, and most front row pastors, they don't want to do that. They don't want to, you know, they feel dirty saying things like, you know, you know, cajoling and pressuring and arm twisting people to come and put money in the plate. And that's actually why in a community like this and in my father's community, a lot of folks who grew up going to back row churches don't mind front row churches because at least we're not running a religious con looking for money. But that is not fair to the back row churches because truth is there's all different kinds of them. Yeah, so I gotcha. Yeah. Yeah. And again, you know, I mean, if you're working as a Tyler, you're working with a lot of people. I mean, I've known a lot of the people that I've known who were semi employed and living on the streets almost all worked some kind of construction. Right. Yeah. Painting or plumbing, you know, they could work two days a week, make a little bit of cash. Yeah. Yeah. Drink the cash the other days of the week when they run out of money, they go back to work, work for cash under the table with some contractor who doesn't mind paying people under the table, so on and so forth. Totally. Yeah, it's the industry where if you show up in the morning on time and you're sober, you're an A1 employee. That's right. That's right. So yes, lots of back row people. I don't know if there's many front row people in my life. We were poor when I was a kid. I remember we got a couple of food hampers from our church. That was a... I wasn't quite sure what to make of it when I was a kid, but it's certainly a memory that hasn't left me. So yeah, lots of back row people, lots of class resentment, which isn't good. Yeah. But it's a thing. That's a real thing. It's a real thing. It's a real thing. I got into punk rock music when I was a teenager. As I got more lost, you fit in more with the misfit subcultures, so I got more into the punk rock thing. Yeah, a lot of resentment. That's for sure. Anybody who works in drug rehab will talk to you about the link between resentment and addiction. Yeah. Yeah. It's just fuel for addiction. That's there for sure. Yeah. Yeah. For me, it was mostly social resentment of the social awkwardness, say. Let's say, made it hard to... What made it hard to connect with people because you start resenting everybody more and more. You feel more isolated and not sure what to do about it. Yeah. I had self-esteem issues. It just didn't help for sure. Just terribly awkward with girls. I grew up and get more and more resentful at girls, which is unhealthy because it takes over your whole world. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah, it wasn't so good. Yeah. That's tough stuff. It's really tough stuff. It is. It is. Right when I got into puberty, I got this rash all over my crotch. We couldn't figure out what it was. We went to the doctor and the best he could figure out was that it was psoriasis. I thought, oh no, I've got psoriasis on my crotch. I'm doomed. My life is over, man. So that was my teenage years. Wow. Wow. That was tough. Wow, that's rough. That was tough. That's rough. Then I got up, once I grew up and had already destroyed myself, the rash went away. I think it was just some psychosomatic thing I gave myself because I was stressed out. That was a thing. Wow. Wow. That is... No. I think the culture war stuff is, in some ways, there's so much resentment in that too. So much, yeah. Yeah. On all sides, right? Yeah. Yeah. It's hard to say what it is. I guess that's what everybody's trying to figure out, but nobody wants to talk to each other anymore. Everybody's getting wound up. I think part of the reason that I really latched onto Jordan Peterson and you guys is... Well, the whole reason is because of the religious. You guys are all Christian. Well, Jordan Peterson, who knows what Jordan Peterson is? He's Jordan Peterson. But you're all talking about Christianity. This is... It's two things because I couldn't figure it out when I was a kid. It's been my project my whole life to try and figure out what is this that my culture is based on, that I grew up with, that I can't understand. And then watching the culture war, watching just the breakdown of basic civility between people, it didn't take long. And I would watch things and I would just think this is because we're not Christian anymore. Nobody wants to have grace for anybody. This is because we're not Christian anymore. Nobody wants to have grace for anybody. You know, everybody wants people to be perfect, which isn't going to happen ever. It's not going to go well. So I saw that and I thought this is more fuel. I've got to put this together and figure out what's going on with this religious problem that seems to be the same in the rest of my world. I'm still working on it. That's why I listen to so much of you guys. I put out so much stuff because I'm trying to figure it out. Well, that's why you're fun to listen to for two hours of rambling. If you were just telling us all the stuff you knew, it would get kind of boring. It's fun to listen to you work with ideas and figure things out and make connections. It's fun to watch people make connections because it teaches you a little bit how to do it yourself, right? Yeah, I guess so. What else? There was something I was thinking I was going to say. No, I'm not sure what it was. I think maybe it was talking about girls and my troubles. About 30 when I got a girlfriend. I kind of dated a couple of girls and didn't really go anywhere. Dated one girl because she threw herself at me. It's a little bit humiliating to admit, but I was 30. I thought I'm 30. I've never kissed anybody in this girls. He's right here. So yeah, I'll try that. It ended up being just so horribly. I embarrassed myself terribly and felt bad about the whole thing and it wasn't good. Then I met another lady that I dated who ended up dating her for three years. Got pretty close to her. I think she was about 30. She was pretty serious. It was foolishly chosen. Bad match. Absolutely. What can I say? Absolutely wonderful, horribly damaged person that I kind of chose foolishly and fell crazily in love with and it was just an impossible relationship. It was just three years of brutal, brutally hard. Hard too because it was good in some ways and so bad in other ways. Impossible to keep up and yet I didn't want to give up on it. It was tough. I'd been drinking like mad ever since I got off drugs. Well, I had a little bit of time when I was at my folks place and managed to say silver. I drank like crazy for years and was still drinking like crazy when I was dating this girl. That ended up becoming a problem obviously in many ways. Then it ended up the place, the suite I was living in. I was cooking and passed out drunk on the couch and burnt food and the fireman came and the landlady asked me to leave. I had the choice to move in with the folks or move in with the girlfriend. Moved in with the girlfriend. That was interesting. Oh boy is right. And the story got worse from there, Paul. This is life my friend. This is life. This is what happens. It's true. You survived. I survived. Yeah, yeah, yeah. Things got more and more stressful and she went away for a week and I was cooking and passed out drunk on her couch. And the landlady asked me to leave. Yeah, yeah. By that time it was long past time to bite the bullet and break up with her. It still took a few months to do that. But it, yeah, it ended. It didn't end very well, but it ended. So then I moved back in with the folks. Stayed there for about two years I guess. Pretty much just worked. Watch some old movies with the folks in the evening. Walk the dog. Yeah. Listen to a lot of YouTube. Yeah, yeah, yeah. It's kind of a bit of a blur. Yeah. When you live with your folks do you get along? Yeah, yeah. We, we, we learned to get along very well. It's actually, that's, that's the thing. It's actually, that's, that's been a blessing in all of this. Yeah, we worked out, worked out our differences and sorted out the issues from the past. Got to know my parents as people, which is actually pretty nice. Yeah, yeah. So, so that's been good. Yeah. That is good. That is good. You know, if parents sound like wonderful people they really do. They really are. Wow. I wish, I wish more people had parents like yours. They'd be, there'd be fewer people on the street. It's true, man. It's true. Wow. They're amazing. Amazing people. Wow. Well, Daniel, I will, I will send this video to you and you can decide what you'd like me to do with it. If, sounds good. If you can look it over and decide if, if you'd like me to share it or if you just want to keep it between us that's okay too. It's totally up to you. Sounds like a plan. Okay, Daniel. All right. It was a pleasure talking to you. It's a pleasure talking to you, Paul. It's weird but it's a pleasure. Yeah, it's weird, I know. But you know, God bless you on your, on your, on whatever new thing comes your way now after tiling. So. Well, thank you. I pray that God brings good things into your life and, and yeah, and God bless your parents because they sound like just terrific godly people. Well, thank you. And thanks for all the YouTube rambling that you're doing, Paul. It's much appreciated. You're very welcome. You're very welcome. Have a good day. You too, man. Take care. Okay, bye-bye. Bye.