https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=IIvH-KYUeQg

 All right, let's open with a word of prayer. Lord, we thank you for this new day, and we thank you that we can continue through the book of Romans and discuss it and learn from it. And we ask that you would guide our conversation and give us your peace. So we ask in the name of Jesus, amen. Okay, let's do a little review again because we're heading into chapter five. What's... So Paul's writing to the Romans, and a church has developed in Rome. What's the big question that Paul has to wrestle with with respect to the God of Israel? Circumcision, that's one of the pieces because the question was... The question was whether, how can non-Jews be a part of the covenant of Israel? That's the question. Because you have this Roman church, you had synagogues throughout the Roman empire, and non-Jews were participating, and women, in a sense, had an advantage of being enfolded into the Jewish community. They could basically, through ceremonial washing, but men had to deal with circumcision. And so one of the big fights early on was, do men in the church need to be circumcised? Now, when we think about, we think about, let's say, a synagogue, and we think about a church as two very different things. Because we think about Judaism as a religion and Christianity as a religion, as two very different things. In the very early church, they didn't have those categories. In fact, even our concept of a religion is, in many ways, a product of the modern era. And so, in many ways, they're thinking of these gatherings of people around the story of Israel, around the Torah, around that long history of Israel, now out into the diaspora, out into the Roman empire. They're thinking of it as one thing. And what we see in the book of Acts is that, again and again, when Paul goes into these synagogues and starts talking about Jesus as the Messiah and the resurrection, there's a split. There's a split. Because some people look at Jesus, and some say, no, he's not the Messiah, and some say, yes, he is the Messiah. And what's been really funny for me, what's been actually extremely interesting and educational for me over the last four years is increasing contact with the Jewish community and getting more and more detail about, okay, and I'm gonna talk about this quite a bit at the sermon, what did we mean by Messiah? And what's clear to me is that Christianity and the Gospels fundamentally redefine Messiah and introduce an entire new thread of thinking about the relationship between God and this world. Now, I've talked before about, I've talked before about what I've called the metadivine realm. And this is the conceptualization of sort of the impersonality, and in some ways neutral, overall cosmos, okay? And then within the cosmos, there are these gods that sort of give the personal in the cosmos, and then there's human beings down below, and what we call religion is in many ways the relationship between these gods up in the metadivine realm and people down below. Now, people would relate to the gods with temples, with altars, with, and that's sort of how you'd win favor with the gods, and then if you won favor with the gods, things would go well in your life. That's basically polytheistic pagan religion and how it works. Sacrifice to the gods, show obedience to the gods, pledge allegiance to the gods, and you will have good favor. Now, what happens in Israel is that you don't have a metadivine realm. All there is is God, and God is in fact personal. And you read in the Genesis story, up in the sky you have the sun, the moon, the stars, you know, and there are in the Hebrew cosmology, intermediary figures. Sometimes they'd use the word Elohim. Sometimes we tend to conceptualize them as angels. And then you have human beings down below. And the angels, if you see that in Jacob's ladder, go up and down from heaven. And when you read in the Genesis creation story, for example, you have the sun and the moon and the stars, but they're not, you know, they're not in the same realm as the gods. They're not gods in the way that they are for the pagan world. You don't worship the sun, you don't worship the moon, you don't worship the stars. You only really worship God, the creator. And this is part of the reason behind the, what was exceedingly strange for the ancient world, the third commandment, well, I am the Lord your God who brought you out of the land of Egypt, you shall have no other gods before me. You shall not make for yourself a graven image. Well, what would you make graven images of in the pagan world? You'd make a graven image about Baal, or you might make a golden calf, or something like this to facilitate the seeking of good fortune, the seeking of success, the seeking of things going the way you wanted to. Now, what you had with God and Israel was the covenant. And that was the relationship by which God and Israel would relate. And then of course you had Moses who brings the covenant to the people and the people are to obey the covenant. And again, read the end of the book of Deuteronomy. It's very clear. If you obey the covenant, Israel will be wonderful. If Israel disobeys the covenant, you're gonna have trouble. Well, what happened in Israel? They had trouble. Israel, and so in that way, the way to explain, it's very explicit in a book like the book of Chronicles, it's very explicit that Israel did not fulfill the covenant. Now again, Paul is out there in Rome, which is mostly filled with Gentiles. And the question is, how can, these are the Jews or Israel, it says whenever you say Jews, it's a little anachronistic. Anybody know what word the word Jew comes from? Which son of Jacob the word Jew comes from? Judah, exactly. So when you say Jews in the Old Testament, the only Jews in the Old Testament really are the tribe of Judah. Of course, the Northern Kingdom gets wiped out, the Southern Kingdom prevails, it exists. So the tribe of Judah endures. So that's today why we call them the Jews. So it's technically better to talk about Israel because we're talking about the children of Israel, Jacob. So you've got Romans with the Gentiles, and you've got Israel here, and then you've got Gentiles. And in chapters one, two, and three, Paul begins going into the question of how these Gentiles relate to God. That's the big question. And in chapter four, we got the argument we had on one side observances, and then the other side faith, and Paul made the argument that if you read the Genesis story about Abraham, their relationship starts with faith, not with observances. And now observances has sort of two aspects, obedience, and then religious practice, let's call it that. Religious practice. Religious practices might be going to synagogue, going to doing sacrifices, obeying the dietary laws, participating in the festivals. All of those are practices, and obedience would be following the Torah, the laws. Now, it's very interesting, I've noted this often, part of how Israel is different from, and did you pick up that we have new papers, Edie? Yep. Part of how Israel is different from the surrounding nations is that John Walton did a lot of reading about ancient Near East cultures, and what he found, and this is true in the classical period, you can see it with the Romans, they tend to, the gods are, the gods like getting paid off. The gods like, the gods are sort of, they're full of themselves. They like the sacrifices. They like the religious show. That's what the gods are really into. And so the oracles in ancient Near East prophecy focus on, do you know why you lost that war? You didn't, you didn't give enough sacrifices. What do you mean? Israel offered a thousand rams. You only offered a hundred. That's why you lost the war. Now, there's a certain cynical side that develops when we listen to this. Who's giving the oracles? The priests. What happens when the number of rams going to the temple goes from a hundred to a thousand? The priests get richer, because as we talked about in, as we talked about in the sermons on 1 Corinthians, what you do when you're a priest is you have all these sacrifices coming. You can't possibly eat all that meat. So what you want to do is convert that meat into, convert that meat into cash. So you sell the meat in the marketplace and people come to the temple and they give gold. And they hear, Lilly's coming in. I don't know if anybody wants to help Delphine with the, the door. Delphine's just zipping her, zipping her in. We saw you zipping in and we thought, uh-oh, let's get ready. So this is the way it's going in the pagan world. Now it's very clear if you read the Torah, if you read the first five books, if you read Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers, Deuteronomy, that there are sacrifices and festivals that the Jews are required to go to. But as the Hebrew prophet tradition develops, we hear again and again, things like, obedience is more important than the sacrifice. Hmm. This is unusual. Pagans don't say that. The priests in the pagan temples are all about the sacrifices. The God of Israel keeps saying, obedience is more important than the sacrifices through the prophets. Hmm. Okay. Now, when Paul looks at Abraham, Paul notes that faith comes temporary. Temporarily prior to circumcision. In other words, faith is more important than the practices, what we would say today, the cultic practices. Now the problem we have in English is that when I say cult, you guys think of Jim Jones and things like that. In Spanish and French, culto. Basically, in the Dominican Republic, if we were going to the culto, same word that cult comes from, we're going to the worship service. So cultic practices doesn't mean Jim Jones and things like that. Cultic practices means religious observance as we talk about them today. So, oh, it's, let's, there we go. So what we get now in chapter five is, you'll notice chapter five, verse one, begins with the word therefore. Therefore means that Paul has now made his argument in chapter four, made his argument about the fact that in Abraham, faith sort of, sort of initiates and the practice of circumcision in terms of the prior life of Abraham. And so he basically says that Gentiles can essentially get onto this same route. So he says that the fact that the fact that essentially get onto this same route. Now it's not going to go through circumcision. For Christians, what replaces circumcision? So here you have Paul saying, this is how God now brings the whole world into his covenant practice. All right. Signs and seals, yes. Now you can see why in Christianity, there's this tension around infant baptism. Because if you look at this, you never waited for, when did they circumcise a baby boy? Eight days in. Now on day seven, you didn't lean over the crib and say, now Samuel, would you like to be included in Abraham's covenant? You didn't ask little seven day old Samuel if he wanted to be part of the covenant. You circumcised a baby boy. You circumcised him. You're already part of the covenant. But now you're going to have to grow up and live into the covenant. And so that's why baptism. But you can understand why there's tensions in Christianity about baptism. And especially when, especially in certain places where there isn't any Christianity and you're not going to have children coming in, you're going to have adults come in. And so then adults are coming into Christianity. But then you see the connection with circumcision. You have infant baptism. I don't want to derail this conversation on a conversation about infant baptism. But circumcision, Paul says in chapter four, and this is exactly what the Christian Deformed Church gets its language, is a sign and a seal of the faith. So people arguing for adult baptisms will say, see, you have to first see the faith. People arguing for infant baptism says, no, they didn't ask little seven day old Samuel if he wanted to be circumcised. So there's the fight. Now, back to, there we go. Therefore, you're building on the whole argument from chapter four. Because we have been declared righteous by faith, we have peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ, through whom we also, we have obtained access by faith into this grace in which we stand. And we boast in the hope of the glory of God. Now that boast word comes from the arguments in chapter four, when Paul said, you don't boast about, if you have access to God through observances, you boast because it's in a sense, in your merit. Your merit won you this place. And Paul says, that's not the case for Abraham. Abraham's merit didn't win him this place. Why? Because what we see in the story of Abraham is, he's wobbly. Did he leave his home and go to the land that God would show him? Yes, good for him. Did he, when God said, I'm gonna make you a great nation, did he sort of reach out for that promise and faith? Yes, good for him. But he didn't earn that. He didn't earn that covenant. That is an unconditional covenant. And again, he messed up a lot along the way. And so Paul is basically saying, Abraham didn't earn his place with God. Now you might argue that Noah earned his spot on the ark, because Noah was the best man around. Not saying Abraham was a bad man, if you're just looking at community standards, but, and now we're gonna get into something which is difficult for us to think about, but not impossible. Because we have to get into the question about sort of assessing our relationship with, and I'm gonna use the most, the most neutral way I can, accessing our relationship with the transcendent. Okay, how many of you have ever seen the sound of music? Okay, sound of music. You have Maria, you have Maria, who's the nun. It's of course based on a true story. And then you have the, the captain who's a ship captain. They live in Austria, and the Nazis are taking over Austria. And the captain is a widower, and he has all these children, and he needs someone to take care of the children. And Austria is a Catholic country. And so, as was the practice, you look for a nun who can come and be a governess. He's a wealthy man. Come and be a governess for the children. And, and so, and there's, and, and so in the movie, of course, you've got the baroness, who's sort of the competition with Maria. Is the baroness gonna be, is he gonna marry the baroness, and she's gonna become mom, or is Maria, but Maria can't marry the captain, why? She's a nun. So there's all this romantic tension, of course. I mean, I think the sound of music is the first movie I remember seeing in a theater. And that says a lot about Christian Reformed Church history. So I remember seeing the sound of music in a theater. And of course, the sound of music had a real, there's a real soft spot in Dutch hearts after the Second World War for the sound of music, because of course they're resisting the Nazis, et cetera, et cetera, et cetera. There's a song, the sound of music is a musical. There's a song in the musical, where basically the captain and Maria, and of course this is gonna cause a crisis for her. Is she gonna stay a nun, or is she gonna marry the captain? There's a beautiful song in the story, where they sing this song, and they say, somewhere in my past or childhood, I must have done something good. Why? Because they're in love, and they feel themselves fortunate. And here they are in this beautiful gazebo, and they're falling in love, and somewhere in my past or childhood, I must have done something good. This in Indian terms, and it's now become sort of colloquial in American terms is karma. If you receive good fortune, it means you are in favor with the gods. And you can see that, how that works in sort of the pagan conceptualization, because it's all about your relationship with Apollo or Zeus or one of the gods, if in fact you have an end with the god, you're going, things are gonna go well. Now we know that that works in business, because well, if you want to have a good, if you want things to go well at work, what should you do to the boss? Curry the favor of the boss, because the boss has power. So if you curry the favor of the boss, then things will go well at work. Maybe you'll get more promotions, maybe you'll get raises, you'll get good reviews on your work. So in other words, you should always be kissing up. And so you kiss up to the gods, you kiss up to the boss, you're always kissing up. And sometimes they say in business, kiss up and kick down. Kiss up to the boss, kick down, get your competition below you. Now, in the Old Testament, someone like, if we look at Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and Lot, not Lot, actually Lot too, but Job, what did they all have in common? What did they all have in common? How would they be distinguished from, let's say, someone like Samuel? Where did Samuel live? He lived in the church, he lived in the tabernacle. Did Samuel have a lot of money? That's not part of the picture of Samuel. Was Samuel righteous? Yes. Did God listen to Samuel's prayers? Yes. Was Samuel a prophet? Yes. Samuel didn't have a lot of money. Job, Job, it's amazing if you read the book of Job, best man in the world, Job was. And when the story starts, the story goes to names things. Job was blameless. Job, and Job was blameless at every level. Job was blameless. He always did the right thing politically. And he was powerful in the town, in the city that he lived in, in the town that he lived in. And he always gave sacrifices for his, on behalf of his children in case they sinned and they weren't doing it. So Job would be righteous, you know, all the way for his children. But Job wasn't just religiously pious. He was also open-handed to the poor. So Job was righteous on every measure that Old Testament conceptualization saw a person as being. And so he was wealthy. And so the accuser, Satan comes to God and says, well, I'm rolling around the earth. Well, what do you think? Well, it's kind of a mess. Have you considered my servant Job? And what's the first idea that comes into the mind of the accuser? Why is Job righteous? Because it pays. Karma works. Karma works. Job is righteous because Job has figured out the system. And we know this today. So, you know, what do you want for your kids? Raise your kids right. Teach them right from wrong. Teach them to save their money. Teach them to rein in their appetites, to not be, you know, always grabbing for the stuff. Teach them. And you know what? If you teach your kid all of this thing, and you give them a good education and you play the system, chances are, your kid won't be begging on the street. They'll have a good job. They have a chance at having a good family. You know, all of this stuff, you teach the kid right, everything will go well. Karma works. Now, you don't have the word karma in the Old Testament. You have... And you find it sometimes in Christian writing, sowing and reaping. You reap what you sow. Now, how do you know? I mean, this goes all the way back to Max Weber connected this with Calvinism, which is kind of not terribly biblically literate on his part because you actually find this in many religions and in Judaism and Christianity. That, well, favor with the gods, favor with God. Do the right thing and you'll receive favor with God. And how do you know you've received favor with God? Somewhere in my youth or childhood, I must have done something good. There it is. It's really basic religion for humanity. If you're doing the right things, you'll be blessed. If you're doing the wrong things, and what do you mean by blessed? Things will go well for you. If you're doing the wrong things, things will go poorly for you. If you decide to, I don't know, rob from your neighbor, be indiscriminate sexually, drink too much, do too much drugs, don't show up to work, you know, and you'll find that it's not a good thing. And you'll find people like this, you probably in jobs had people who are lousy employees and then they're in the coffee room, they're just complaining about the boss, how bad they get treated. And all the other employees are sitting there thinking, you know why, you know why the boss doesn't like you. You're always taking breaks, you're spending too much time in the bathroom, you never show up on time for work, you're a lousy employee, that's why the boss hates you. The boss loves good employees. It's simple. Okay. Now, what Paul says here, and probably because we don't think in these terms, because we've been so deeply impacted by Christianity, none of it caught, none of you caught it. Because we have been declared righteous by faith, there's the grounds, we have peace with God. Oh, what does peace with God look like? Well, when your wife goes into labor, she has a healthy child. When you extend yourself on a risky business transaction, it turns out well. As your kids are growing up, they make the right friends, they get a good education, things start happening well for them. That's how you know you're right with God. Somewhere in my youth or childhood, I must have done something good. I've done good things and therefore, by circumstance, I know I'm right with God. Abraham, Job, this is how you know. How do you know Job was righteous? Everything's gone well for him. And then suddenly things go badly for Job. And what do Job's friends wait in and say? Somewhere in your youth or childhood, you must have done something bad to deserve the calamities that you have endured. And so this book of Job sort of sits there in the Old Testament like a sliver. And it just gnaws at this idea of karma that is absolutely pervasive all around the world. And because at the end of the book of Job, we know because we saw sort of the curtain was pulled back, we saw behind the scenes, Job didn't do anything to deserve the calamities he endured. But yet he suffered calamity. But yet at the end of the book of Job, what ancient pagans would have liked would be, well, can I buy an insurance company to make sure that God doesn't put me in Job's spot? Because truth be told, I love my children. I don't want a house to fall on them. I love my wealth in the bank. I don't want raiders to come and destroy my wealth. I don't want to disagree with my wife. Curse God and die, Job's wife says. That's not very good advice, but that advice is completely a part of the ancient mindset. Now, anybody reading verses one and two would say, oh, okay, I know how the system works. I need to, I didn't move my water bottle. I need to get in touch with the God of Israel by faith and then everything will be great. That's still around today. You know what we call that today? You know what we call that today in the Protestant church? Prosperity gospel. If I really want my life to go well, I should be a good Christian. Now, that's not bad advice because let's say you're living a terrible life. You're drinking too much, you're spending money poorly, you're not good to your family and friends, you're a terrible employee. If you become a Christian and suddenly you reign in your appetites, you treat your wife and children better, you're a better employee at work, guess what? Then the Christian's gonna walk out of there and say, my life was a mess. I went to church, I got saved. I'm good to my wife. I saved my money. I don't drink all my money away or gamble it all away. I'm a good employee. And you know what? My life is better. God is blessing me. Absolutely. Sowing and reaping. But Job, and in fact, not just Job, Christianity has a man more righteous than Job who Job suffered all these calamities, but what happens at the end of the book of Job? It's all restored. Now again, we read that book and we say, can you really replace your kids? No. But it's in that sense, sort of a morality tale, right? The question with Jesus is, well, do I really wanna be like Jesus? Look how that went for him. See, Paul is dealing with all of this Old Testament stuff because he's trying to graft the Gentiles into God's story. But there's a lot of things to deal with. So now we keep reading. Not only this, but we also boast in our afflictions. So if you think about theology, that's the word we would call it. It's actually something that develops over time because Job, not for a minute, would say to his friends, I know I'm righteous because I'm suffering. No. His friends are saying exactly the opposite. They're saying to Job, you're suffering because you sin. And Job's like, I swear, I was offering the right sacrifices. I was good to the poor. I was upright at the gate. I was seeking justice for the city. I did all the religious observance. I did everything right. And then this calamity befell me. Now, because we have the little early part of the story, we know, oh, this wasn't Job's fault. Job was blameless. He didn't deviate from his blamelessness. Something else happened to him. Job couldn't see it. And then it was all restored. And God says to Job's friends, Job was right, you're wrong. What do you mean we're wrong? Everybody in the world knows that this is the way the world works. When you have good fortune, it's because of favor with God. Okay, that's one reason. Now, this gets into this question of the nature of the world. Because part of what the Medi-Divine realm says is that the world is neutral. And if you listen to atheists today, that's exactly what they'll say. They'll say, the world is neutral. The world doesn't care. Let's say you were born with some difficult situation. It could be the poverty of your parents. It could be you're a man and you're too short or you're a woman and you're too tall. Or maybe there's a birth defect or maybe the wrong time and the wrong place. Or for some reason, you were born into bad circumstance. Karma says, well, what does Karma say about that? How does Karma figure that out? Well, in a previous life, you must have done something wrong. And maybe you were born to good circumstance and Karma says, in a previous life, you must have done something good. Atheists and neutrality say, it's just physics and chaos and randomness. Oh, so well, I guess I better deal the best I can with the cards I'm given, but sucks for me if I've been given lousy cards to start with. And I worked with Haitians for a long time in the Dominican Republic and they were dealt a rough hand. And their rough hand goes back through history. And we, myself, born in the United States, good parents, I was dealt a good hand. Now you might look at, let's say Prince William and say he was dealt a better hand, but then you watch the crown and it's like, I don't know, I'd rather maybe born less money, less royalty, born to Stan and Barb and Patterson. I'll keep what I was given. But, hmm, the difficulty that a religious person has who is suffering is, what did I do to deserve this? Am I still right with God? Now, Paul says here, the most remarkable thing, and again, we don't think of it as remarkable because the story of Jesus is 2,000 years into us. We also boast in our afflictions. What? Why would I boast in afflictions? Because in the ancient world, afflictions mean you've done something wrong and you're getting what you deserve. Exactly what Job's friends say. Paul says, no, I also boast in my afflictions. Why? Well, because, and this is really complex, because in a sense, being, and I'm using this with some of the people that I do videos with, being in Christianity is good. And in Judaism, being is good. When God makes the world in Genesis, what does he say? It's good. Now, something happened in this world that causes affliction. What is it? Well, you go to Genesis 3, rebellion causes affliction. Now again, this fits into the karma story because you can say, aha, if you're suffering affliction, it must be because of rebellion. So Job's friends said, but then we look at Jesus and Jesus adds a new formula into this and says, sometimes in this world, doing the right thing gets you bad situations. Now again, we all know this. Let's say you have a bad boss at work. You have a bad boss at work. Let's say you have a bad boss at work and you're a good employee. Or let's say you have a good boss at work, you're a good employee and you have a whole group of bad employees around you. And they're all taking smoke breaks, hiding, sneaking into the bathroom, ringing stuff up in ways they can take a little extra from the till. I mean, growing up, working in a lumber yard, working in a bakery, I saw all sorts of ways that people could be good and bad employees. It's just normal stuff out there in the world. But if almost everybody is a bad employee and you're a good employee, what goes on at work? They give you a hard time. Why? You're making us look bad here. We're all, hey, okay, it's a crappy job. We're on a minimum wage. We're all just kind of sliding by. But you're taking the extra effort and the boss likes you, right? I mean, what happens? I mean, you see this all over the place. And now what that means is that there can be layers in the world under which people live that can bring affliction to good people. Because when it comes to Jesus, isn't that the story of Jesus? Read John 1. Light comes into the darkness and guess what? The darkness doesn't like it because their deeds are evil. That's what John 1 says. And so Paul is introducing something new into the dialogue. Not only this, but we also boast in our afflictions because we know that, oh, affliction produces patient endurance and patient endurance, proven character, and proven character hope. And hope does not disappoint because the love of God has been poured out in our hearts through the Holy Spirit who was given to us. Paul now sort of does, so I don't know a lot about martial arts, but I've heard about, I mean, karate is sort of hitting with your fists, okay? Jiu-Jitsu is a grappling discipline where you try to use the advantages of your opponent against them. And so what Paul brings into the conversation, let's say you're the good employee amidst a bunch of bad employees and you're getting a lot of grief from the other people. Well, what might that do for you? Because we know that affliction produces patient endurance. What's that? What's patient endurance? Staying the course. So let's say, and you see this with kids. You know, with kids sometimes if something's hard, some kids will, when things get difficult, they'll quit. Ever watch a kid flip over the Monopoly board or something like that? The game isn't going their way, they flip over the board, why? Because they're not going their way. They're not going their way. They flip over the board, why? They're not winning. If I'm not winning, I don't wanna play. Here's a problem with that. If you keep that up in your life, how are things gonna go? You're never gonna achieve anything. You're never going to, well, what do you mean achieve? See, Paul has in mind here that God can bless us through our afflictions. What does that mean? That means that, well, parents know this. Sometimes parents are like, you can go out to play after you clean your room. And the kid sits in the room and crosses his hands, sits there in his dirty rooms with his hands crossed. Parent peeks in, room's still dirty, room's still dirty, kid's still sulking. Let him sit. At some point, hopefully the kid's gonna wisen up and the kid's gonna, you know, then maybe the kid tries to sneak out of the room and the parent's like, nope, go back in there. You can go out to play when your room is clean. Now, in a sense, the wise parent is afflicting the child for the child's own good. Then after maybe five or 10 minutes of sulking, the kid thinks, shoot, I'm gonna go out and play. My room's a pigsty. Why don't I just pick up the darn room and go out to play? And so the kid wisens up, picks up the darn room and goes out to play. And the parent's like, good job, go have fun. What does the kid learn? Patient endurance. Does mom and dad always tell you what you wanna hear? No. Is this a bad thing? Not necessarily. It's for your own good. What do you want the kid to learn? You want the kid to grow up into responsibility, into strength. We're doing a series of videos on my channel about marriage. And when I was a student at Calvin College, Dale Cooper was the chaplain there. And he was an excellent chaplain. He was an excellent preacher. I used to go to the Nocrest Worship Services. I heard a lot of his sermons. And after, I can't tell you, a few things that he used to talk about stuck out in my mind. One of them was his parents. When Dale Cooper was a boy, Dale Cooper's mother got polio. And in that day, if you got polio bad enough, the only way to survive it was to be put in an iron lung. Dale Cooper's father was a farmer. Now, think about farms. You grew up on one, right? It's all hands on deck. The more kids, the better. They're free laborers. And so you grow up on a farm, you learn how to work. Now, some people grow up on a farm and like, I'm gonna go to college. I don't wanna do that. Other people grow up on a farm and like, I wanna be a farmer. Okay, it goes both ways. Dale Cooper's mother lived most of her life in an iron lung. How do you think that went with Dale Cooper's father? You know, you don't wanna be married to someone in an iron lung. Think about it. Think about what you can and can't enjoy in a marriage. So for the rest of her life, he cared for her and had to raise the kids. And keep the farm going. And you just think about that. And you think a lot of people would be like, wife in an iron lung, I'm outta here. Now that made a huge impression on the kids, probably everybody in the community, all the way through the Dale Cooper, all the way to me in the church listening to him, thinking, I'm gonna be a farmer. I'm gonna be a farmer. I'm gonna be a farmer. I'm listening to him thinking, wow. Now we admire his father for that. Why? He had patient endurance. Now again, anybody might say, he had half a brain, he'd get out of that stupid marriage. Yeah, we understand that. But there was something beautiful, something noble, something esteem worthy that patient endurance created. But that patient endurance comes within a whole world of values. Patient endurance produces character. So his wife in an iron lung developed character in Dale Cooper's father. And then character in Dale Cooper and his siblings. And character in Dale Cooper's children. That virtue spread out through the story all the way to us. We're inspired when we hear that. Now again, there's gonna be lots of people who hear that and say, he was an idiot. What does it mean to have your best life now? Certainly not to be married to a woman in an iron lung. No, but we say, that's the kind of person I'd like to be married to. We might even go as far as to say, that's the kind of person I'd like to be. Yeah, but it came at a heavy cost. Character. Suffering produces endurance, and endurance produces character, and character produces hope. Okay, now, if someone came to Dale Cooper's father and said, YOLO, you only live once, what might that lead Dale Cooper's father to do? I only live once. What do I want out of life? Do I wanna be hooked up to a wife in an iron lung? No, I don't want that at all. I wanna find a wife. I wanna find the prettiest wife, the wealthiest wife, the nicest wife, the most adoring wife. I wanna find a wife that's gonna please me. I don't want any parents saying, clean your room before you go outside. Something's happening here. Character produces hope, and hope does not disappoint us because God's love has been poured into our hearts through the Holy Spirit, which has been given to us. Okay, the love of God, God's love. What does that mean? Did Dale Cooper's father have God's love, and what do we mean by that? What kind of love does God have? What, unconditional love. God's love is the kind of love that looks at the rebellion in the world and what? Doesn't say, yolo, look at all those ingrates. I've given him life, I've given him food, I gave him all this stuff, and look what they do with it, ingrates. No, God's love says, what does John 3.16 say? For God so loved the world, that's the love of God. Now these, in grammar, they're called genitives. A genitive is love of God, and they're really tricky because we've noted this with other genitives before, it can mean a love that God expresses, but it can also mean a love that God imparts. Dale Cooper's father loved his wife the way God loves us. Agape, agopic love, it's self-donating love. It's self-donating love. It's self-donating love, it's costly love. You see, there's a lot of people that read Paul and say, well, you know, is there much Jesus in this passage? There's Jesus all over this passage, because Jesus not only shows us God's love, but Jesus gives us the capacity to love like God does. That's what Paul is saying here, and that's what affliction does. See, Paul adds something to Job, which is not in Job, because you don't end the story of Job with even so much of a sense that the afflictions helped Job. It's not really in the story, not much at least, but Paul looks at the world and says, the way that the pagan world looks at all of this stuff, but it can't account for in affliction is how God changes us to be like him. That's what's happening here. So I'm just gonna read the next verse. For while we were still helpless, yet at the proper time Christ died for the ungodly. There's the love of God. Dale Cooper's wife and that iron lung is helpless. That's what it means to be living in that iron lung. Can't you do housework? No. Can't you be a good sexual partner? No. Can she be the kind of mom that people would like their moms to be? Can she go to sporting events? Can she go to PTA meetings? Can she bake a lot of brownies? No. But yet that love shown to her by her husband transformed the children, transformed the church. The story of it now via these videos will probably inspire and transform others. Look at the power of that. One man deciding to love his wife in an iron lung, that's power. And it comes through affliction. And Paul says, how do we know this? It comes through Christ. And it comes through us. And it goes out into the world through us. And you know what? If that story of Dale Cooper's father loving his wife in an iron lung goes out into the world, what might happen? Somebody else in a difficult marriage might say, I'm gonna love my wife. And the kids are gonna see that. And they're gonna say, wow, that's love. And the love of God, the love that God gives to the world is something that we now not only receive, but we now give like God does. That's powerful. All right, we're out of time. Lord, we see your love moving through Christ into the Gentiles, into the world, through your church, through your Christians, through faithfulness, despite affliction, despite the very natural assumption that, well, good things are being blessed by God. Nobody's saying that isn't true. But reality is deeper and more complex. And in fact, afflictions can make us like you. Lord, none of us should ask for afflictions. And I'm not recommending that any of us do. We should seek good things. That's absolutely right for us to do. But Lord, we do know that afflictions come and they don't come evenly. We ask, Lord, that when we do receive afflictions, that we might receive them like you. Hear our prayer. In the name of Jesus, amen.