https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=Gq3CTd_gjDo

 Okay, well, I can't even do a promotion for the Discord server because you're already in it and are you enjoying the Discord server? Yeah, mostly as an observer. Being honest, I don't know what 99% of the stuff people are talking about is. I didn't take a single philosophy class in college and while I find it all very interesting and I have a stack of books to get to, I'm playing catch-up intellectually. We all are. Someone once made a comment in the comment section that, you know, VanderKlay said he's just nodding and he doesn't even know what's going on. That certainly is true some of the time. None of us are smart enough to know everything and we all get out of our depths in one thing or another. Yeah, I'm trying to avoid doing that. But that's actually kind of funny because that's one of the things that really caught my attention about you was I was thinking, wait, this guy's a pastor? He's really smart for a pastor when it comes to philosophy and things that are not Bible-related. So that's been new to find someone and I've been hooked ever since. The Christian Reformed Church is a European denomination and like many of the older denominations, had fairly rigorous, you know, those have been weakening lately, but had fairly rigorous educational standards for its clergy. And that gets, that's contested, especially in an American context. But especially if you go into the ministry young, get as much education as you can. You know, it could, if I didn't have not just this education but interest in these kinds of things, I couldn't do what I'm doing now. So but I get lots of stuff wrong. You know, I fake it plenty. So pastors are liars and thieves. Well, I spent a couple years around the Jesuits and they're kind of, it's a similar tradition, very education heavy. Yeah. Yeah. Well, why don't you tell me a little bit about yourself because we've never spoken before. Sure. Yeah. I suppose in accordance with your new guidelines, I guess I'll start basically with my own my faith, which takes me back to, you know, when I was growing up, I grew up in a Christian family and in San Diego. So kind of very, if it is a tradition, a very Southern California evangelical sort of tradition. But you know, in the 80s and 90s, it was very, well, I don't know, all I know is my own experience, which was a very kind of very legalistic, you could say version of kind of evangelical Christianity. I was homeschooled for through like sixth grade and that didn't go well. I learned well, but I hated it because it was so isolating. I wanted to be around people when I was young, so I didn't particularly like it. But so we went to like a Calvary Chapel church and then around in sixth grade, we moved to Montana and we're very rural Montana and went to public school and went to a local non-denominational church group and non-denominational churches didn't really think too much about it, I guess, until sort of the end of high school, I started going to an evangelical free church and with a pastor who was far more, I don't know what the right word is, intellectual than my previous pastors, I suppose. Free comes out of Scandinavia. So again, as opposed to these American non-denominational things that are just kind of, hey, do the kids like you? Do the adults? You'll be a pastor. The European churches had educational demands on their clergy before they were allowed to preach and teach and do things. That's interesting. Yeah. And it wasn't until recently, in all these years, I actually, and I think it was because of some of the discussions happening on your YouTube channel, I finally Googled like what is the difference between all these? And it showed this like family tree of like how they all split. It was mind boggling. I was like, okay, at some point I got to sit down and figure all this out because I just went where my parents took me and then from there I've moved around a lot and so I always try to find a church. It's weird in America because, at least in the evangelical, I guess, churches, because you just never know what you're getting into when you set foot inside one of these churches. Well, here's someone can turn this into a meme. Non-denominational is like a box of chocolates. Yes. You're forced dumping your way through church. There it is, baby. That is most definitely true. Yeah. So that was like my first experience kind of hearing Calvinism, Arminianism. I was like, I don't know what these are and a pastor saying, hey, I'm not one or the other and there's differences. But it was interesting and then I stayed at that church through college and so I really enjoyed the sermons at that church and it felt like I was finally starting to learn Although I don't know how much I've retained since then. You'd be surprised what sinks in. It might not be conscious to you. I think about that a lot. I think about, I was a kid listening to my father preach. How much of him did I absorb? Probably tons. But ask me specifics about different sermons. I could tell you how I guess he would talk and I think that's a function of the brain and memory and sort of how we absorb things. We don't absorb things like a photocopy machine or a computer. We absorb it into heuristic of sorts and intuitively we know things. I think so. Yeah. Yeah. So I went to that church through college and it was, you know, I've got a friend who became a Christian in his 40s and it was always interesting to talk to him because it's kind of a point of frustration for me growing up in the church and especially not, you know, kind of being, you know, if I was Catholic it would be different. I'd have some sort of, there'd be things that I know, you know, that I was schooled in, you know, almost a formal education of sorts. But, you know, when you're just in it, you don't really know, you don't think about it too much, you know, and especially I'm just by nature, you know, I was a kid, like, you know, my parents will never, they said they'd never lie to me. So I believe everything they tell me. When they say, you know, it's, you know, when I ask questions and they say it's because I said so, okay. So not thinking too critically about my faith growing up got me, it ended up, you know, now in my 30s I have a lot more questions that I want answered because I, turns out, I like thinking about this kind of stuff a little more critically and, you know, I find, obviously I find your videos and these conversations really interesting things to think about and so, you know, now I want more information. But yeah, but, you know, we kind of, you know, and I think that's part of the, that, that very evangelical tradition of like, look, you know, you believe and that's enough and you don't have to think about it much beyond that. And I think for a lot of people, that's what, that's what happens. And that's certainly what I was taught when I was young and that's, you know, accepted it as fact. Yeah, yeah, yeah. So but then you go to college and now you have professors who, you know, don't, let's just say they don't, I didn't encounter too many Christian professors in college and so, or even professors who had much respect for Christianity and so, or classmates for that matter and so now, you know, you're just, you know, when you're being attacked or your faith is being attacked, you just, you don't really want, you know, you start to think about, well, if I start to think critically about this, if I start to, you know, consider the questions that they have for me, I don't want to lose my faith. So I'm just not, I'm going to pretend that I didn't hear that and just, you know, which is kind of, I don't think that's a, I mean, that's kind of what you're taught, you know, other than what I was, you know, as young, like, you know, don't listen to these teachers, don't listen to these professors and, but I think that really does a disservice to people because eventually like now a lot of the people I grew up with, the family members, friends who we grew up in the same churches now, or they're not believers. They said, well, that's ridiculous. I don't know why anybody would be a Christian, you know, and it's, and, you know, that I didn't go that route, but, you know, I really think that, you know, the, you know, that kind of just reading about everything in the Bible is true. Don't ever question it. Don't ever think critically about it. Just accept it and believe it and move on and don't listen to these people. Don't interact with them. Don't have these conversations with them, you know, is I think really puts you in a tough position because when you start to doubt yourself, you don't have answers to these questions and then you have to go somewhere to find them. You may not, may not find good answers. Yeah. And culturally that prohibition is suspicious on lots of levels because culturally we have a very open culture and it's like, well, investigate it. You know, Miss Frizzle, the magic school bus, you know, get dirty, take chances, ask questions. And so when a certain segment of the church is saying, no, just, just put blinders on and you know, I can't hear you. I can't hear you. We will look at that and say that that's not those people don't communicate strength and confidence to the rest of the culture and saying, no, I think my ideas can stand up to yours. Yeah. Right. Exactly. Yeah. And I feel like you should be able to go to your pastor and get answers to these questions and they're paying them for, right? I mean, it's like, come on guy, earn some of that money. Yeah. And I've heard from other people too. They, you know, are very dissatisfied with the answers they've gotten from their, from their pastors. And so, yeah. So where are you at now in terms of faith? You go to church, not go to church? Well, so that's, I read a blog post by a pastor who said, Christian, you don't have to go to church. No, I, I am, don't have a church now. I recently moved to a new state with a new job and it happens to be in the Bible belt, which finding a church here I think can be dicey. To be honest, I have so much anxiety about walking into a brand new church and, you know, they just, you know, finding a church everywhere is dicey. It is not easy. Yeah. And non-denominational tags don't help. At least with certain denominations, you should have, you'll have, if you know the lay of the land, you'll have some idea of what you're getting. Right. And I, I've thought, I've been thinking a lot recently about, you know, gee, if I were Catholic, this would be really easy. You know, I'd move to a new place and I'd have a church. And although there's a lot of diversity in the Catholic church too. I'm sure there is, but at least, you know, there's one in town usually, you know, or something to that effect. And so it's always, it's, I've moved around a lot. I've moved like 12 times in the past 15 years, including a few countries. So it's been difficult to find a place. And in fact, that's one of the things I lived in Seattle for about two and a half years. And that's one of the things I probably miss most was my church, because if I were to move back there, I know exactly where I'd be. And so, so right now it's a work in progress. But in terms of faith, I'm a believer. I, you know, I've spent so much time. Asking the same questions many people ask. And for me, it just seems it's too difficult not to believe. I'm just, it's so funny. I hear people who are not believers talk about, you know, well, I just can't, I just can't believe, I just can't accept, you know, this idea of this, of the metaphysical world. And I'm the opposite. I'm like, I just can't accept that this is all just coincidence, you know. And I think it was in Tim Keller's book, Reason for God. He talks about how, you know, being an atheist is just as much of a faith as being a Christian. It takes a lot of faith to say, oh, I believe in that there is no God. So, I mean, for me, it makes perfect sense. It's that for me, the struggle over the past several years has been navigating, I guess you'd call it evangelical, American evangelical Christianity. And that has been difficult just in my own personal life. You know, I've had a lot of friends who are not believers. And a lot of my experience has been that, you know, when I needed someone to be there for me, the person who was there for me was not a believer. And the people who were, were not. And it's a point of frustration over the past few years of like, I know we're all sinners and I know we're all, we're not perfect, but shouldn't we be just a little bit better than the average when it comes to some of the stuff? It just makes it really hard sometimes to, you know, go out and sell it to someone else. You know, I mean, so, so yeah, but I mean, I don't, and I don't hold that against Jesus. You know, it's just that, you know, on the, on the day to day basis and, and, you know, it's, I think it can be difficult to, to latch on to a specific, to a specific church or specific community and get plugged in and feel like, yeah, this is really adding something to my life that I need. So, I mean, it's, it's something I desire and I'm constantly trying to find, but it's very difficult. And in, you know, in Seattle, I was there for two and a half years and it, you know, Seattle is a notoriously difficult place to make friends and, and it is, the church is not immune to that at all. So, yeah, it's so, so I had, you know, by the time I left, I had a one or two friends, but in the, you know, but yeah, it was difficult there too. So, American, American Western culture is interesting because of course, I grew up in outside of New York City and then I was in the Dominican Republic. I was in Western Michigan, which is kind of the home of the Christian from church and, and then moving out to California, California and the West Coast too. I haven't really been by the Pacific Northwest. I mean, there's a, on one level, especially in California, there's a friendliness and an openness. But one of the things that I noted is that in Midwest churches, you're always in other people's homes. In California for, you know, one of the early things we did when I came to the Living Stones, we started some small groups and very quickly the small groups all migrated to meeting at church again. And so it's, it's, it's these little subtle ways of culture that you have out West that are different from the Midwest or the East. Yeah, it's, and, and there's a huge difference between people in San Diego and people in Seattle. People in San Diego are very friendly. And I've lived in a lot of different places too. And, but Seattle, the city of Seattle in particular, they call it the Seattle freeze, which is they're known for just being a place they don't, they're not super friendly. They're, you know, one of my, my, my friend who was the one who became a Christian in his forties, who lived in Seattle, he, I was complaining to him once about how, you know, my, my, I've lived in my house for like two years and my neighbors never even said hello. And he said, that's one of the things I loved about Seattle when I came. But, but it's true. I mean, you can live next door to somebody in Seattle for a decade and never speak to them. And that's very common. And, you know, frequently at my church, I would, we'd at these social events, I would meet someone and someone say, hey, let me get your number. I'll give you a call. We should have a beer sometime. And I'd never hear from them. And then six months later, I'd run into him again and it's, hey, let me get your number. We should have a beer. I gave you my number. You've got it. But, okay. You know, so I never hear from him again either. So, I mean, that's a very typical thing that happens there. But, you know, it's, it's, it's been a couple of years since I've lived there and more and more people are moving there from other places all the time. So I think it's changing quite a bit. Yeah. Yeah. Interesting. It's very interesting. I've dug into you long enough. I don't know if you got more. What were your thoughts, your thoughts on our conversation today? Did you have a list or what do you want to talk about? Well, yeah, you know, I mean, I knew you wanted to talk a little bit about my faith and stuff and which I think kind of segues nicely into this place I'm at where it's kind of, I'm, you know, I've been living in Oklahoma now for about four months and still trying to make friends and stuff. It's not going so great, but we'll see. You know, these things take time. But, you know, moving around a lot, I, this whole meaning crisis thing has come up and it's funny that somebody put an actual label on it because it was something I had kind of been thinking a lot about and dealing with. But there was no label for it. And for me personally, it has a, it's a little bit different because I was in the after college, I was in the army for six years. And, you know, that that is a very particular thing that comes with good and bad aspects. But ever since I left the army, things have been a lot different than I thought they would be in terms of trying to sort of find my way and figure out what what I'm doing. And I think, you know, you might be aware this is a thing that a lot of people who are in the military and left are dealing with now and and the larger culture, apparently. But the the one difference might be that for a lot of people who are in the military, you know, and still for me, this is the case for me. And I don't want to speak for everyone, but I think it's fairly common that, you know, that's that sense, that very clearly defined sense of purpose and meaning. I had that in the military, in spite of how much suffering it was. And it was a lot of suffering, often times just arbitrary, which led to frustration that motivates a lot of people to leave the the military. And certainly I was motivated to to get out as soon as I could at different points in my career. And so. But when you leave, you know, what I should say when you're when you're in, you know, it's a it's a sort of a tribe. It's a very close knit group. I had, you know, the best friends I've ever had in my life were in in the army. And so and it had a sense of community and a shared sense of purpose. And even if you didn't really believe in the mission, you were there with someone else, you know, and we all had sort of that that shared experience together, which brought us really close together. And so some of the things even that the church talks about that they want to foster within their church, I had all those things in the army. And so when you leave the army, you you expect, well, I'll find the same thing once I get a civilian job and you realize it, it's not that easy. And, you know, I spent some time working at a university in the past few years, too. And, you know, this is kind of an epidemic among college kids. They can't, you know, connect and they don't feel like they belong and all this. And you realize, oh, yeah, like if you didn't have, you know, I was lucky. I got out of college, I went into the army and I got this. And if I had stayed in the army, I might still have it. But, you know, a lot of people never experienced this. And so, you know, there we're all kind of dealing with the same thing. The difference is, is that thing that a lot of people desire that that community and that intimacy with other people, I know what that's like. And the difference is, is I don't have it anymore and I miss it. And I don't. And I also now I'm smart enough, I guess, to know I'm probably never going to have it again, not to that degree. And and so that realization is been difficult. You know, if I left the army nine years ago and, you know, if I spent the first six years looking for it, not finding it, I've probably spent the last three years contemplating the fact that I know I probably will never have that again. And so then that begs the question, well, what now? And that has not been a difficult question to answer. And I'm interested to listen to you and others try to navigate this. And, you know, if I were to take this conversation, this thing we're talking about, maybe my my evangelical family, although now my my couple of family members might have recently joined a reformed church, which is interesting to talk to them about. But, you know, they would say, well, you know, what you're looking for should all be you should look for in your faith and in your church. And I understand that answer. But I also know that I'm what I had with friends in the army, I'm probably not going to get that same thing with people at church. Right. It's a level of I mean, the army's sort of a monastery in a sense. And that you're living. I mean, you had you had this. So the whole thing begins with this grand retreat setting, also known as boot camp, where you bond with each other in suffering. And then you learn within. I mean, you're all wearing the same clothing. You've got flags. I mean, the whole thing is designed to turn you into cohesive units and to have all of your meanings surround the mission of the unit and the mission of the organization. I mean, the I mean, psychologically, that's what the whole deal is set up to do. And you're exactly right that once you get out of it, I mean, in a sense, it's not it's there's similarity to people who get out of prison. And struggle, people who get out of school and struggle because the entire institution has been created in order to deliver an effect and to bond you and to deliver outcomes. And you know, you're out there in the land of freedom. So everything that you have said to me makes absolutely perfect sense to me. Yeah. And and the thing about it, too, is that when you these these types of things and and it was a little bit different for me because I was an officer and so I didn't have you know, my my best friend was another officer and we were lucky in that we were together when we when we for a lot of the time when we went to Afghanistan. But you know, you can't I can't bond in the same way with some of my soldiers the way that they can bond with each other. And so that has an element of loneliness to it. But I was lucky in that, you know, I happened to be it's just the nature of the army. Like there were two officers. Normally there aren't, but there's two in an artillery platoon. And so and I just happened to be with my best friend in the army for a lot of the time. And at one point, you know, on a on a mission doing exactly what the army trained us to do. And, you know, he he said to me, he said, you know, I'm not sure if I'm going to be these are the glory days like we could recognize in the moment that like it's never going to get any better than this. Yeah. And and I'll never forget him saying that because I realized, yeah, you're right. Even if we stay in the army forever, we're never going to be at this level doing this kind of work. You know, we'll be on some staff somewhere making PowerPoint slides for some colonel or whatever. You know, we're not going to have this this shared sense of purpose. You know, and, you know, I'll never forget that it was one of those like moments where you can actually stop time in a sense and go, oh, yeah, this is where this is this is the thing that we all wanted. We have it right now and we're never going to have it again after this. Yeah. So John Cougar Mellon camp is ringing in my head. And I'll tell you, I so so I've worked with a lot of church planters and for many church. I mean, a lot of it has to do with together in a mission. And so church planters start this horrendously difficult thing of planting a church, usually in a place where church is difficult, like Sacramento. And they they, you know, they're meeting random people and they're struggling and all of this stuff. You can if you listen to Rick Warren, who's one of the most successful church planters in modern American history, if you read his book like Purpose Driven Life, the way he starts out, it's glory days all over the place. And, you know, I came out there with my family and I went door to door and we didn't have any people. And it was yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. And the thing is, as pastors, you begin to know that the people who have, say, gone up in a denominational bureaucracy, they tell all their glory days stories and about, they're nicely there in the bureaucracy and they have a good salary and a secure job. And they're not sweating how many people haven't shown up for church or that their budget isn't making it. They've got all the glory days stories. And and and it's like, yeah, they all lose a little bit of status and respect because now you nailed it. You nailed it. And what do you do like that guy in the John Cougar Mellencamp's glory days story where, you know, he's in the bar and everybody's heard that story how many times? And yeah, yeah, yeah. Yeah. And and, you know, I always thought, you know, I guess I always knew it probably wasn't possible. But if I could just take all those guys I was there with and we could all live on the same street somewhere, that'd be enough, you know. But, you know, everyone's scattered now across the country and it's like you, you know, you got to find find something else to fill the void. And I, you know, it interestingly, I really like this whole discord thing is kind of interesting. I, you know, it's promising. I I had an idea when I was working at the university. I was also I took classes, started a master's degree in English that I'll probably never finish. But I did it mainly just out of the need to make friends. I needed something someplace to go every week. And it's great. And it's, you know, I kind of I while I was doing it, you know, all these parallels started to enter my mind about a midweek Bible study. You know, we all sit around a table and we did the read. And, you know, I wanted to write something about, you know, in the in the Church of Social Justice or something like that, you know, it's like a Bible study. And they use all it's all the stuff I'm learning about on the Internet. They're using all this religious language to talk about the things we're talking about and whatnot. But but I thought, you know, if I could gather some of those people like I was in the army with and convince them all to read a book together or something and meet once a week and talk about it, kind of like kind of like a graduate seminar. You know, stuff like that might be enough. I mean, I'm I've I've always been inspired by the the Inklings, you know, they used to meet at the Eagle and Child Pub and and what and I thought there's got to be yeah, the burden, which was like there's got to be a way to do that, you know. And and the thing is, that's the other thing about it. The church will do that. You know, they had small groups at my church in Seattle, although ironically, you know, there was more demand than they had groups. And so they'd always say, try again, you know, in a few months. So so, you know, there and there's nothing wrong with like a, you know, a Bible study, you know, like a faith centered group. But I'd be interested in that, too. But, you know, some of the stuff that I've noticed as you talk, there's I love everything that you're doing. And there's times where I cringe like a whole man. If some of the people I know heard a pastor talk about that, they'd be like, what is he doing? And I love that there's got to be there's got to be a place, you know, where, you know, I got to be able to hang out with people who are not necessarily Christians and talk about things that are always the Bible, you know. And well, you know, for for me, the you know, I have I very much had a glory days that they can come again. They're always different. So I had a glory days episode. I lived in a little town in the Dominican Republic. And there were there were a group of young American expatriates, about six to eight of us usually there. And we all bonded. And, you know, again, it was always there was always suffering. So one of our members, he worked he was a he was a marine biologist and he was he was working for a shrimp farm and he was always getting attacked and he had an unguarded and he was getting robbed and you'd have tropical storms come through. So we're always rescuing each other from these crazy situations. And we we share food together and we live together, we share lives together. And and I have a bond with these people that when we get together, it's like bang. We're right there and we tell the old stories and and bang. And so it's all these and families have that often. So siblings have that. And and truth be told, we've I mean, we're having that sort of right now in our Jordan Peterson meetup in Sacramento. You can sense some of that in the Discord server and that, you know, Joey and Tyler and Rick and, you know, they're the ones that in the Discord server and, you know, and and so then, you know, friendships have been built and then you start getting the CS Lewis writes about the inner ring and the outer and you start getting those dynamics. But these there there can be times again now. Now, there are certain elements that always seem to be involved. There's always amount of risk, a certain amount of it. There's always risk involved in it. There's there's usually some kind of suffering or stretching. There's very much being together. There's very much a mission. And and and and in a sense, these things you can't you can you can sort of create the environment for them to happen. But it's always like I look at the Jordan Peterson meetup that we have here in Sacramento. And I think we just got you know, we've just had some of the right people and without some of those right people, it wouldn't have happened. And I also had some of that with my church planting cluster that we had in Sacramento. We had some glory days in the late 90s, early 2000s when we just had certain key people there and it just it just hummed. And and so. But but then you go through these drought periods where, you know, we're going to have this again and we're going to. So it's it can happen again. And I think part of I think part of. Setting yourself up to have it happen again is recognizing the the necessary but not sufficient elements that you need. You need to be on a mission with some people. You need to have enough diversity, but enough commonality. You need to have enough living together. You need to get together often enough. And then this is sort of the what I'd say the God part of it where it happens when you have just the right people and you could not have selected these people. You could not have recruited or found these people. And then but then so when it happens, it's just a gift of God. It's like, whoosh. And you know, you look at the Jordan Peterson moment, too. That's a kind of a different thing, because I don't know to what a degree he's got. That's the thing I've often looked. He doesn't seem to have a team of people like if, you know, if if if this little thing around me keeps going, you know, there's there's Joey and Job and Jeff and Luke and these are kind of the online guys. But then there's the guys who aren't online or behind the scenes. And so I'd say, you know, the main thing is recognize the necessary elements and just keep keep them ready. I mean, it's sort of like a fish trap. You just have it or fishing. You just you keep that you keep the hook in the water. You keep the bait on the line and you just wait for, you know, in a sense, God to move in and you build the altar and on Carmel and wait for God to, you know, bring fire from the sky. Yeah, yeah, it's. Yeah, it's and I know it's difficult. It's a very it's not it's not an easy thing to cultivate and can take time for sure. The one of the some of the monastic groups had the discipline of it's basically the discipline of place. And you're exactly right when you said you've moved around a lot. That makes it difficult because staying grounded and rooted. So my father spent thirty six years in his first ministry. I've been twenty two years in this place. The longer you're in a place, the more you know, it's it's sort of like the difference between someone just dreaming up some fantasy novel and Tolkien, who had languages for elves and languages for orcs and this huge back story, which allowed the moment that was the Hobbit and the Lord of the Rings to to grow. Yeah, yeah, it's I you know, yeah, it's not it's not something it's something is really important to me, so it's not something that I'll give up on. And and I'm interested to see what happens with this community. You know, it's and I thought it was very interesting when your your survey results came out that the number one thing people were looking for were friendships, which I mean, that it was true for me. And, you know, I think it it's a very and it's even tough with I think the fact that I move, I think a lot of people move around. I think and I think part of that is almost unavoidable. You know, I I came here for a job that I just could not turn down. And it's not because I wanted to move here necessarily. But I think a lot of people are in that boat. And so I don't see that changing anytime soon. The great thing about the Internet is that you can connect some people. So it's it'll be interesting to see what happens there. And I thought that was interesting, too, because, you know, Job's was Job was kind of thinking about a convention, but I was thinking about a retreat and I was thinking, you know, 15 to 20 people for three days in a nice setting where. What's your two popular poll? We can't have a retreat with a thousand people. But they won't all come once you set a date. You say that, but you might be surprised. I don't know. We'll see. I should just pull the I've got some in my mind and some places in my mind. I should just announce I just don't like administration setting this stuff up. So I'm going to be in this place. Click here to register. And I was listening to it. I'm Googling flights as you're talking about it on the podcast. Yeah. Oh, yeah. That's what Mary said in the comments. She says, yeah, and you thought you'd have 200 subscribers. But but I think you're exactly right. And so I was actually talking to my friend Rod, who's in Tucson. And and Rod listened to that video and he's like, oh, Paul, you got to come to Tucson. Let's do one in Tucson. I'm so down. But Rod is also so much of a let's sit back. And Rod and I became friends. We have our own glory days when we were on a board, a home missions board in the denomination, and he and I were the two West coasters. And so everyone would go to bed at like 10 o'clock and we were jet lagged. So he and I would go out to IHOP and stay up till two and start meetings again at eight the next morning. And but that's where we bonded. And so he and I have a bond that is unique. So now and I and that's why I do think. I do think the retreat setting, that's that's what I've been so pleased with with the Discord server, because I see I as a small church pastor, you very quickly learn you might gather people, but it's the bonds they have with each other, not the connection to you, the bonds they have with each other. That's what that's what knits the world together. And that's that's the cool stuff. Yeah. Yeah, for sure. I was going to ask you this. I have I can't keep up entirely with your prodigious output. Really? You don't have an hour or two every day to listen to me ramble. I'm shocked. So I haven't. But I'm doing pretty well, actually, with your stuff. But I haven't been doing as well as all the other people that even have all their stuff, too. But but in all that time of trying to keep up. And I've been watching you for about a year and a half or so now, I guess. But one thing I haven't heard mentioned, I don't know if you've mentioned this before, but, you know, I thought of it when this whole thing kind of kicked off and Jordan Peterson became popular and this whole all these people started coming out of the woodwork. You know, I thought of this book that I read when I was in college before I joined the army that was given to me by a friend. I don't know. You've probably heard of it. The book Wild at Heart. Yeah. John Eldridge. Yeah. Yeah. I thought this is just like wild at heart. Wild at heart is written for a Christian audience. But boy, I've read that book three times. And I and if I were to go back now, maybe some of the stuff might sound a little cheesy, but it had a huge impact on me, especially for someone who was, you know, a year away from going into the army when we're involved in a couple of wars. And, you know, the Braveheart references are all throughout the book and everything, you know, but he really touched on something that I think Jordan Peterson is kind of the sec doing the secular version of now. And that just has stuck in my mind. But it hasn't I haven't seen it come up anywhere. I don't haven't seen anybody mention it. And I don't know if people was published in 2001. I don't know if it's a little dated now or what. That was a huge book in the in the early aughts and and church planters and oh, yeah, yeah, that book was all over the place. And that's the that's the and it's the same. It's it's part of the same. It's growing out of the same needs. And and so that's the question of Jordan Peterson. Will he will he will he be another John Eldridge or or? You know, they're all different or Joseph Campbell or Richard Roar or I mean, I could sit down and start naming names of of very similar movements. And again, especially for men, I mean, men and women are different. Big surprise. I gave that book to my girlfriend years ago and she was like, man. And I was like, OK, well, you know, you can't say that men and women are the same because this book, I was like, you have to read this. And she read it was like, exactly. And so part of the male side of this and again, men, men bond side to side. Women bond face to face. And, you know, I've watched my wife and her relationships and, you know, women, women, they'll just talk, talk, talk, talk, talk, talk, talk, talk, talk. And one of the early things we did and we have to do more in our meetup was but we need a project. And, you know, we're so we're meeting in our little broken down dumpy church. And and, you know, all these atheists are like, we ought to be able to do something for this church. And I'm just sitting here thinking. This is not this is not the big atheism fight, you know, everyone talks about. And so then we built benches and, you know, and we cleaned out storage rooms and guys need to do stuff. And that's how they bond because they do stuff together. And that's part of what I think with a retreat, you know, we'll have some we'll have some time where we talk and then, you know, someone mentioned, you know, do some camp outs as retreats. And I thought, oh, that's a good one. I like that, too. And because there's also something about camping back. So my parents started camping in the in the 60s when this camping craze started going. And and one of the things that people who studied this stuff said, you know, families that camped together had much more sense of, you know, of of unity. And I think, again, partly as OK, there's a mission. OK, you survive and there's risk and there's it's uncomfortable and you're all in it together. And so we camped through rainstorms and all kinds of misery and tragedy. But now we look back on it. And those were glory days. So there's something about gathering around a fire, particularly if food is involved and things of that nature. And there's a lot of it's very it's very significant in in literature. It's one of those one of those things that when it shows up, you know, oh, this is this is a significant moment, you know. And yeah, for sure. I mean, and the army does a lot of they wouldn't call it camping, but, you know, and yeah, I think you're right. I mean, it all sounds great. And, you know, you know, the churches, I grew up and they would do retreats all the time and I, you know, I don't really remember much. You know, I was I was a kid and I didn't I went on a couple as an as an adult. And they I don't really remember a whole lot about them. But I think, you know, with a group, people that you you're getting, you know, well, it's it's like kind of taking it to the next level, I suppose. You know, when I when people ask me, so what happens with churches is that in every town, there are usually the hot church and the hot church grows big and usually for real reasons. They've got great music. They've got a great pastor who's a great speaker. It's a healthy place sometimes. And so the thing just grows. The difficulty is these kinds of things that you're talking about. It gets inhibited by size. Now, the core of people who started out tiny, who led the thing to grow. Well, they're having glory days like crazy. But almost everybody else who's coming in late. So I recommend that people look for small churches, because here's the crazy thing about small churches. They're usually small, dysfunctional, crazy. There's usually all kinds of nuttiness going on about them. But here's a little secret about small churches. If you stay long enough and if it isn't like severely dysfunctional, within four or five years, you'll be a leader and you will then suddenly be part of that mission and you'll begin to have relationships and mission and all of that stuff together. And so I would, you know, if I, my metrics are going to be all different because I'm a pastor and for all these things. But my advice would be if you go to a new town, start looking at churches that no one else is ever going to look at because that's my church. I mean, people on YouTube are now like, Oh, Paul, if I were in Sacramento, I'd go to your church. I'm like, you might come to the meetup, but the church, I mean, talk to Rick about coming to church sometimes. There are a lot of times he'll say, I don't know what the heck is going on. I'm like, yeah, I believe that. And it's it. But there's hundreds of tiny dying churches out there. And some of them are basket cases you don't want to be involved with. But some of them probably have decent pastors and decent community and lovely saints who have grown and matured for decades and have someone your age walk in and, you know, you're a shopper at first and that's OK. But if you if you decide the pastor is decent and the people are Christian and it's mature and there's enough commonality and alignment, that's the church you want because especially if you're going to stay because even if you're not going to stay because people say, well, how do you get into the church? Well, go go every week for a month and everyone will say you're a core member just because that's how it grows. So that's that's my church plan. That's my church finding advice. Yeah. Well, yeah, I'll have to give that a shot at some point. That's a internet because you can listen to pastor sermons, even crap churches like this. That is that that is that also has you know, when I left Seattle, I was like, I can listen to my pastor sermons on podcast for every week. Why do I need to go anywhere? You know, and when I just Sunday morning, just, you know, open up my computer and, oh, hey, look, it's on Facebook Live. I can I can I'm at church. The whole service right there. I don't know. Really? I know it's not really it's not it's not the same just in the same way that these conversations in the this community, there's a desire to be physically present with each other. It's it's not the same. Yeah, it's the same thing. Yes. Yeah. Yeah. So, yeah, a few more minutes. Anything else on your list? You know, there's I yeah, there's a there's another just out of curiosity, there's another book I wanted to mention, you know, want to know if you've read it. But this is another one that more recently, in the wake of this whole meaning crisis and all that, really, this this was the book that I was reading. This this was the book that really kind of. Explain to me what I was dealing with in a way that made sense. And that was the book called Tribe by Sebastian Younger. It's subtitled on homecoming and belonging. And it's a real short book. And it's really interesting because he kind of. He used it. He pulls from psychology and history and all this and to really kind of identify that this is not a new phenomenon. And like and he has all these examples in it about, you know, people in London during the blitz and World War Two. It was an awful time. But, you know, afterwards, they they recalled it with this, you know, this almost this nostalgia about boy, you know, kind of, you know, again, those were the glory days, you know, this. And he talks about why this is and he gets into some of the psychology of, you know, and one of the things that he he mentions in there, something like, you know, humans don't mind hardship and the fact they thrive on it. What. But, you know, what they mind is not feeling necessary. And yeah. And I was like, man, you know, when I when I read that, I was like, yeah, you know, because I my feelings on my what I did in the army or, you know, or I should say, you know, the the wars, you know, were pretty, you know. I don't mind saying that I think they're just a it's a futile endeavor. You know, it's I think in a lot in the way that World War One, you know, ended in all with all this loss and nothing accomplished. I think that that's essentially where we're at with these now. And so and I recognize that while I was in it. I mean, it was so obvious. I mean, and that was 2006. And so I realized this is not this war has been lost for several years. Like, but we're just still here. And so but it didn't really matter that much because what people a lot of people don't realize is that once you're in it, you know, the mission you're given a mission and you're doing your best to accomplish it. But it's not really about that at that point. At that point, it's about the people you're there with and and trying to, you know, serve those people, protect those people, take care of those people and all come home together. And so, you know, it there isn't so much the the same loss of meaning like there was in World War One, where they were all very idealistic and they believed in their cause. And then it turned out to be, you know, a toll mess. And they realized, wow, that wasn't what we thought it was going to be. I think a lot of the people who have served in these wars kind of kind of know that, you know, if not, they figure it out pretty soon. They're like, OK, yeah, this is we're not going to change this place, you know. And so, you know, if you can kind of shift focus and and your focus is, you know, my responsibility to my fellow soldiers or whoever, I can get meaning from that. You know, I don't need, you know, a cause, you know, for my, you know, whether it's to win the hearts and minds of the Afghan people or whatever. It's like, I know I'm not going to do that, you know, but that's OK. You know, I'm sent over here for however many months and, you know, I'm going to do my best to take care of my people and get them all home safe. And so, you know, that a lot of these things kind of really became clear to me when I read that Sebastian Younger book, because he talks a lot about, you know, what the aftermath, what do we do now? What do veterans do now? Because this is a, you know, an epidemic among veterans. But, you know, now we're seeing it in the larger culture as well. And so, you know, I I don't know how many solutions he offers, but boy, does he like hit the nail on the head, you know, and that it's not even unique to now. It's it's, you know, it's been the case throughout history that the same thing has occurred. And so, you know, I don't know that this whole kind of whatever it is, we're calling it, we attaching Jordan Peterson's name to it, but I hope it moves beyond just him and his name. I mean, because, you know, some of these other I've read, you know, those other two books, you know, The Wild Heart, I recalled that. But then, you know, reading Sebastian Younger's book, I realized, wow, yeah, this is he's he's definitely identifying all the all the elements of of what happens and, you know, and also how a lot of the problems that people have in their, you know, their lack of purpose or whatever, when a catastrophe arises and they feel necessary, all of their problems go away. You know, it's when when people feel needed, they're not so much concerned about, you know, their own, you know, lack of meaning. All of a sudden they have a job to do or or a mission or something. And and that can be great for for them. But threading the needle on providing people with that with that mission and that sense of meaning without a catastrophe or a war, I think is is where we're trying to get to. And so, yeah. No, that's exactly right. Now, I just put that in my Amazon cube because I that's I so I grew up in Patterson, New Jersey, and Patterson could be like Seattle. It could be a could be a heartless city and you didn't talk to people and, you know, high population density. But I loved it. Every couple of years, you get a big snowfall like 18, 20, 24 inches. And that just, you know, Patterson's a compact place and never designed for cars. And so everything just grinds to a halt and you have to shovel out. It's going to melt quickly in Patterson. But you have to shovel out. And those those snow days were always glory days because neighbors would help each other and you'd be helping push cars down the street. And and and it was just it was it was it was just wonderful. But the catastrophe was really catastrophe. But the the trauma of the snowstorm created a whole new level for community and life. And and it was it was it was vital. I remember a church planter. We did a church planter retreat and this was a church planter, very interesting church planter. He had grown his church large. And then after he grew at large, which was the imagined goal of all the other church planters, he wanted it small again and so began demanding, you know, very serious things of his congregation. And they found other churches that asked for less. But but, you know, we asked the question, you know, what would what would create a new revival, a new growth in Christianity? Well, an enduring crisis in the culture, because so I talked to my friend Rod in Tucson and he was he was telling me, he said, yeah, you know, 10 years ago, we had all these young women coming to church and single young women and they were, you know, dealing with molestation in their past and struggles and need for healing. And he said, now we've just got young men like crazy coming into the church. And and I thought, you know, it's and some of them know Jordan Peterson, but a whole bunch of them don't. Well, it's all part of the same thing that and and it's hitting people differently at different moments in different places. So makes perfect sense. Yeah. You know, if you had to design a society to build loneliness, you know, look at how many places in America. And what I find, ironically, you know, everybody gets in their little steel and glass machine and goes to their, you know, places of autonomy and anonymity. One of the things that I see in living and working with street culture, which is homeless, drug addicts and and Chris Arnade writes about this in his book, Dignity. You know, there's vibrant community at that level. And if I want to know something, I know who to go and talk to and ask the question, because, you know, there's word on the street. But and again, I think part of that, many of the homeless people I know, this is their lifestyle of choice and they're fleeing some things. And I think part of what they're fleeing is what you're describing and that if that meaninglessness often tied to a broken family, substance abuse, some crippling thing, mental illness, all of that comes and then homelessness as a lifestyle choice becomes a survival technique. And they experience tragedy, but they experience rich meaning too. And I see that all the time. And I sense that in my communion with them. So, you know, we Americans in our nice little beige dry walled boxes with our internet connections and our air conditioning and our little vehicles to keep us autonomous and anonymous. And we ain't so smart. There are a lot of happy people. I encountered a lot of happy people in Afghanistan, and I was very puzzled with my, you know, Western American, you know, rich country perspective. I thought, how can you possibly be happy? But boy, was that naive of me. I learned very quickly that, you know, it's not people want a higher standard of living and I'm, I think a higher standard of living is good for a lot of those people and I hope that they can get it. But you can find people who are very happy, who don't have much in the world. And, you know, I think there's something to that, you know, I, and Afghanistan is not a good place. It's probably not the best example, but, you know, I traveled in Thailand quite a bit too, and, you know, they're, they're doing okay. They're not quite as well off as America, but there are a lot of happy people there who seem to, seem to really enjoy life and, and don't seem to have nearly the stress that, that we have on a daily basis. So it's, you, you can definitely find it out in the world. And I think there's something to that. I, but it's, that's difficult when, you know, you're trying to keep up with everyone around you or, and a lot of it is just being bombarded. I mean, I, I have to shut things off after a while because I, you know, the, one of the best things that's ever happened to me is like, this is move away from like regular TV because man, I don't have to watch a lot of commercials anymore. I used to be so annoyed by those things, but, you know, you get bombarded by things and, and the internet, people are figuring out ways to bombard you with things to distract you and whatnot. But yeah, sometimes, you know, blesses more. I mean, minimalism is becoming a fast growing lifestyle as well. That's when I discovered that I was like, when I, I sold almost all my stuff and moved into a tiny little apartment and boy was that liberating. So it was like, what else, what else can I get rid of from my life? But I don't need. Oh, and Marie is popular for a reason. She, yeah, she's, uh, yeah, I have a thing for her. I'm like, oh man, I need someone like that in my life. Organize what few things I have left, you know, but, uh, yeah, it's, there's definitely something to that. I think there is, there is. Well, Andrew, this has been a delight and I don't know if you're, um, willing to let me share this or you want to watch it first, or, um, if you don't want to share that, all of those options are fine. I will send you the recording of this. And you can decide if, you know, everybody's story is their own. And I, like I say, I only, only about half of the stories make it to my channel. So, which is, which I'm totally good with because I believe God knows and God sees and the strange thing called YouTube doesn't have to see everything. So, well, I appreciate that. All right. I really appreciate what you're doing and I hope you keep doing it because I'll keep consuming it for sure. All right. Well, thank you, Andrew. All right. Thanks Paul. Take care. YouTube. Bye bye.