https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=z4ATwkCnZuw

 Hi, this is Paul and this is Rough Draft for Sunday where I run through the current version of my Sunday sermon. Sermon is subject to change. This is Friday between now and Sunday. That's just the way it goes. If you want to see the final version, you can check it out on the church channel. This is Palm Sunday. Jesus has arrived at Jerusalem and we've been following him in the Gospel of Luke and he's been heading to Jerusalem since chapter 9. Jesus is there for Passover where they're celebrating God freeing Israel from Empire Egypt. Jesus is celebrated as Messiah, as the chosen one, as the anointed one, but chosen, anointed to do exactly what? Moses freed Israel from Egypt. David freed Israel from the Philistines. The Maccabees freed Israel from the Greeks. How will Jesus do it? Now many times they tried to make Jesus their king and if you remember the end of the parable that we ended with last week, there are some people having second thoughts about Jesus being their king. He doesn't seem motivated to do the job they would like him to do, which is to drive out the Romans and reform the morals of the people and do all the usual things that a great revolution is supposed to do. But yet Jesus remains popular because of his miracles. If he gathers enough people in arms, he can overwhelm the Roman occupation forces. He can liberate Israel from Rome just like David did from the Philistines. Jesus is miraculous. Jesus can liberate Israel from Rome just like Moses did from Israel's enslavement with Egypt. Maybe there'll be plagues that he'll be able to call down on the Romans and off they'll go. God sent Jesus to Israel perhaps as a prophet like Elijah to slaughter the prophets of Baal of those who were bending the knee to the foreign gods in the pagan ways. And so we arrive at the story. After Jesus had said this, he went on ahead going up to Jerusalem and he approached Bethphage and Bethany at the hill called the Mount of Olives. He sent two of his disciples saying, go to the village ahead of you and as you enter you will find a cult there. Which one has never, which one has ever ridden? Which no one has ever ridden. No one has ever read here. Untie it and bring it here. If anyone asks you, why are you untying it? Say the Lord needs it. Those who were sent ahead and found it just as he told them. And as they were untying the cult, its owner asked, why are you untying this cult? He replied the Lord needs it. And they brought it to Jesus, threw their cloaks on the cult and put Jesus on it. And he went along. The people spread their cloaks on the ground. When he neared the place where the road goes down to Mount of Olives, the whole crowd of disciples began joyfully to praise God in loud voices for all the miracles they had seen. It looks very clear about their motivation. Blessed is the King who comes in the name of the Lord. Peace in heaven and glory to God in the highest. Well, if you're paying attention as you read the book of Luke, you'll notice that this is basically the response from below from the song of the angels in Luke chapter 2. Suddenly there was a company of the heavenly host appearing with the angel praising God and saying, glory to God in the highest and on earth peace on those on whom his favor rests. The people are thinking, it's happening. Some of the Pharisees, however, in the crowd said to Jesus, now only some. It's really interesting. Jesus, rebuke your disciples. This is over the top. I tell you, he replied, if they keep quiet, the stones will cry out. Now there's a subtle miracle at the beginning of this because you don't just hop onto, now Jesus rode a donkey because donkeys were the mounts of the kings of Israel, not a war horse. And he rode a donkey that had never been ridden before. And anybody who knows anything about animals like horses and donkeys know that they're very strong and they'll just throw you off. They have to be broken. They have to be trained in order to be ridden. Jesus doesn't do that. He's the master of creation. He gets on it and it obeys. And Jesus' point here about the stones crying out is the same thing. He is the Lord of creation. He is the master of the world. He has come to the center of the world and well, what they are doing is fitting. Now if you compare these stories in Matthew, Mark and Luke, it's very interesting. If you start at the triumphal entry in Matthew, the next story is the cleansing of the temple followed by cursing the fig tree. In Mark, it's cursing the fig tree and then the cleansing of the temple. Luke, before you get to the cleansing of the temple, you have Jesus weeping over Jerusalem. And I've been mentioning this in the last few sermons as we've been getting closer. As he approached Jerusalem and saw the city, he wept over it. And this word is very much a word of mourning and lamentation. It isn't just a little tear comes to his eye. He's lamenting. He's mourning. Well, why is he mourning? Jesus then said, if you, even you had only known on this day, what would bring you peace? Why are they shouting peace on earth? They don't know what will bring peace. They don't understand what is happening. They think they understand what is happening. They think they are moving their political social agenda along by accompanying Jesus into the city. And they're going to wait for him to announce it's time now. What's happening? Let's do this. But now it is hidden from your eyes. What's hiding it? What's hiding it seems to be their own ideas about who Jesus is and what he's about. The days will come upon you when your enemies will build an embankment around you and encircle you and hem you in on every side. They will dash you to the ground, you and the children within your walls. They will not leave one stone on another because you did not recognize the time of God's coming to you. Now that's really interesting because that's exactly what they think they're doing. This is God coming to them. This is God coming to them as he came to them through Moses, through David, through the Maccabees. This is God's coming to them and he's going to make Israel great again. He is going to sweep them away and set everything right. Now it's interesting that this mourning comes up a couple of chapters later as Jesus is taking the cross. As the soldiers led him away, they seized Simon of Cyrene, who was on his way from the country and put a cross on him and made him carry it behind Jesus. A large number of people followed him, including women who mourned and wailed for him. Jesus turned and said to them, daughters of Jerusalem, do not weep for me. He was just weeping for Jerusalem. Weep for yourselves and your children. Remember what he just said about themselves and their children. For the time will come when you will say, blessed are the childless women, the wombs that never bore and the breasts that never nursed. Then they will say to the mountains, fall on us and to the hills, cover us. It's interesting that that falling on us and covering us is something that gets picked up again in the book of Revelation at the time of God's coming. Now of course, rebellions will continue to happen. 67 to 70 AD, the temple will be destroyed. The rebellion in 135, the Bar Kokhba revolt will just make it all the worse. Now Jesus comes and repeatedly refuses to take the kind of power that they keep insisting for him. This happened obviously with Satan's temptations. Satan's temptations involve Jesus using miraculous power to give himself privilege and comfort and to win the popularity of the people. Cut a deal with the devil to have political power over the nations. In Galilee, Jesus was popular for his wonder working so that they tried to make him king and he slips out through the crowd. On his way to Jerusalem, they want Jesus to mob up and overwhelm and kill the Roman troops. Do miracles against them. Now this is Palm Sunday and a colleague of mine who was working on this in John plucked out a commentary who noted that basically for them waving palm branches, that was sort of like waving flags of Israel. Make Israel great again. Jesus, you've got to do it. Cleanse us of the unrighteous people. Cleanse us of the pagan Romans. Get them out of here. Make this again God's community. That's what you're supposed to do, Jesus. What do they think would bring them peace? Well, it seems obvious. What do the combatants in our own politicized culture war think brings us peace? If we, me and the people who think like I do, have political power, then we'll make the world right again. We'll use the power of the sword, which is the power to compel through fear and threat to impose our will on the other. That's standard operating procedure for this world. In a democracy, we wish we would always win the elections. We wish that we had unlimited money for the government or flip it the other way, maybe maximally limited government and all the court cases would go our way. Then we would make the world right. Do we really believe that? Do we really think that's the way the world works? Go ahead and use power over to compel your adversaries. See what happens. Will you end? Will you by law and racism, sexism and enmity against sexual minorities? Or will you just stoke resentment? Isn't resentment itself often the source of that animus? By trying to prevent it, you perpetuate it. If your market forces provide plenty for the masses, will this yield the world you're looking for? 150,000 people a day, a day. And this has been going on for years already. 150,000 people a day in this world are lifted out of extreme poverty. Every day, it's never in the news, but it's been happening for years now. Are we looking around at this bright and shiny utopia? You don't even know that number. You probably don't even know where I got it from. Once basic needs are met, well, it doesn't tend to provide happiness. I know lots and lots of people who eat every day, may or may not have a roof over their head. They can get the sex they want, get the drugs they want, get the TV they want, get the things they want. And what do they usually want? Well, more or different. People often pursue other agendas just to derive meaning from their victories. And I think a lot of that is what's stoking our political animosity today. We are filled with meaning and the experiences of meaning as we charge against our political rivals and try and get what we want. And all we do is perpetuate the same kind of thing that was being perpetuated between the Jews and the Romans. Misery, it's God's coming to you. Jesus came to them and they didn't like it. Jesus didn't pursue power over because he knew that this tool was not fit to engender the change needed for peace. We could not recognize Jesus or his ways because our hearts are far from God. It's basically what the prologue to the Gospel of John says. It's what the first chapter to the book of Romans says. We don't recognize God and when we do, we don't want him. It's the drama of Genesis 3 all over again. We suppress the knowledge of God in our hearts. We resist his agents. We derive meaning from fighting with each other. Imagine that if I were in charge, then the world would be perfect. And if we look around and ask those who know us and even love us, how would you feel if I were in charge of the world? That would be so good. How about you? Oh yeah, I'll take it on. How can the world be saved? Basically the better question is how can the human heart be healed? If the sources of sin and misery are inside us, how can that be addressed? And that's exactly the problem with power over. It doesn't finally address anything. Let's say you always won over your political adversaries. Would that change them? Or would that embitter them and embolden and embolden them? What do you do with them? How do you get rid of them? Do you kill them? That's what's been practiced in the world again and again and again. And it doesn't solve anything. Look at the story of the flood. Here God saves the best man and his family from a flood and wipes out everyone else. And in the matter of a number of generations, it's all back to the same. Each of us carries the virus that destroys this world. It is the sacrificial love of parents that turns wild children into potentially generous human beings. How can that love be practiced? How can the love of the Father be communicated to the world? Not by power over. It is sacrificial love that freely elicits generosity from human hearts that are fearful, insecure and miserly. Jesus loses his culture war but begins to win the world by changing it with his love. The lesson we need to learn over and over again, both inside and outside the church, is exactly that. It's almost always far harder to show his love from above than from below because once we have power in our hands, well, we tend to want to use this. Great example of this in the Protestant Reformation. I've been reading books in the Reformation period again. You know, the Roman Catholic Church was so hard and brutal on these adversaries and on these heretics, burning them at the stake. Once the Protestants got that same power over the Anabaptists, guess what they did? Exactly what the Roman Catholics did to them. This is really hard for us to learn. And breathless accounts of these hated Anabaptists and how loving they were to each other. Jesus wins the world by losing his culture war in a particular way. And that's the gospel. It's hard for us to learn. We're very direct creatures, but this is the way of Jesus. Now how anxious are you for the power over your political, social, cultural or religious rivals? Do you long for it? Do you wait for it? Do you basically derive all your meaning from that competition? Do you plot and fantasize your defeat over them? Do you really think that if you have power, then you have the skill and wisdom to bring about a perfect world? Forgive us if the rest of us are skeptical. I like the first and second question and answer of the Heideberg Catechism because I think it shows the way. What is your only comfort in life and in death? Not that I will have political power and get to enforce it on my enemies, but that I am not my own, but belong body and soul in life and in death to my faithful Savior Jesus Christ. He has fully paid for all my sins with his precious blood and has set me free from the tyranny of the devil. He watches over me in such a way that not a hair can fall from my head. He lets a lot of them fall without the will of my Father in heaven. In fact, all things must work together for my salvation because I belong to him. Christ by his Holy Spirit assures me of eternal life and makes me wholeheartedly willing and ready from now on to live for him and to live in this world for him and to bless this world the way he blesses it. What must you know to live and die in the joy of this comfort? First, how great my sin and misery are. The problems of this world are not just out there, they're right here. Second, how I am set free from all my sin and misery. That's exactly what Christ does for us and to us and through each of us to each other. Third, how I am to thank God for such a deliverance, basically living out his life with each other. That's the way.