https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=xs6Nzvf4bMA

 Oh, we got Sam in here. We got another customer. Perfect. Hi, this is Paul. And am I streaming yet? Yeah, it looks like I'm streaming. Let me turn on my chat window so I can see the chatters out there, because they're always the ones that help me know that I'm actually on. There we go. Okay. Just announced. Oh, that's the stats, not the chat. So I was in the open studio on the Bridges of Meaning Discord, and Mark, who always leaves such meaty comments on my videos, said, I was hoping you were going to bring in the other point. And of course, what is the other point? I'm not sure what the other point is. You do know that you're streaming on the internet right now, don't you, Sam? Okay, good. All right. So he did have another point that I hadn't thought of, and it was a really good point. And so I wanted to explore that a little bit more, and I thought, hey, I wonder if I could just livestream right from the Discord right into whatever this thing we're doing. So everybody introduce yourself a little bit. I got to figure this out because Rick's going to have comments about what I'm doing here. I know he is. Mark, somebody introduce themselves. I got to fuss with something here. I'll go first. Go ahead. I'm Mark. I have a YouTube channel called Navigating Patterns. Do you have a Patreon? No, I have a Subscribestar. Mark of Wisdom is my Subscribestar. Oh, okay. There you go. There you go. Yeah. And I'm a big fan of Paul's, and I do all the meeting comments. Meaty comments. Big meaty comments. Right? Try to help him out. And yeah, that's me, Manuel. Go ahead. Yeah, I'm Manuel. I live in the shadow, and sometimes I live in other people's shadow, and they don't like that. But yeah, I hang around on the server a lot. On the Verveki server? You mumbled. It's all that beard it got in your mouth. And I get flack from Paul. So that's all you need to know. And Sam, you can go next. I have no idea what I clicked on. I was on Discord. I'm like, oh, there's five people in a group with Paul, but apparently this is live on the internet. But hi, my name is Sam. I am the host of the Transfigured YouTube channel. I do not have a Patreon or a Subscribestar, but if you really want to help me out, I always have a list of books that you could buy me that I probably won't read, but that I still plan on buying. Sam works for books. I will work for books. All right, Luke, you go ahead. All right, I'm Luke. I don't really have a YouTube channel. I like to talk with other people and make videos. Yeah, but I mean, I don't. That's just that's like my diary where I just am working out thoughts. I'm not like try. I would try if you want, I guess. I don't care. I have no Patreon. I have no I'm not promoting anything. I like conversations and a lot of people in this community and Paul's stuff. And I'm chopping garlic, so I'm going to meet myself. All right, Andre. My name is Andre Jones, a friend of Mark LeFevre. And did you know he has a YouTube channel? I didn't know I had friends. I hang around on the Vanky server as well. I'm now a co-admin of it and put a tight little ship going and trying to find some sort of meaning for it. But we're having a bit of a crisis, as you would say. Been a fan of Paul for a while and he's blessed my cat on her birthday. So I love the stuff we've got going here. And yeah, that's a tiny summary of me. OK, so I was so I made the video. I released the video this morning where I sort of did a mashup with the Rick Rapeto conversation with John Vervecky that Mark, Mark, when he saw that, he immediately sent me notes that you have to watch this video because this video is everything to do with what you're doing. And I thought then I watched the video and I thought I was sort of it was the you know, he was watching yoga on TV and bang, he had a you know, do we call these mystical experiences? He had a body out of body experience. And and that was all interesting. I thought, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. And then he got to the other end where his little his little yoga church broke up and where he decided to leave all of his practices entirely and reenter his body and take up smoking and eat meat and have sex with women again and all that stuff. And and that I that whole transformation thing I found interesting. And I just I juxtaposed it with Gavin Ashenden, who had just released a video about conversation he had with Jordan Peterson at Cambridge. And what I thought was interesting about those two sides were here you have Gavin Ashenden, who also told Karen about a near death experience that he had prompted by drinking too much alcohol. And, you know, it sounded very similar to Rick Rapeti's experience. And so then I riffed on those two things and brought in the Paul Kings North thing. Very nice, Luke. Luke's Luke's are Luke's are first grader with show and tell here. Carrots, peppers. One, two, three. Sam brought to you by Coke. What's that, Luke? Is that? That's bacon fat. Bacon fat. Oh, so. So, you know, I was and then I was going to do a second part today. And Mark says, well, you know, you'll hit my you'll hit my point in the second part. And I pretty quickly realized I wasn't going to hit his point in the second part because I didn't know what his point was. So, Mark, brief, you know, then Mark told me what his point was. And then then Manuel said what what he heard from Mark, which was a little different from what I heard from Mark. So why don't you go ahead, Mark, and give a little brief summary of what you see the second point is in this conversation about the mystical and, you know, everybody's all excited about the mystical now. Oh, I want to be a mystic. But, you know, we're talking about the limitations of that. Yeah, yeah. So there's a couple of things, you know, a lot of people refer to these as transformative experiences. And one thing I realized a little over a year ago now, you know, being on the Verveki server and talking about these things is that they're not transforming. You're just having profound experiences like they're having something and, you know, more real than real, however they describe it. There's lots of descriptions for it, but they're the same jerks. They were afterwards in many cases. Now, Rick Petty's case, obviously not. Right. He actually did go through transformation, but then he transformed back right in the story to your point. And it gets me thinking about because I've been around hippies. I used to live with hippies. I love them dearly, even though I've always wanted to murder all of them for various very good reasons. I'm going to get demonetized by YouTube. A few of them. Look, you know, sometimes when you live with people, especially people with no boundaries, it is difficult to get along with them because, you know, but then what happens with no boundaries is they think they can, you know, have these experiences and that they're making sort of progress or changing when they're not. And I think part of the reason why is because they have a local container, a community. Right. And that's what Rick Repetti was talking about. It's because local communities got Ram Dass and these other semi-famous mystics or however you want to couch them. Right. Gurus, whatever you want to say from India. Right. Lived in India. And then the community breaks up and he doesn't have another community to go to because he doesn't have a larger container outside of that that would hold him. And this is one of the great problems, I think, with transformation is you need a larger container than your even even then your community to hold you. Right. Then your local community. Yeah. Yeah. So there's a proximal container of your local church and then there's the larger container of in the crazy Christianity, Jesus, right. There's the Jesus container, which is bounded by the Bible. The Bible gives you the balance for that container. And then when your local container blows up, your pastor has a has an affair, which didn't happen in Repetti's story, but it sounded something very, sounded like there was a little bit of potentially sexual scandal that caused that whole community to break apart. Right. I don't know that it was, I'm not making any claims. I wasn't there. I don't know the guy. Right. But tantric practices tend towards the sexual, not that they are sexual at all. I'm very familiar with them. They're connectedness, roughly speaking, but they tend towards the sexual for whatever reason. And it sounds like that's where the community grew up. Tantric expert. Yeah. You can add that in your next introduction. No, not at all. Expert on the tantric experience. No, not an expert on a tantric experience. But I mean, you can hear that in, you know, in, in reports from say movies, you know, music people and movie people and whatnot who have done this, right. They, they talk about tantra and how it was great and all that, but it never lasts. Right. And they don't have a larger container either to, to orient with these things. And so when you have these experiences and then your community breaks up or you have these experiences and then it doesn't go anywhere, you know, you end up in an apartment in New York for a month protesting, right. Or whatever, whatever John Lennon did. Right. Right. Like, but then you go to the strawberry field. So my uncle and I went recently, we went to the ELO concert in New York city and uh, we were like, Hey, we got some time. Let's walk up to, to, to central park. And, and we happened to be near, near the part where strawberry fields is he walks up there and he's like, yeah, I'm not impressed. And I was like, really? Cause he kind of grew up with all that stuff. And it just, it doesn't last. Right. It doesn't, it doesn't, because there's no larger container past your community. There's no larger container to have things in. Well, you know, and what, what struck me when you were mentioning this Mark was, so I've been thinking, you know, I've been trying to get the language around. I call it dead reckoning. Peterson deals with it with once you have something that's sort of aspiration you sort of pull yourself up to it. So there's proximal betterment. And for, you know, people who have what, what language are these mystical experiences, are these transcendental experiences? Um, they're, they're pre-modern. Let's call them pre-modern experiences. I mean, all these kinds of things, things that sort of things that are very much upper register with very little connection, um, experiential connection to the lower register. So then people have a transformation and, you know, in, in Rick Repetti's example, there was a lot of, it was all upper register and he was trying to connect it to lower registers type stuff, but you need to have really sort of a local container to, you know, to re to sort of heighten this, stabilize this. Somebody just sent me a long email where they went through all of, you know, a whole bunch of experience that they had, you know, drugs and it was trouble with the law and it was issue with the parents. I mean, lots of people have those kinds of things, but, you know, so we really, really need sort of a proximal container to sort of stabilize these things and gel these things. But I think you're right, Mark, that when that blows up, you very much begin to see the need for, for far larger containers. And that's why people start, you know, Buddhism, you just use that word Buddhism, but especially here in the West, that sort of means people who are, want to be spiritual, but not Christian with a little bit of formation, but you're right in terms of, you know, Christianity, you sort of, that's where you have the emanation, where you have the Jesus up above. And so what then tends to happen is you have the emanation from above, which then connects up down below and allows people to sort of stabilize and connect these experiences. And because they're also transcendental in that way, that's where you'll begin to actually get some lower level development that builds up and sort of stabilizes everything. And you can actually develop something of a civilization without this, without all of these, without any of that process from below, you're pretty much just stuck with these experiences that are just sort of ephemeral and off they go and they're gone. And, you know, I think when you look at something like AA, which came up a fair amount in the comments section, you know, you do have, you have the grounding of the group and the, the sponsor and the storytelling at the group and the meetings. But then you also have the big book and the tradition and all of those things sort of allow the thing to settle. And then, you know, once you get into something as large as a civilization, you really sort of need a world religion size environment to actually create all of the dynamics to fill in the world. So that's, that's what I heard from Mark. So what, what did you hear from Mark Manuel? Well, I'm not going to go do my commercial thing because that that's the private stuff. Like I need to make the profit from it. But what I, what I heard is, is like, you have, you have the container, right? Like I like to call it a worldview. And, and this, this worldview is, is, is the thing that allows you to place everything connected to each other, right? Like, because, because not only containers of groups blow up, but sometimes people blow up. And like when, when a, when a people blows up, they need to get themselves out. And when they blow up, they're in a community or whatever goes for their community, right? So, so the community did not prevent that from happening. Right. So you, you always need that extra thing to, to pull yourself out. And like, like, well, I have personal experience in, in, in this regard, but, but, but it's, it's important to, to have a path back to intelligibility, to, to reestablish hope, faith, trust in, in things. We've been talking about that a lot lately. And, and here's where Favik is right. Like if you start placing that in a person that's living, then they're, they're, they're always going to let you down in some way, right? Like they're unable to hold this forever because they're not perfect. And so it's, it's, it's important to, to have this transcendental aspect in, in your worldview that, that is able to be maintained across your experience. Anybody else have something they want to jump in with that? Cause I thought that was a really helpful point. So, Rod Dreer on his American. I will make a note. Someone in the chat said it's the three introverts and three extroverts on a panel. And I thought that was pretty funny. Okay. I'm sorry. Go ahead, Sam. Yeah, I'm not sure which one that makes me. So Rod Dreer had a post about psychedelics on his, on his, on his psychedelics on his, the American conservative. And like the, does Rod Dreer watch your channel? Paul, do you think, or is he lurking somewhere? Because either there's some like really strong convergent thought going out there in the world, or it's not actually convergent. It's actually, he's just drawing from a similar well, but like, so here's he, this is the article is mostly about psychedelics. Here's, and he wrote it, let's do this December 3rd. So four days ago, I repeated to Nikki, my usual claim about psychedelics that I suspect they really do work to open the doors of perception in ways that don't usually happen to people except after long, except at ascetic disciplines. Therefore they're like people who win the lottery versus people who become millionaires after years of hard work. The lottery winners don't normally know how to handle the money and often ruin their lives. I thought that was a pretty good analogy. And then there's this paragraph, which is like, he, I, anyway, I'll just read it. Um, so yet after my conversation with Nikki yesterday, I believe that we are certain to see a big jump in spiritual seekers turning to DMT in search of transcendence and re-enchantment. I believe as a matter of faith that Augustine was right. Our hearts are restless until they find rest in God. We are created for fellowship with him and as spiritual creatures, we crave experiences of the spirit. I have major theological differences with Pentecostals and charismatic Christians, but I'm 100% on their side in terms of their recognition of the importance of the participatory experience of God and worship. In Orthodox Christianity, I believe we have worked out a good balance. The Orthodox writer, Fredricka Matthews Green told me that many years ago that she was at an ecumenical conference once and observed during the break time that the Calvinists and the Catholics bunched together on one side of the room to talk doctrine while the Orthodox and the Pentecostals bunched together on the other side to talk about worship. So that's the end of that quote, which sounds like, honestly, I'm like, Roger, are you watching my conversations with John Vervecky? Because that's almost exactly what I talked about with like how the four P's relate to, you know, different sort of denominational specializations, I guess you could say. So I thought that that was interesting. Another thought that I'm having, like, Peugeot and Bishop Barron, when Jordan Peterson was sort of pushing them on the psychedelic thing a little bit in the Four Horsemen video, were very much sort of like spiritual experiences come, but don't seek them out. Don't dwell on them. Hold them with an open hand. Let them go, you know, and like very kind of negative, I would say negative, skeptical, not completely dismissing because obviously maybe saints and monks and that sort of thing might experience a higher degree of these things than the rest of us. And they might occasionally bring their wisdom back down to us, but definitely don't seek them out and stuff like that. Whereas me coming from, you know, one of these charismatic sort of backgrounds that Drear might have been talking about, I think that there is value in these experiences in themselves for the believer in terms of offering enchantment. And like Drear said, you know, we are spiritual creatures that speak experiences of the spirit, and that's part of who we are in our image of godness. And so I thought that Peugeot and Bishop Barron were a little bit too negative, really, on what I would say the perspectival and in a way that Jordan Peterson didn't find very satisfying and that I think that we're going to need better answers to these sorts of questions from the DMT enthusiasts than what was offered to Jordan Peterson when he was really seemingly earnestly asking and wanting something of an answer from people that he respected in the Christian tradition. And I don't think he got the answer that he was hoping for from either of them in that conversation. Well, what do you think? Do you want to talk, Luke? You're unmuted. Yeah, I did. Well, so I think that, man, there's a lot of things to say. Like, many people have said that the Verveci 4Ps are tough because they're just one of the downfalls. And he would acknowledge this, I think, and a lot of people would, is that they're only separated and shown to emphasize things, to be able to analyze and talk about them. But really, they should all be one thing. And then to the point of a lot of this stuff, I think you need to distinguish between... Here I go. The difference between an experience from an individualist kind of isolated me in my own subjective world and then an experience that is communal in orientation. And this is where I would say, Sam, like even your, like a charismatic religious experience, I would almost equate that to like the exact same thing as a psychedelic experience, because you could experience both of those like individually in your own prayer closet, or you could do it communally where you all get together with a bunch of close friends and take some mushrooms. And those things can... They can be transformative. I think the correction should always be is that they're not prescriptive, I think, because of the whole unearned wisdom thing. And... Oh, shoot. What was one of the other points that you were talking about? And one other thing to say. Yeah, I don't... I don't... An experience in and of itself, I guess this is the thing that I would say, my understanding from within orthodoxy and just how I take it as an experience should not be pursued in and of itself and can be useful like a proposition can, but it's never the thing in and of itself. Like you can have tons of experiences, but divorced from transcendence and community and other people, like if they're not... If that experience is divorced from all of those things, it's going to be more deceptive than transformative. This is probably the rare subject where I'm more wooey than Luke. Well, I love the example of, let's say... I still got to schedule my talk with James Wellman and Tripp, because my contention, my theory has been that when you have big box charismatic worship, which I've done my share of taking cheap shots at it with the skinny jeans and the smoke machine and the guitar and the lights, that is a transformative, something parallel to frame breaking, but it's also communal. I mean, when you have thousands of people, even if they're singing love songs to Jesus, that they're doing it together, I mean, that for many people, part of the reason the American megachurch is working, and what I mean by working, it's at least it's functional in terms of its capture of the attention of millions of American Christians is in fact that transformative experience. And people will tell you that experience is transformative. Now, any pastor also knows that those experiences are ephemeral in that they disappear. And so, I've known, I knew a guy, he was a CRC. Your memory is something. You know, the full qualitative experience disappears, but the memory lingers on, just like how you can remember a dream after you woke up, but it's not quite the same thing as being in the dream itself. Right. But what we... Go ahead, go ahead, Manuel. Well, the thing that we focus on or started focusing on is setting a container. Right. So I think what's happening is there's a container setting, right? And then you open the space. So what you're doing is you're taking people out of their daily lives and you're introducing them into a sacred space. And then there's a sacred element because people are gathered there. But then there's also a sacred element in the fact that you're enacting with the same purpose. And so now we have the space open. Right. And that's not a transformation. Right. That's an affordance. Right. Like it allows for potential to manifest. And then, well, like what is the spirit that's being invoked in that situation? And what is our relationship to that spirit? Are we letting that spirit inform us or are we just consuming the spirit as a participant to have a good time? Right. Like, so now we get into what is our intention. What is the way in which that we're participating in this openness? And like you can see the analogies all over. Right. Like, so, oh, like in circling, people come in and they have this feeling of intimacy that they don't have anywhere in their lives. Right. This was literally what Fevek said to Peterson. And it's like, yes. Right. So there's this affordance. They're like, oh, right. There's all of this potential. Now they can't handle it. Right. Like they don't have an interface with the potential that allows them to transform themselves as a consequence of what's actually available to them. And I think that's where the box is. Like, okay. How do we get people to actually transform in the right direction? And now we've got to talk about the good. Like, what's the good? Right. Like, how do we relate to the good? Like, how do we understand the good? Is the good the thing that Sensei says? Right. Like the teacher? Like, oh, are we going to follow a person? Or is the good something that's transcendent? Right. Like that's being passed down through a tradition. And I'm just going to go with the tradition and whatever the teachers say. And how common is the good? Because if the good is common to your local group, but it's not common outside your local group and the group blows up, your entire identity, your entire worldview is gone. And that's the problem. Whether you're talking about spiritual experience and Sam, I totally disagree with your characterization of Bishop Aaron and Peugeot. And actually I did a breakdown on the meaning code. We're going to do another one with Karen Wong on the four horsemen conversation. Right. And I am, I look, I'm not, I'm not actually even against taking psilocybin, but I'm completely no on drugs because I've seen a lot of people take drugs in good containers with guides guide the person has a bad trip. The person has a bad trip and the guide is ruined for life, for life because they couldn't prevent the bad trip. That happens all the time. I've seen it many times. That's what's blowing up churches because a priest, a priest scandal, someone deconstructs because they had a bad experience in the pitch PVK. Someone put in an idea about talk about childhood trauma and deconstruction would be an excellent topic. So to your point, Mark. Yeah. Right. And so you can see how this is the same, whether, whether it's a sexual scandal or a profound experience, right. Or just the disintegration of a community or a situation like Manuel's talking about, where you go into something like a circle. So circle is usually temporary. Maybe it's a group of people, you know, we've done some experiments on the Verveki server with it. I'm not a big fan. The guy saying stock was on, he talked to us about circling. You can listen to that on the awakening from the meaning crisis discord YouTube channel. It's kind of interesting because it doesn't give a lot of information, I would say, but it's very telling in other ways. I think what all these things have in common is they lack this larger structure, this larger container, right. And we were calling earlier the Jesus container, right. The container where everything is, because I don't think people take transformation seriously enough. In transformation, what you're doing is you're taking your current worldview or at least significant parts of it and you have to kill them. You have to let them go. You have to destroy them. When you're doing that, you need support. And then when you're transforming, you need to know, are you transforming for the better or are you turning into something worse? Because it's not clear, right. And then once you get there, you still need to reestablish your transformed self. You need something bigger for that. And just to round it out, also the container needs something for that. You can't reform the container if the container isn't sitting in a wider thing. So when you talk about things like contentional communities, that's a self-referencing thing. You want a community that references a common good that's common not only to your community, but to all humans. So that if your community goes through a problem or if it has a problem or if it becomes corrupt, you have a reference point outside of it that you can orient towards, that you can fix it relative to. That's why the larger container's going forward. Like the Babylonian king having the Babylonian god above the Babylonian king, right. Exactly. But to some degree, that's always going to have to be ineffable and only ever seen in the personal things, which is why I think in Christianity it's made to be love. Because if you make it something else, it'll turn into a utopian ideology every time. But that's why it's so tricky. So Rick Rapetti talks about this and you can watch Verveckis absolutely giddy the whole time, right. He says, oh, I had to reground everything. And then Verveckis just, oh, yeah, you had to reground everything. But again, you're not rising above the container. Maybe that container could have been fixed. Maybe those that could have been repaired even after the damage that was done, had they a larger container to orient against and fix against. The only reason the container blew up for Rick Rapetti, according to his story, from my understanding is because there wasn't any way to fix it. The everybody went off in different directions and it's flintered because it didn't have a larger container to reference. How do you maintain fidelity with a larger container? Besides just saying it, how would that look? It looks like the Christian church. Worship, that's how you maintain relationship with the church. It's easy to say that, but the last 500 years of the Christian church have shown that Christ and Antichrist kind of go hand in hand. Well, it's sacrifice, right? Like you sacrifice for the container. I told you that a month or two ago, sacrifice is a virtue. There's a lot of people who would agree with everything that you're saying and all their relationships and churches and marriages are falling apart. Welcome to peopling. Your doctor smokes and is overweight. I mean, this is people. But you still need the container. I really love this point by Mark, which is you still need this container because actually this container allows things to reconstitute. This is one of the reasons. How does the container manifest though? It gets manifest in the locality again. So let's, I mean, Chad's in the Chad, the alcoholics in the chat room. And, you know, I think AA is a great example because there are better and worse A chapters. And I'm sure people let's say who move around a lot. Oh, the A group in Portland was wonderful. The A group in Kansas City is not as good. You know, yeah, you have all of this stuff, but there's an essence to it that holds it together. And let's say that the church, the church on the corner that's dying or has trouble or whatever, it can be reformed because the reformation is possible from the container. They can access it and sort of pull it down and try to re-instantiate it again. Yeah. And just to, just to play more on your emanation versus emergence thing, right? Look, you're fully in the upper register with a large container. Like the large container has no material component whatsoever. Right. I have no problem with that. I think that's required. It's totally upper register. It's totally heaven, right? Whatever your upper register is, totally Buddha. I don't care. It doesn't matter. The community in the middle is the middle. It's the place where things happen. Right. It's the, you know, it's not the grounding, right? Because it's lifted off the ground. It's between that higher container, that fully, that fully ethereal, right? Or upper register and the fully material, right? The stuff that doesn't move, the totally, totally stultified, staid stuff that doesn't do anything, the ground. And that's where we exist. That's where the co-creation happens. Right. That's the area of, we'll call it actual reality, right? If we want to get clever with the double references and crazy adverbs. You could say actuality, perhaps. Right. Yeah. Well, actuality is usually what I use, but I'm sort of riffing off and at the same time, poking at Vervecky, right? When I say actual reality, right? Because he uses the really real. And it's like, which is way worse because you're self-referencing, right? You're using real to reference the word real. That's not a definition, right? That's a magic trick at that point. But I think with all of these things, what you see is this idea of enchantment. And we're starving for enchantment. Doesn't matter if you're a Christian or if you've never been a Christian. You've never been a Christian. You're striving for enchantment. You're looking for drugs or Buddhism or both, right? If you're a Christian and your marriage is falling apart, you're having all these problems because the church is failing you. And I've got my problems. The church is failing society in general. That's my big topic now. The church is failing society by not calling out morality. Then your enchantment is something different. But everybody wants enchantment. Doesn't matter if you're in the church or out of the church or never been in the church or going to be in the church. Everyone's looking for enchantment. And you would define enchantment in this, in what you just mapped out as? Enchantment is. The meeting of the upper and lower registers? No, I would say enchantment is all upper register stuff. We're starving for that upper register, Paul. We're starving for that higher thing, for that thing above us. Not that we necessarily want to engage with it in submission, which might be the proper way to engage with it. I'm not making a statement here. I'm just throwing out random ideas that maybe I've thought of for a long time. Right. But we want to engage with it nonetheless. And hey, if that's drugs, that's drugs. For Chris Petcow, it's drugs. Right. He's a big drug. I'm having a big... He did a thing on your fractal commentary. Right. He's got a fractal commentary on your commentary on the poor horseman. And I've been commenting on him because I'm pushing back on him saying, no, drugs are bad. Lots of people become schizophrenic. They become paranoid, sometimes for life, as a result of psychedelic experience with chemicals because they're trying to control it. And that's not good. Nobody wants that. We can all agree. And Karen pointed out in the video I did with her on the meaning code, she said, did you read the study? Because yeah, 60% of the people did better and 30% of the people did worse. And I was like, well, this is why I don't read those studies because 30% worse is not good. Right. Now, and maybe that's their best option. And in a lab, all for the drugs. People freak out when the vaccines have a one in one million bad side effect. A 30% bad side effect is awful. Right. Just abysmally terrible by medical standards. Yeah. Those are desperate people though. Right. And now I didn't. If your video goes flat, now it's Sam's fault, by the way, Paul. I'm off the hook. I'm sorry. So I'm just talking about this drug that starts with I that I found is very interesting. So here's my question though, because I'm still confused. I mean, I'm not into Verveki stuff as much. I'm not on that server. I mean, I follow his stuff a little when he talks to you folks. And I'm increasingly more interested in Verveki, but I would say I'm still, so I'm still confused how we access this thing because I would agree the upper register is something that comes down and renews the new one. And I guess what I, I mean, just to be blunt, what I hear on here are Sunday school answers that I don't think are going to, I don't understand what the prescription is. Well, I don't think part of my, I think we have been formed by our culture to imagine that there is a prescription and prescriptions sort of imagine that there is a pill I can take and I'm going to resolve this. Right. And part of the pushback by Verveki, Baron and Peugeot on Peterson is the skepticism about a pill because there is, there is no prescription. You're, I mean, think of your, your entire life as a pill in that sense, because it is all going to be formation and, but it's not all bottom up. It's also, so I'm a Calvinist, so I also believe in a lot of top down and a lot of the stories I shared on the video I released this morning were about people who just were simply given a gift. God decides, you know, you know, my friend, he actually lives in the UK is, you know, okay, you're, I'm meeting you tonight and you'll never be the same. It's Paul on the road to Damascus. I mean, these things also happen. I mean, life is wild like this and, and there is no prescription. And, and so, you know, we are in many ways radical recipients that the best you can do is keep your hand open. And in that sense, I'm sort of, you know, leaning against Peterson. I mean, I appreciate the fact that Peterson wants people to drag their heavy cross up a hill. Okay, that's good. It's probably better than sitting crying at the base of the hill, but at the same time, we are all radical recipients of everything that we receive. Yeah, I guess I, I'm going to try to state it more clearly, I guess then. So like, we're all, so we have these experiences. This is how we started it off. But if it's just an experience in and of itself, it isn't nestled inside a larger transcendent box, then it becomes a problem. Which my, my concern is, is that I think, and I think that's largely societally and culturally and individually true. And, and then you could say, we're not doing that. So then what do we do? And you can say church, but that is also failing. Well, it's not utterly failing. It's having some mixture of failure and success, like it's always had. Yeah, well, you have to have church, right? And then you have to have the awareness that there is such a thing as these transformative experiences and you have to guide people in a way that prepares them to have them. Right? So you can go into a week of fasting, right? And just say, don't eat, right? Or you can go into a week of fasting and you give people comprehensive structure, right? Like, this is like five things that might happen to you. And these are reactions to the things that, that, that will happen that will allow you to, to find meaning effectively, right? Like, like you, cause cause like you can read the Bible, right? And then like, it doesn't make sense, right? And then suddenly you're in the right context. And then the thing informs your whole world. And, and having, having the connection, right? The ability to connect whatever is relevant to a person in the moment, which might be a different thing for every person, even if they're in a similar situation. And, and, and someone actually able to provide that to them, right? Like that's, that's what I think is important, right? So, so first of all, the person needs to ask. Secondly, there needs to be a resource that that's able to, to distribute people things in their path, right? They need to be able to recognize the path that a person is on and the position that they're in on the path and what's going to help where they're at. Like, yeah, so you need, you need skilled people there. Like that's just a people choice. Right. And when, and when in many ways, I think that prescriptive argument is the problem. Right. We've gotten into this scientific mode of thinking, right? Years ago, years or decades ago, right? Maybe, maybe 200 years ago, right? Around the enlightenment, maybe, maybe. And then we've decided that, look, we can, we can use the tools of science, right? It's very Kantian, right? We can use the tools of science to apply it to this religious realm and figure out how to build better robot people without all these flaws. But that's not, that's not the way it works. And so we've taken, I mean, Bishop Barron talked about the flattening of the Catholic Church. Catholic Church is very flat. And, and, and, you know, he, he, he didn't, I don't think he went as in depth as I would have liked. Although I liked him a lot better this time than previous times I've seen him. Right. Because, you know, he, he, he did exemplify how the church got flattened. And I think there's something. So if you want to take Vervecki's work seriously, and I do, even though I have deep disagreements with some of John's formulations, if you look at something like participation in the church, that's something that is more or less exemplified to your point, Sam, when you talk to Vervecki in certain churches, right? Certain, certain denominations go after these different sort of four Ps of knowing. And I know, like Manuel and I worked on the different four Ps, right? I talked to, I talked to you, Paul, about that over a year ago now. I talked to Karen, Karen Wong about it on the Meaning Code too. I think that one's in some ways a better video, we had a little bit more time. But, but there's a way in which the church has took the scientific endeavor too seriously. And so, look, if you do the, the mass in Latin, and I don't understand it, that is a participatory advantage. Because there's a way in which, because I can't hear the propositions correctly, but I see the relationship between the Latin being spoken and it being acted out in the, in the, is it the liturgy? Whatever, whatever it's called. See, I don't go to church. There's a way in which I learn from that, that I cannot learn from, if I'm just told what's going on directly in a language I understand. If the mass is in English and you do understand what's being said and etc., then there's also an ability to interact with it in a way that you can't, if it's in Latin. I agree. I agree that you're privileging propositional knowledge over participatory knowledge. And I will actually state this axiomatically. No, no, but I'll state this axiomatically. Participatory knowledge is way more important, way more significant, and we don't even need propositional knowledge, because we only need propositional knowledge to communicate with others. And also, if, if you tell me something, right, my reaction could be, oh, you told me it, I know it. So now I don't have to deal with it because I know it. And that's the thing that a lot of people do. That's academic. And sometimes, right, like, like, like, I wrestle with it, right, like I do the right thing and I think I know it. And I still don't know it because I don't have the right context in order to grasp the full meaning. So, like, giving people propositional knowledge is the way for them to get spiritually bypassed. Like, when you look at awakening for the meaning crisis, from the meaning crisis, right, like, it gives you a sense of, like, oh, like, I'm actually resolving the meaning crisis for myself. But it's not, right, like, there is no tool in there that is, can be enacted participatory that will help you resolve your meaning crisis. Right. Like, it might lead you to finding solutions to for yourself, right. And like, I hope it will. But the fact that you spend 50 hours on that, like, does not resolve anything for you, but it does give you the feeling that you're working on it. And that's where the danger lies, right. Like, like people, people like to engage with a billion ideas and now they think they're smart, right, but they still can't translate that into transformation in their lives. All right. Closing comments, people. Let's land the plane. This isn't supposed to be a two-hour thing. And Colton asked if I could, I still haven't figured, I still haven't gotten into the habit of saving and streaming. And so the technical stuff here, this is a total experiment, but I think it was a, I think it was a productive experiment that we just did here. So closing comments. So I, I would say that, I don't know, I'm still confused because if, if there's transcendence that we need to be participating in and participation is so important versus propositional. And if we say it's just like these proper liturgies and church is an example, I don't know what other examples people would say, but then like Mark, you even said like, you don't go to church. So, so I don't understand how you're participating in transcendence then. How, how, you know, like it just, I don't get it. Laying on the altar call. I mean, no, I'm not even, I'm not doing that either. Cause I don't, I mean, I just made a big video video about Christian perennialism. So, uh, I mean, you know, I love that Paul Kings North video. I I'm not saying like, I'm not going to say this is prescriptive for everyone. Cause I'm not you, which isn't pluralism either. Watch my video. The guy who said he had no channel. Well, I think that distinction is important. I liked that. The link to the Patriots in the description. There's no page to port. Give it to him. Give it to Chris. He wants it. I don't want it. All right. Andre, you haven't said anything. Uh, there was just a very loud cat there. So I just touched that. Um, One thing, uh, idea I did have talking about the larger container, the small container, um, made me think about, um, ideas of postmodernism, how we have the grand narrative and the local narrative. Um, and I believe it may be ground there to explore connecting, uh, all those ideas. Um, especially with transformation and perhaps ruin and they, they, they, they, they, they that, uh, my, my only real comment would be to say, uh, my friend, Mark LeFevre has a YouTube channel and you should all visit it. And, um, that's all I've got to say. All right. Thanks, Andre. Um, Manuel, you have any closing comments? Well, yeah, like, like we participate in the transcendence through hierarchy, right? So we submit to the authority and whether that's Jesus or your pastor or whatever, and you try to participate within, within the hierarchy and like, maybe you get promoted on the hierarchy or maybe you find fulfillment, whatever spot you're in. Like, I, like, I don't think having the experience is necessary, necessary because you can participate through others. Good. That's helpful. Any other closing comments? I'll, um, I'll just say Manuel is, is, is, uh, brilliant and articulate, and you can see more of him on navigating patterns, my YouTube channel, but, uh, a little more seriously, I think that, yeah, the, the, the, the key to all of this in terms of transformation is understanding that larger container. And, you know, we struggled with awakening from the meaning crisis, right? And, and to Manuel's point, it should be, you know, it should be called awakening to the meaning crisis. The awakening from is John's meditation series and it's cultivating wisdom courses. That's where you get that practical aspect. And to flip Peterson on its head, look, you need, you need, you need a judge, you need a judge and you need to submit to that judge because otherwise you have no ideal to move towards. And maybe that's a better, a better way to say it, right? Maybe that's a better way to get people out of the, to Andre's excellent point, post modern, there's no grand narrative. You don't need one, right? You need that judge to have that ideal, just to flip Peterson around a bit and, and, and bring, drive that point home. And, and that's what's going to give you the ability to participate in the, in your, in yourself better, in your local container better and in that larger container better. That, that I think is my summary. Quick thing. Does the, does, does this Christ judge manifest in you and your quiet time reading the Bible through his revelation in the Bible or through the magisterium or through, I mean, that's just the thing is like the details, how this manifests matters. And that's a lot of the disagreement. It, it manifests if you submit to it, like, like that's, that's all there is to it. Like, I was that. So whatever you submit to call it Christ and you submit to it and it works. No, if you, if you submit something that is something else, it, it works too, but it doesn't have the effect that you want. So you know, you can, you can submit to climate and you'll get climate, you know, extinction rebellion, right? Like you get all these little sects, like you get these little religions. It's happening all the time. We just don't see it. I got to serve somebody. It's a principality, right? But I'm just saying you can also, I think it's possible to be thinking you're submitting to the hierarchy of Christ and many will come to me and say, Lord, Lord. And he'll say, I depart from me. I never knew you. That's a quote from the universalist. That happens, but like, like you, you can't solve that. Like that's not solvable. All right, Sam closing comments, anything? Yeah, I think that we need to do a better job of offering some sort of olive branch or bridge to the DMT folks. I think that this probably is going to be a thing that is going to be increasing in, you know, use prevalence, cultural awareness, et cetera. And I think that what is troubling for a lot of people on these psychedelic journeys is that they don't have any framework to make sense of what's happening to them. But yet what's happening to them feels more real than perhaps what's ever happened to them. And that this is a very confusing thing for them. And then they, you know, end up treating it as some form of entertainment or something like that. And it can also get really weird and demonic and all other sorts of things that they have even less of a framework to make sense of if it goes in that direction. And that I think that they're like, Paul, you say that you read CS Lewis's miracles a couple times a year, maybe used to, to kind of fight off the materialist lurking somewhere in your consciousness, Congress, right? Or to at least make sure it didn't get too much sway in the Congress. And I think that part of that same sort of thing needs to be encouraged and productively facilitated in church. I'm not saying like everyone needs to be tripping DMT or something like that. There's all a variety of spiritual experiences from like being really moved by music to being emotionally touched by a sermon to discovering some sort of insight while reading scripture. There are a whole variety of these things, right? And not all of them are like, you know, hallucinogenic trip. Some of them are like hallucinogenic trips, though. That is one of the things. And I think that we need to figure out as a church how to communicate to that. And I think there's a huge evangelism possibility for being able to offer some sort of affirmation of the realness of what is happening. But also a word of caution about what could happen and how it could go wrong. And an invitation into some big container that can actually make sense of this and ground this and point you beyond it. Like the church tradition that I kind of came out of was a Jesus Movement Church that was able to take a whole bunch of hippies who had had plenty of experience with all this stuff in the 60s and 70s and point them in a charismatic but structured direction that enabled them to kind of say yes and no to some of these things at the same time, but allow them to live productive, constructive lives in the community and in families, etc. And I feel like I hear some weird echoes of the 60s and 70s happening with this and that we'll need to remember some of those things, but also we're in a new context, too. So I could say a lot more, but I think that's a great point, Sam. I think that's a great point. And I think part of what the church did then is offer. I mean, I don't want to see pastors handing out psychedelics in church. And I think actually the church has been offering liturgy, worship, spiritual disciplines. The church has been offering these things, but they've much. It's sort of analogous again to my steroids analogy that at some point, yeah, you're probably going to have to stay in the gym and the roids are, you know, especially for Major League Baseball, not the path to actually producing a. A good career. A career. It's a good season or two, but it's not a good career to do steroids. Exactly. And it's not good for Major League Baseball. So. All right. Well, this whole thing has been an experiment and I'll, I think this has been successful. I'll probably try to do this again. I'll continue to figure out how this happens. I was in the. I had no idea what I was clicking on. I was like, oh, there's some fun people in the chat room. I'll click on that. And then all of a sudden I'm on the internet, but. Yeah, I'll have to make a separate little room. I think it's helpful to have a room that's and then maybe also this could maybe be something like Clubhouse, a little bit more open than Clubhouse and that, you know, people could come in and drop in and drop out, something like that. It all depends on what kind of time I've got. So anyway, Luke's giving us, how's it look, Luke? Oh, nicely done, Luke. Nicely done. Rice and beans. Nicely done. It's a good way to wrap this up. Okay. So thank you all for this. I'm going to, I'm going to stop the stream and thank you for those of you who were in the comments section and yeah, good experiment. Thanks guys.