https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=vxq7_yhKVuQ

 Hi, this is Paul, and this is what I know as food truck Emily from Twitter. She started, I don't know when, let's, when did you first find me in this corner? You talked a little bit of that in your introduction video. It was sometime this year. I was, you know, actually, you know, so John, uh, Jonathan Pagio had started talking about that hideous strengths. Uh, so I went back and like read the trilogy and I had already been like reworking through all of CS Lewis stuff. And so, but I didn't have anyone to talk to about it. And I harassed everybody. I know trying to start like some kind of book club or something, and it just didn't take. So I scoured all the podcasts looking for something, and then I got on YouTube and I saw your video and at first I, you know, cause it wasn't like high quality video or anything. Um, but then when you, but then you'd start talking, we're talking about CS Lewis. I was like, you could just tell you were, you were drawing in from a lot of different things. I was like, okay, I, I like this guy. Well, then YouTube started serving me up more of your videos. And I was like, Oh, he listens to the same people I've been listening to. And so I started listening, but I, as soon as I discovered you had audio form only, I went over to podcast and I just didn't take the time to stop and realize that, because you'd be mentioning people had no idea who they were, you know, um, like people within the corner. And so finally I just got curious enough that I went over to actual YouTube and, um, I think I made like one comment on something and then you actually responded and I was like, Oh, there's an actual person there. And, um, yeah. And then I just got like kind of addicted, I guess. How did you find Peugeot? Um, yeah, the Jordan Peterson. Okay. And you know, it's kind of interesting is the first time I heard Peugeot, I was so put off by him because it was this episode where Jordan was in, was clearly in just deep spiritual pain over his physical pain. Yeah. And I was so underwhelmed by his responses. And I was like, that's what a Christian has to tell somebody about their human suffering. And so at first I didn't care for him, but then over time, I, you know, I started listening to him here and there too, you know? Well, let's, let's get, let's get down to business. Now you've already sort of made a, a little splash yet. You didn't make a huge splash, which is interesting. I I'm always because the corner is, I think about the corner as sort of a conscious entity and, um, so it's just interesting to see how things happen in it. Cause nobody is controlling it really contrary to, uh, some people's imaginations. So let's go all the way back and let's do this randos thing properly. Uh, tell me about the home you grew up in. Uh, well, by the time I was born, my parents actually were missionaries in Mexico. Um, but they got kicked out as a ministry and it completely turned my family's life upside down. And so my parents had been, um, converts out of like the Jesus movement. So like your whole thing about that movie, I found really interesting cause I recognize so much, uh, out of that story. So, um, it was really more like a power thing within the ministry. I think there was an insecurity in the authority and in the leadership. And so these, some of these young guys who there was a lot going on with them. My dad is a very, um, it's one of those, he's like you, he reminds me of like you, but only an introvert. So everyone was opening up to him and coming to him with their problems. And I think they felt his influence was too much. I don't know. He wasn't doing anything bad, you know, but, um, they ended up sending him off to Mexico, maybe to, I don't know the full story, but maybe to get him away from, you know, the group. Okay. And then he kind of describes that the leadership flew down and interrogated him in the hotel room on his theology. He's a young believer at that point. And then the end, they decided that because he doesn't speak in tongues and that he must not have the Holy spirit or I don't know what, so they just, they kicked him out. And so here they were, you know, they're from Southern Illinois where the only jobs are coal mining and farming. My dad was a coal miner and my mom had been the daughter of a farmer, but my dad's actually, it was a musician and in a rock and roll band. So, but that was the only work available. So here they are in Texas and no marketable skills, three little kids, um, no community their entire lives fell apart. So my first memories of childhood were of just my mother having a complete breakdown in the middle of the store. That's my very first memory. It was of my mom just breaking down, staring at a shelf and I probably, she couldn't afford what was on the shelf. I just imagined that was it. Yeah. Um, and so there was a real scramble to find work. And, um, by the time I was four, they decided that my dad should become a truck driver, so he was gone all the time, except for one or two days out of the month. And he was putting my mom through school. So she's working and going to school. So, you know, maybe a typical lower income story of like the kids are kind of left to their own latchkey kids in the eighties and we just wandered around a lot. My older sister took care of us. Um, she was very much the nurturing motherly kind, and she was like really into literature and poetry and theater. So that was kind of like a lot of my influence then. Um, and then, you know, without, I'd say the protection of a father figure in the home, uh, I became very easy prey to my, my best friend's dad, my next door neighbor. He ended up being a pedophile. Um, and so that was like a really bad start. I'd say was in the middle of all this, like falling apart of all the, like community spiritual, like everything happening in our family, just, there was just this pervasive loneliness that I felt like got exploited, you know, and, uh, more than just the abuse itself, I think the whole thing was traumatic. And back then, I don't think, I don't think they did a good job with kids. Um, you know, in counseling and stuff like that, my mom was afraid to even talk about it, that she'd make it worse. And I just had this deep sense of shame that I can't even describe. Like it was, uh, I felt 100% like it was my fault. And I would say to you, that's when I became really fixated on the idea of God. Actually. Um, my family wasn't at this point, my dad was super cynical, couldn't even talk about God anymore. Um, and that allowed lasted for a good seven years. And my mom was trying to kind of hold it together and, uh, in a sense, like occasionally taking us to church, if she could manage, there was nothing real going on there and I just felt this desperation for God to save me. And I didn't even know who God was or what that meant. Yeah. Um, so I had a real rough time in school. That was very sick all the time. Like, I mean, it was now I know it's anxiety. I was vomiting every morning before school. I was, I couldn't manage relationships with other kids. The teachers didn't like me. I was weird as fuck. Like weird. Um, I just, I remember actually standing in a hallway in elementary school and just, and I think I would sort of like dissociate a little bit, you know, and just looking at it all around me and just thinking, I'm not like anybody anymore, you know? Um, the whole police, police involvement was very traumatizing. The whole, the year that the whole court situation happened, I don't even, I don't remember that entire year pretty much. So I must've just like blocked all of that out. Um, so yeah, um, I think so somewhere around middle school. So I had, like I said, just that shame that I could not shake. And then I had a very bad relationship with my mother. It was very much, um, it felt like couldn't do anything right. Kind of situation. And she's probably very indigram one, I think. I don't know if that means anything to you. I have never done the dive into the indigram stuff. So well, that's for another day. I'm not like an indigram cult or whatever, but it's, it's helpful sometimes. Um, very much rules and not a lot of emotion. There wasn't like a lot of feeling of connection and that comes a lot from her side of the, I mean, all the generations in my family are messed up, unfortunately. Um, yeah, just not knowing how to handle stuff. And, uh, anyway, I started, you know, self mutilating and just started obsessing over. Um, it's not like I was suicidal, but it was all my mind all the time of that. Like, how long do I have to do this? You know, how long is this life going to be? And I felt desperate to get out and I couldn't really imagine it being better. So, um, I prayed all the time. I remember just pretty much every night. And I felt like if I didn't pray, like I would wake up in the night to pray. Cause I was afraid that if I wasn't doing it all perfectly, that God wouldn't look at me or wouldn't save me. And I didn't even know what all that meant. And then my, my dad finally quit truck driving and he had another like whole life turnaround came back to faith. Um, and they started going to church. And so here I've never really been really in a community of church and stuff. And, um, and it's the first time I really started looking at the Bible and you might get a kick out of this though, because the, you know, the thing during that time was Calvinism versus Armenianism. I just remember coming into youth group and the pastor was constantly like drooling into us that we're, we're saved and we can't lose our salvation. And I'm just looking around at all these kids who've got, I don't know. I just thought they had bad, bad character. I'm like, why do you keep telling us that we're saying, I actually started reading the Bible because I wanted to argue with him and I just remember him pulling me aside one day and just saying, you know, Emily, you're just really abrasive. And, um, I love him to this day. Like I still, I'm still friends with him, but he wasn't, he was not wrong. I was like this 12 year old lawyer that came. I mean, I came with my receipts. I came prepared. I had a notebook full of all the scriptures I had found to say that it's not, I don't know. Um, and then when I was around 14 or 15, we got a call to my house and I remember where I was standing when this happened. It was a woman from, sorry, a woman from our church. And she was, she was a missionary from South Africa and she had called and asked to speak with me. And I remember my dad coming into the room with the phone and saying, this woman from church wants to talk to you. And she was in her 20s. So she was actually young. Um, so I'm like, okay. I answered the phone and she said, I know this is really strange and I don't know how to explain this to you, but every single time I've gone to pray for weeks. Now, all I see is you. She said, I don't know what it means, but can we spend some time together? And of course, no one, not my parents, no one knowing what I was going through. Yeah. Um, I still get emotional when I think about this because I was so lonely and so, in so much pain and it was the first time that I realized like, God, God sees me, he knows that I exist. Like he's maybe he's heard me crying out to him. And so I started hanging out with, she just brought me into this little like community of young people from YWAM. So she was from YWAM and it was this little group of misfits, I swear, like from all over and a lot of people mixed in were doing school of the Bible. So there was just this really beautiful group of people that just loved on me where I was and I went to, and during the summer to like one of their, like, I don't know if it was like a month long thing, and then you go to Mexico for like outreach and before you go, it's like, they're doing all the teachings and, you know, seeing where all the kids are and spiritual development stuff. And I just felt like I'm waiting for something to happen, you know? When's this thing going to happen? And like, when am I going to be saved? Like, I didn't, you know what I mean? I had this idea. And there was one night where they were really like, they were really like leaning into the cross, like they were, you know, going into gory detail and all these kids, I just remember I'm in the back of the room and all these kids are like crying and wailing and like having this big emotional experience. And I just remember thinking, wow, okay, like I must be really bad. Um, and I had this idea that you could be beyond saving, like you've sinned beyond repentance, like, I don't even know where I learned that verse, but I had it in my head. Probably, probably when I was doing all that research for. That's right. And so I had this idea in my head that I've, I'm that bad and nothing's going to happen for me and like, um, I was devastated in that night. I went and I got in my, in my cabin and I got in my bed and I put the covers over my head, I got on my face and I cried out to God that either save me or let me go because I can't live the rest of my life like this. And if you're not going to save me, then yeah, I just don't want to do it. And I had already kind of had an idea of like, when I thought I was going to give like a timeline, it's like something needs to happen. Or I did want to, you know, I don't even want to say it, but, um, and I don't know how to describe it, but since Martin Shaw could talk about it and be weird about it, I will be too, because what I experienced in that moment was nothing of hardly ever experienced since. And that's like, almost like a, it wasn't a voice, but it was like, it was not my own knowledge, something just divinely downloading into my mind. And it was okay. It was like, okay, you want to do this? Well, that's not what it is. That emotion stuff is not what it is. This is an clear as day. It was, this is a marriage. This is a covenant. This is something that we're faithful to even when those emotions aren't there. And then also immediately it was like, and you need to confess. And I was like, and I, it was, everything was right there. Like everything that I needed to confess and it was bringing everything that you're hiding in the darkness into the light. And so all of, all of that self-loathing event about the self-mutilating, which I was, I was humiliated even that I had that problem, um, the anger and the rage I had toward authority, like toward my mom, especially at that time, um, that I needed to confess it in front of all these people that I'd only met a few weeks before, and so I did, um, and I was shaking. I mean, I was just, I was, that's such bad social. So this wasn't just confessing under the covers. This was confessing to people. No, very explicitly. Like I was being told to take this from the darkness into the light and that this involved me standing in front of people and speaking it out. Um, and that's, I was so terrified, but I was also so desperate that it seemed like the right thing to do. And I did. And I feel really lucky because there were some very mature, older, um, leaders around and I stood up and I, especially saying out loud, like the stuff from my childhood and like that abuse, which I was humiliated by. Um, and it's like, as soon as I finished, I erupted in prayer and I had probably never prayed in front of people in my life either, and I felt literally a physical weight come off of my body and they immediately surrounded me and they, like all these leaders and they prayed with me and, um, and I can tell you from that time on, it was like a switch happened in me. I was completely different person. I, I suddenly could understand the Bible for the first time. I was, all I wanted to do was understand or know God. Um, every book off of my dad's shelf, I just started picking up and reading and I mean, even at one point I was 16 years old carrying around Charles Finney's systematic theology and like this high school I carry, I'm like, what was I doing? But my biggest thing was like, I knew I experientially had something had happened, but I couldn't understand what it was. So I really, I was reading about like atonement and, um, sanctification and you know, and it wasn't too long after that, that it's like, yeah, the actual problems of the faith come up that you need answers for. Yep. Um, so at this point I'm in high school. I've had a horrible time all through school socially and everything. I was eating lunch in the bathrooms and I didn't connect this until recently to just how providential this was, but another person called and offered me a spot at this private school because I was a musician and they were trying to build up their music program and it was a school we never would have been able to afford or anything, but I went from being like lost in the sea of children at this massive public school to being very seen and exposed and having like all my papers, which I was a great, I thought I was a great student, made really great grades without trying. And then suddenly people like scrutinizing my work. Um, turns out I couldn't write my papers off of spark notes anymore. Um, but the quality of the education at the new place was like, this is where I, this was what leveled me up. And, um, to a degree is that the stuff they were reading was Tolstoy and, uh, Augustine, Dostoevsky, these three particular blew my mind. When I read crime and punishment, I felt like I was understanding myself. I was like his, his insight into the human psyche is just amazing. Um, and then a older friend was like, well, if you like that, you'd like Kierkegaard. And again, I'm, I don't even know hardly what I'm reading, but this is the kind of stuff that I was like, I was just insatiable. I was an avid reader and could not get enough. It's all I wanted to talk about. It's all I wanted to do with, you know. Um, and even though all my peers were going to college, I felt like absolutely could not because all I wanted to know was truth and I didn't really even know what that meant. I realized that the culture around me, um, I felt like I needed to figure out who I was and who God was outside of my culture, my identity and all that stuff. And I picked what I thought was the furthest away from that was like, I'm going to go to the motherland. I'm going to go to Africa. So I joined YWAM and went to Africa and I did their discipleship training school, um, in South Africa and Mozambique. And that was wild. Um, but that experience for me was so humbling because I had gone, you know, where you, I was very well spoken. I could, I, you know, could talk theology. I could do all of these things. Um, but when rubber hit the road and I'm here, I've never witnessed that level of despair and poverty in my life. Um, and I had no context in my understanding of God, my view of God and my understanding of the gospel, I had no context for that because I had this like Western idea, like you're going to do all these great things for God and you're going to self aggrandizing. But we were going to these townships where pretty much everyone had AIDS. They're living in like cardboard houses. They, I remember this one home. This was, this one particularly wrecked me because we go into this home and there were so many orphan children, cause all the parents had died of AIDS. And there's this man, we're bringing groceries to him and we're going to pray for him. He's writhing on the ground in pain on a dirt floor. And the only thing I'm thinking is he doesn't even have a TV to watch. He doesn't have medicine. He doesn't have anything to take his mind off of. Yeah. And I'm like, what the hell am I doing here? Telling him about the, what is the gospel to a man that's dying like this and what kind of prayer am I going to pray? That means anything. And I think there was like three days I could hardly get out of bed after that. Um, I nearly went home after that experience because I just thought, I am just a stupid kid and I have no answers. I can't even fix my own problems. What am I doing? Um, so I, I had been kind of estranged from my brother at this time, but, um, we started connecting over email. Um, I guess he was like, what's my sister doing in Africa? Maybe she's interesting. So we started talking. Oh, um, age difference between you and your brother. Three years. Okay. Yeah. Um, he brilliant, brilliant guy. Um, it's funny. You were talking to somebody recently about like, no, no, yeah. You encourage one guy in a random day, go to Germany to study. It's one of the things that my brother did too. Um, anyway, and he was like, well, if you don't have anywhere to go after Africa, you're welcome to come to Austin. You know, and he was going to try and help me get a job at the hospital. I didn't know what else to do with my life, to be honest. Um, and so I come to Austin. It turns out my brother was in the middle of like his, I'd had no idea what I was walking into. Um, I don't want to tell his story on, you know, very bad situation. Um, and now then I understood maybe why he was reaching out for me to come. Wanted something to happen. Anyway, he ended up having this major life flipping around, like conversion too. Um, so then we were just like, and then we had to met another friend and they just sort of like grew this sort of community, whatever. Um, so I'm out looking for work because I have to pay, I was sleeping on a tile floor in Austin, um, had like maybe three sets of clothes to wear, you know, that didn't really need anything. Um, and I didn't have a car, didn't have anything. And I'm walking around just picking up applications anywhere nearby to pay rent. And I was at this little local coffee shop and, um, there was a guy that there that overheard me that I'm looking for a job ultimately ends up being my husband. And he's like, I could use some help if you need some work, you know? And, um, this sort of, it's so funny because I was so backward and shy. Um, and he, there's a big age difference too. So he's like 15 years older than me. Um, anyway, I go over there and I see that, uh, he had a sandwich shop and I was, I went home and I was like, there's just no way that all my friends went off to college and are doing all these great things. There's no way I'm going to tell people that I'm working at a sandwich shop. Like what a failure. And as soon as I said that, I felt this massive conviction of like, who do you think you are? You just, you just came from Africa where you saw people in absolute abject poverty and you think you're too good to work at it. And I was like, okay, I'm taking this job. Um, cause I felt like clearly my ego needs to die. Um, and so, yeah, so I, I went over there and it's like one of those things almost immediately, we, my husband was a heavy smoker. He's like, and he can't stand for anyone to be working if he's not working. So every time he had a smoke break, he'd like make everyone go outside and sit with them so annoying. Um, but we started talking and it was like immediately, like you start, you feel like you've known someone forever and you can't stop talking like that. Completely platonic. In fact, we never dated like that's for later, but we never dated. Um, but we were just, I was crazy about him. He's so intelligent. Um, and he was very interested in me. Like when he found out that I had been a missionary, he's like, I've never met an actual Christian, like he knows nominal Christians or he knows people who, you know, it's, it's like a religious sect or it's a, and so the kind, the level of conversations we were having, he was very interested in. And, um, man, we spent hours and hours and hours and hours just like talking and, um, we ended up becoming just incredibly close friends and, um, a lot of stuff happened around that time. Like, uh, my mom was diagnosed with cancer, so I had to go back home and just this whole time, by the way, spiritually, I'm just like, I have no idea what's happening with my life. I'm just going from day to day. You're not going to church. No, at this point I was not, I was still devouring literature. I mean, um, I got really into like watchman knee. I was trying to solve the problem of why Christian lives didn't look like I thought they should. Where was the power? Where was the, um, overcoming of sin? Um, I'm looking around at the church. I had gotten involved in a church, uh, here in Austin. I was even on the leadership and it was just so hard for me. Like there's, I am the kind of person who, like they, you know, you walk into a church and they have like a list of this is what we believe. And I'm like, I can't tell, I can't tell you, I believe all that stuff. Like, what the hell do I know? And, you know, one of them was even about the, um, what's it called? The, whether or not the Bible is like completely inaccurate or inerrancy or infallibility that one drove me really crazy. And I thought I was actually going to get kicked out of the church because I was like, well, what do you mean by an errand? Like, what does that even mean? And, um, I don't know. I just, I just didn't feel like I belonged in church circles and every community group I was in, it's like, they're sitting around watching the bachelor. Like that was their idea of, uh, uh, fellowship. I am here. I am somebody who doesn't watch TV, doesn't watch movies. I don't drink. I don't smoke. I do all the disciplines. I'm like somebody who's fasting and praying and wake up at five o'clock every morning to read, pray, you know? And then the thing is I was, even though I knew intellectually that. It's not my own righteousness. I was definitely living. I definitely believed that it would. I was that eager kid in the classroom who wants to impress their teacher. I wanted God to call on me and I wanted to be worthy of him calling on me. And now I look back and I realized how much of that was just. Um, unhealed trauma stuff. And also just probably an attachment disorder for my caregivers and stuff like that, that I totally put on God. As soon as feelings would wane, I would feel like I was abandoned or rejected because I wasn't good enough and I wasn't trying hard enough. And it's because of some secret sin that I haven't managed yet. So I was obsessively trying to like play whack a mole with every sin in my life. If I thought the tone of my voice when I talk to someone was too arrogant or something, I mean, I would just it would devour me. I couldn't sleep at night. It was that bad. Um, long story short. Uh, let's see, I, my brother ended up having a break, a breakdown. He had he has some issues that have now been resolved. Again, I don't want to like, right. Stuff that was undiagnosed that we weren't aware of. And right. But it just shattered my world because suddenly I was completely alone. I was so I skipped a part about my husband and I getting him asking me to marry him. It was one of those like we hadn't dated or anything. He was just like, what do you think about us getting married? And I was like, OK. And I think, well, this is what I think happened, is that to me, he he is someone of like, when I say integrity, I mean, like integral, like he is so like the unity of character. What you see is what you get. So safe. He's deep. He's. And I just felt like I felt so lost. And so fragmented that I just wanted to cling to somebody that was whole. And that seemed to know what they were, where they were going. And I think I made there. I mean, I know I made the right choice, but I know that that was kind of my instinct was I'm not going to find anybody better than you. And I think you're the only person that can tolerate my craziness. Anyway, so we had decided to get married, but his dad died. And yes, all this stuff was going on around me. And I just remember waking up one morning, like I always did, like five o'clock to go read and pray. And it was like, like the ceiling was just steel, like the heavens closed up. The words coming out of my mouth felt like lead, like they just like nothing. And I got up and I just said, I'm not doing this anymore. I'm done. And it wasn't like I didn't necessarily feel like, I don't know. It's still good emotional thinking about it because it was it was like it was so heartbreaking for me because all of my identity, my entire life was. That's that was it. All my eggs were in that basket. I had no backup plan. I had even imagined myself as a different kind of person. Yeah. But I felt like I just wasn't going to be able to make the cut and that I wasn't good enough in that. Ultimately, God had rejected me or something. I don't know. I couldn't even think about it. I couldn't open my Bible again. And then I just kind of went into this a dark night of the soul that lasted a really, really long time. And. Yeah. So we we got married, we had kids. And, you know, during this time, even though I say like it was a dark night of the soul, they were I think my last journal entry actually said, I've believed in the gospel of my right arm and my right arm has failed me. And I would be driving down the road and unprovoked or whatever. This sense would come over me and I would have like this visual in my mind of like being held by something that I wasn't holding on to. And it was almost like, hey, you let go, but I didn't let go. So Calvinism is going to come back and bite me later on, you know, because I'm going to ultimately believe in the sovereignty of God. Because at a certain point, I don't have a choice anymore, because like, yeah, I know absolutely that none of this has depended on me and my righteousness. Like I thought it would. Yeah. And, you know, this verse kept coming up. And I know it's like whatever, it's out of context and whatever. But it is the verse that always came up to me. It was in Isaiah six, 13, where it talks about like even when everything is laid waste, but the seed, the imperishable seed is in the stump, you know? Yeah. And I didn't know exactly what it meant, but I knew what it meant that I had been everything was going to be torn down. And like I was going through a crucible. But that that imperishable seed was untouchable. And I couldn't destroy it. And and so, yeah, I just felt like a seed buried under snow for the next long time until. Let's see. Getting into my 30s and stuff. Well, you made you did a lot in 30 years. Well, it gets worse. Just kidding. So I had kids, but I was really a terrible stay at home mom. The only thing that kept me going, actually, is podcasts, because I was so unstimulated. Yeah. Taking care of little kids. It's it's yeah, it's can be mind numbing. And so, of course, I mean, especially before podcasts and things, there's a reason there's a reason certain moms look the way they did. Because it's I could not even hanging out with mom groups. And my husband, I remember, would be like, you get to sit home and like have coffee with friends. And I'm like, friends, they talk about strollers and car seats and diapers. I'm like, I'm not having fun here. But, you know, it's like funny. Recently, I read that this little book by I can't remember his name. Rol, Rol, Heiser, I don't know, doesn't Ronald. Anyway, it's called domestic monastery. And it kind of gave me a little different perspective on the seasons of our lives, like where we think we're not doing spiritual work, but our ego has clearly gone to die. And I feel like motherhood is kind of where my ego has gone to die. Like you're constantly disrupted. You're not able to make something of yourself. You're never able to achieve something that feels successful to me anyway, especially as an ADHD mom. My house was always a mess. Everything's chaos. I just felt like, wow, I suck at everything. But, you know, when my first was four months old, we had we had a restaurant. A manager called in sick and I have four month old, six o'clock in the morning. I get up and I take my baby with me to work. And I'm like breastfeeding while I'm taking orders. I was like giving him naps three times a day. And I was just doing whatever you have to do. And I just was I wanted a way out, but I didn't know how to get out. It's like, I mean, I just yeah. So by the time I'm getting to 30, I'm having a midlife crisis of I can see my future. And my husband's always going to be working seven days a week. And I'm stuck doing this, working and dealing with the kids and failing at everything. And so I started getting into like a really serious depression. And I I also had developed an autoimmune disease. And so I had gotten into like nutrition, trying to reverse it. And then finally, after like years, like I felt a little bit better. But I read this book called The Last Best Cure. And she starts talking about EMDR and the mind body connection. And it's all it was a science journalist who had interviewed all of the top researchers around it and seeing this connection between um adverse childhood events like your ACE score and the likelihood of you getting certain disorders. And they it can predict it with uncanny accuracy. Right. And I just thought, whatever, I'll give it a chance. But I'm like, I've done therapy. I'm so tired of talking about like my childhood. I don't want to deal with any of this stuff anymore. And but I was like, I'll try it. I did an EMDR section. I've ever heard of EMDR. Oh, yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Holy shit. It's weird stuff. I mean, you'd think, well, how's that going to do anything? But actually, we have a retired marriage and family therapist in the church. And she she wound up that was the bread and butter of her practice for a long time. I mean, it's I thought it was woo woo stuff. Yeah. But it turns out that all these ancient practices that were connecting mind and body, like we thought were like too fricking smart. They knew what they were doing. Yeah. And you know, even what built up to this, I'd started doing yoga. And I just felt like this body work and all the stuff that I was doing had because this comes up later. That's the whole the only reason I'm really mentioning it is because I was had become sort of limber, like all the things. And one of my videos, I talked about how I ossified my heart had become toward like I was fully inoculated. I've been there, done that like I did all the way. You know what I mean? Yeah. And so I just I thought I was completely inoculated against really the gospel or Jesus ever again. Yeah. But I knew something really profound had happened to me, but I didn't know what to do with it. So I just couldn't look at it anymore. Yeah. So anyway, I just all these things that sort of limbered me up and going into EMDR. I had this profound realization because you don't even really do a lot of talking, you know? And it's like a magic wand. It's crazy. Yeah, it's pretty crazy. I had this explosion of like, first of all, I for the first time understood that how how insanely lonely I was as a child and how that loneliness and this insecure attachment that I had that I, you know, I started making connecting all these dots in all of my relationships. I started seeing this. Right. Like my fear of rejection is not just like a normal fear of rejection. It's it destroys me. Yep. And yeah. And in the session, you know, I was able to basically communicate with my younger me and kind of heal that memory. I was able to insert. Yeah. It's like cleaning a wound. You know what I mean? I was able to clean out the bride, that wound and and let it properly heal over. You know? And then so that was the beginning. And then I'm about to turn 33 and I'm thinking, man, things are getting better. I'm my depression's gone like and then my husband has a heart attack and ends up having a quadruple bypass. And here I am now having like we've got multiple businesses. My youngest was like two years old. And once again, just feeling like I'm back into crisis mode, crisis mode, like seems to be the story of my life. And that was around the time, too. That we had a friend visiting from anyways, actually, the son of my dad's best friend from the ministry, who ended up becoming a hardcore atheist, like talk about Dawkins, Hitchens, those guys. Oh, he's self-educated. Yeah. Worked with NASA. He was the superintendent of the observatory at a major university. Brilliant. You know, guide. They passed over Ph.D.s for to put this guy like. So he's brilliant and he's a brilliant atheist. So his son, though, became interested in my dad and our family and started bringing his family to come visit on the summers. And so he was sort of softening and his, you know, opening up. And I was still closed off. And we're having this conversation and he brings up. Have you ever heard of Jordan Peterson? Oh, this is this is like 2016. And I said, no. And he was like, he's just I remember the look on his face. He looks at me like, I think you'd really like this guy. So he sends me the link to his first interview on Joe Rogan. And I mean, I'm listening to this interview. Couldn't care less about that. That bill he was talking about, really. It was all these other things that he talked about. Yeah. Yeah. It was like there was like this quickening, you know, yeah. Like something just like lurched in my spirit. And I didn't really know what it was, but I knew I wanted more. And I joke about it. But if he says he has 200 hours of videos on YouTube, I watch 200 hours of videos on YouTube. We get to the biblical series. Oh, my gosh. Like, so we get to Genesis. I wept. I wept through the entire thing right alongside Jordan. In fact, I think I might be the only person who cries as much as Jordan Peterson. And I just started. So my brother and I and my dad even like. My dad is really good at staying connected and always been able to talk to us, even though we were post Christian, you know. Yeah. Yeah. But my brother and I were like, listening to Sam Harris, Eric Weinstein, you know, Daniel Schmortenberger, like we were really into all this stuff. Yeah. For years. And so then you hear Jordan and Sam debating. And it was like, I really like Jordan. I really like Sam. But now we're hearing these ideas. Yeah. You can stage with with each other. Yeah. And it was like that inner battle that we were having to being right there on stage. And it was like, who's who's going to win and which side are we going to be? Whatever. Jordan won out clearly. But there was definitely I think that Jordan played this role in turning over the soil of my heart to such a degree that I was just I was ripe for something to happen. I started seeing the Bible from a different way. And the fact that he uses different language in the same is how I feel with Verbecky and his and you and and now it's like John Mark Comer, for example. I actually feel the same way about him able to use language in a different way that does not just, you know, these barriers don't fly up to where you can actually hear it in, you know, something in a new way. So let's say fast forward now. My during Covid, all this stuff is happening. And you feel things happening with people. They start having deeper conversations about things, the meaning crisis. And then my parents get Covid and they get over Covid. But my dad apparently had a secondary infection. He had pneumonia and they were hospitalized. And, you know, during that time, you can't like communicate with them, whatever. Right. We had no idea that my dad was dying. Oh, oh, no. And my dad, I mean, like it was my absolute best friend. Every morning, it's like whatever podcast I'm listening to, like, could not wait to talk to my dad about it. And so and then like so my last conversation with him, I should have known that he knew that he was because he was in and out of like coherency. He ended up dying of sepsis because they didn't treat because of all the weird stuff and, you know, Covid. He was treated like a Covid patient. I don't know. They put him on from disappear, which probably complicated it to anyway. We had this conversation and he just was like regaling his whole life. He told me his whole life story from the beginning to the end. And I was just gripped, you know. And I kind of had the sense of like. He was, you know, and then later I found out that like the night before, he called my brother and they talked until like two o'clock in the morning. My dad just was like, Jed, listen, I need you to listen to me. And he told my brother. The gospel and he just said, listen, he said, like, basically, no matter, I don't even know how he worded it, my brother would be better, but he said, you can't get away from Jesus, you know, and. Then, yeah, so my dad passed away. It was very traumatic for our family. My mom and dad were like inseparable, like madly in love to like to a disgusting point, you know, oh, like they just were mad about each other. It was really bad. But so at his memorial, and I didn't tell you this part, but because this is important for like eight years, my dad had been trying to convince me to go to North Point. And that's a church. Yes. His selling point on this was you can come as you are. It doesn't matter where you are in your faith or whatever or lack of like we've got atheists there, we've got agnostics, we've got speakers, we've got all kinds of people. You will be welcomed. And and he just said, I just wish you could get involved with the music. Because in my youth, I had done, I was a worship leader. For years. And so I went with him like once to. And first of all, I had like such an allergic reaction to church at this point. I was like, there's just it hurt. It was physically painful to be in a church. And then I'm looking at the music and you're in Austin, Texas. I mean, the singers are like from The Voice and American Idol. And he's like, they have albums, all these people about their professionals. And I'm like, Dad, I've barely played guitar or sung in 15 years. Like, it's never going to happen. But for eight years, he was on me about that. So at his memorial, my dad was a songwriter and I sang a few of his songs. And when, you know, like the worship, the music director at the church was there. And weeks later, I get a call inviting me to come hang out in his studio. And of course, I'm thinking he's being nice because my dad worked on the sound board and he's just trying to like, reach out and be nice or whatever. And I go in thinking I'm in there for a rehearsal. And then we just talk. And it was so awkward. I like I don't even know. I probably said such and I don't even know. It was so awkward. And I was in such the throes of grief. Yeah. I think I said so many F words because I'm like not trying to like, it was like, and and they're both like really introverted and like anyway. And then like I leave and I get in the car and I'm like. The fuck was that? Why? Why did I just come here and have this conversation with these people? You know, and then they invited me back again. And this time they're like, let's sing a song. And I just I froze. I was like, yeah, I can't do this. And I don't know why I'm doing this. Like, I don't want to. Why are we singing? And it was it was so bad, Paul. Like I still like my stomach hurts when I think about so embarrassed. But I'm about to leave. And he stops this guy, the music director. He stops and he's like, Emily. Do you ever. Do you think that things happen for a reason? And I look at him and I'm like all cynical and I was like, well, it depends on what you mean by that, I guess. And he said, well, I don't know how to explain it, but you just keep coming up. And it's like as soon as these words come out of his mouth, I'm immediately taken back to like 14 year old me. Right. And I felt so apprehended by God in that moment and had nothing to do with because he was inviting me to do music with them. Right. He just said, I feel like we're supposed to do music together. Yeah. He had no idea that my dad had been telling me this for eight years. Yeah. He didn't know any of the stuff that really was going on with me. And I just remember freezing in that moment. It was like God just grabbed a hold of me. And it was like. The time in the wilderness, whatever that is, it's over. We've got worked, we've got stuff to do. Let's go, you know. Yeah. And it was not I mean, that was wild because no one in my life knew knew me ever as a Christian. So I had to sit down with each one of my friends because they were like, why are you going to church? And I was like, well, you're not just going to church. You're up on stage at a really big church. Yes. Yes. And also it's like there was all this stuff happening inside of me. So especially my closest friends, I had like these sit down conversations and, you know, I'm expecting them to be like, yeah, you lost your mind. Instead, they're like, can I go with you? And suddenly I have all these people in my life. That were interested are interested in God and Jesus, and they never really heard the gospel. And so all this stuff. And then my brother ends up having this like massive turnaround again, too. I'm telling you, like, if you asked me if my brother, he was I never called myself an atheist, he he would have considered himself like that. Yeah. So for him to I mean, it's wild. That's why I say I now believe in the sovereignty of God, because when I look at him, I believe in the sovereignty of God, because when I was not going after him, yeah, completely changed my life back around. And there's like the last part of this really is that doing the music, it was like such a trigger for me. And, you know, I don't know if you ever heard of IFS, internal family systems. Yeah. The form of therapy, too. Yeah. Also, it's like where you kind of deal with the parts of yourself. Like you are not you are like a community of parts. Yeah. And that each one of these parts is there for a reason to like protect you or whatever. But he has this language where he talks about like it's not he doesn't use the word trigger. He's words trailhead. And I thought I couldn't sleep. I was complete. I was just wrought with anxiety. What the heck am I doing? I am not good enough. I'm such a I was embarrassed. I felt like I sucked so bad. And I just didn't want to do it. Now with this, are you playing music that they are picking for you? Or do you have a degree of leeway over your picking? None. And I still and like, you know, which which none. I don't know. They assign me. OK, OK, OK. So you're a performer in that sense, rather than a leader. Yes, yes. And so it's so important distinction in a context like this. Absolutely. It's also part of my current ongoing crisis that I'm working through is what it means to be part of a church in this context. Often, you know, we talk about authenticity like. Yeah. Me managing. That is sacred to me. That is like that's something I just will not. I cannot. I cannot stand up there and perform. I can't. So when my younger years, like through YOM and these things, I was definitely a worship leader. I have a catalog of songs that I know and we will be in these hours long prayer and talking, sharing kind of situations. And I would be like, dude, like being led by the Holy Spirit, like songs would come up and you really depend on a sort of I hate to use like the religious language, but you really depend on a certain anointing. And so now I'm getting feedback about my stage presence or. Yeah, yeah. It's a real struggle. So there was all that going on. And anyway, I just felt like I was having a nervous breakdown. Yeah. And I was like, I don't know what's going on. I tried to get into emergency therapy because I thought I thought I was actually losing my mind. There was one night that my husband held. I was crying hysterically. I was like, I don't know what's going on. I was crying hysterically for hours and he held me just praying for me for like two hours straight because I thought I was having a nervous breakdown because it's all mingled in with the grief and like, you know, you're in this emotionally very everything is just so turned over, you know, and all of these things that I worked my whole life to not have to face are now like I'm facing them. So why did you agree to do this? Why? Yes. I don't know. Well, first of all, it's like in that moment, it was as your father. Well, it's partly it's also, you know, I've always said that. During worship or like what I was what I was a part of doing, like when I was younger or music in general, so like even so when I left like that, like, I don't know what you say, left the faith. How do you say that? I don't know. I don't know. When I was in the world, because it's really it's really hard to figure out how to say a lot of those words. Yeah. And those words or phrases feel right. They feel really trite and empty. And I don't know what to say. But whenever I left all that stuff, I lost music, too. It was like I my enjoyment and music was so much in the actual worship and the whether or not whether it's religious music or not, there was something I my dad described it as like he felt the delight of God on him when he would sing. He was he led worship to, you know, and that's exactly how it felt. Like there is something that happens inside of me that feels like the warmth of God is all around me. And I don't know how else to describe it. And so that's what I was, you know, saying yes to. And it felt like it was felt like it was designed for me to just like a door just open for me to just walk right into, you know, and it has been great. But I think part of part of what happened is it was used to really there was so much healing that needed to be done still. And so, like I said, like this trailhead analogy worked very well for me because I felt like I was having these panic attacks, which I've never had in my life. I had to pull over the side on the side of the road. I thought I was having a heart attack, crying all day long, like couldn't figure out what's going on anyway. And so this idea of the trailhead is like, OK, there's something there. And if you decide to go down that trail. Yes, it's like it feels like it's going to destroy you, because that's what I was afraid of. But it's also the source of the deep, profound healing that you're longing for. And I just had this there was this one moment I had been reading like Gabor Mate and all these things. There was one page on there that just struck me one day. I'm sitting on my couch reading and it just hit me all of a sudden that I have never known. The unconditional love of God. And see, I still get emotional. Sorry, I told you I cry more than Jordan Peterson. And I just realized that every person needs to have that as a child, they need to know there's nothing you can do to be loved more or to be loved less. And from such an early age, I had experienced such a. Such a massive amount of shame and guilt and sense of unworthiness and unloving lovable, this whatever that I just I couldn't shake the rest of my all those decades. And I was always trying to justify my existence by being good enough or winsome enough or agreeable enough or likable enough. And I like as I'm reading that page, I just I've had this profound sense of. The deep love of God that I've never known before and that sense of like. This time, you're not a little girl that's alone. And neglected. But you're you have a community around you. And this time, like, I'm going with you and that's where the healing is going to come from, you know. And yeah, that was. Yeah, I've had like three maybe experiences in my life, but the initial one when I was like 16, EMDR, and then that one that was so. Yeah. Life changing, you know, and yeah, so that's kind of where I am now, and I've just been trying to sort out my relationship to church. That's where you are now. So you didn't talk about getting out of getting off the stage at North Point, because that's. I mean, that's. That's a that's a moment, too, because you have to you got kicked off or you quit. Oh, oh, North Point. Yeah. Oh, no, I did not get. In fact, it's kind of interesting because like I went and the beginning, I'm sort of just. I would be coming like once once every three months, sometimes, like just radically and every single time. I think, OK, I've I suck. And I'm for sure that's the last time I'm doing this. And I wanted to be fired like. And then what happened was all of the main group left altogether. And then guess what? I'm like the only person left. So it was all the worship leaders left. Yeah, yeah, it's I don't want to like. No, that's OK. You don't have to go into details. Those things, those things, wrecked videos, trust me. Or at least they wreck the they make great videos, but you can't put them on YouTube. No, I mean, and you know, it was nothing like there was nothing bad. There was nothing scandalous at all. It's just it's just church stuff, you know. Yeah. Yeah. And it's it's sometimes the combination between church stops, stuff and people with artists temperaments because you nailed it. You know, churches, these mega churches become these massive institutions that are experienced delivery machines. And they need artists to deliver the experience to people. But artists are are these, you know, there's there's, you know, authenticity. You have this level that there has to be congruence on the inside and the outside. And so you nailed it, Paul, because. So as soon as it happened, I went scrambling into fix it mode. And I'm like, I scheduled meetings with like the leadership of the church. And I just was saying, listen, I know I'm an outsider. I know I'm just a random person that comes in and out on the stage. But I really think you guys should think about the fact that in the leadership, there's a tendency to want to control everything. And I don't mean that in a bad way. It's I mean, you've got to be these type A people that it is like that thing is flawless. I mean, they have it. And it's so but, you know, when you have all that structure, it gives you the space for, you know, to relax into it. Yes. But then I just said, you know, the thing that this guy did so well was he, you know, he's dancing on that border between order and chaos. And when you when you try to control that, you're going to lose the magic because the magic is on that dance between order and chaos. And especially when it comes to things like those those spaces in the Sunday morning experience that are. Yep. Yep. I mean, because I hear it all the time. I have people come up to me all the time telling me that what's happening inside of them during the music. It's way more impactful than the message. Oh, yeah. Yeah. Yeah. And so I'm like, you can't discount that. And if you try to overmanage that part, you're going to lose the magic. Right. Which makes the oh, the oh, gosh, there's a there's a whole there's so much in that whole area in terms of mega churches. And really, in many in most cases, in many cases, the the the the psycho technology that energizes the mega church movement is mass worship, as we call it. And it's so deeply tied to music. And then the relationship between that and this religious industrial complex that is trying to affect. And you just said, you know, it's the order chaos thing. And and that's why I asked immediately, were you a performer? Because this because churches and this then gets into the question of what exactly is a church? Is a church this community of Christ that is going to have all of this raggedyness, which in which cases things in a church can get really raggedy, which is and then people who are coming in. Because part of what Americans want from institutions is, again, this restraining of chaos because individual people. So if you kind of take people in and you kind of government, you create an institution, you sort of try to stabilize that so you can deliver on expected outcomes. And but the expected outcomes that you want the church to deliver on is is not a you know, is is there's wildness built into that. And if you if you ring the wildness out of it, it's dead. And now, actually, what I was about to say, it's, you know, this goes back again to like things that Martin Shaw and what's the other guy? There's Martin Shaw and this other guy that have similar their very Paul, Paul, King's North. Yes. The idea of like the rewilding. It's like we have, I think, overly. Yeah, we have just overly. It's so neat. And the thing is, like all the things that we need to happen don't happen in that neat space. And so I don't know. I don't know the answer for it. So well, there is no answer for there is no answer. And I loved how Martin Shaw in that conversation basically says, we got to talk about this wild thing. And then he basically goes and says, you know, he he he blew up my life. He blew up my finances. He blew up my, you know, it just blew up everything. And and there is and Lewis, you know, tries to get at this with Aslam is not a tame lion, right. But it's it's also and of course, I'm preaching through the Gospel of Mark. I'm preaching in the Gospel of Mark right now. And that wildness in the Gospel of Mark is so tangible that I mean, Jesus' mother and brothers come to him to try to, you know. OK. OK, Jesus. I think we've had quite enough of this. And it's like, you have absolutely no idea how stranger this is going. And then and the fact that, you know, Mary and James come around in the end is a testament to truth. But, you know, part of what's powerful about your story is that it is so wild. And. That is that is a big theme in. It's just it's just so hard to talk about because people are so diverse and there are there are really wonderful. Serious, genuine Christians who have deeply orderly faith and life that that is just true. And so you can't say unless I see the wildness, it's not authentic and true. No, you can't say that. That's how wild it is that you can't just say, well, this is chaos. No, it's that's, you know. Anyway, I mean, I interrupted. No, you didn't interrupt. I mean, that's this is so much of what I've wanted to talk to you about since I first ever saw your videos, too, because the question that I have is like, I mean, and I don't think it's necessarily answerable. And also, I will say one thing that I gravitated to your channel for is like, you have such a lightness about you, like it doesn't seem to roughly like. Things that to me, I just I don't want to say it's like I doubt or I become I feel like this urgency, like I need to figure this out. And and you just you're able to laugh about it and just like, you notice it, you observe it and you're like, but it doesn't it doesn't affect you. Whereas I become like, this is a problem and I need to know. I need to understand it. I need to get my mind around it. And you're OK not having your mind. So whenever I would listen to you, I would like I could just feel my nervous system calming down, you know, like I'll be so shaken by things that are happening in the world. And so my real question is like, what does it mean? And it's always been my question. What does it mean to be a believer, a follower of Jesus of Nazareth in this world? What does it mean to be the church? What is our function? What is our role like? And as you know, like all the current events in politics, and this has been a problem in my life for a long time, because it's not the first time stuff like this happens. It's like all of these things sort of intersect, like the Christian nationalism intersects on my my practical life, you know, part of my husband, like he would never say he's a Christian. He would know because he has this whole like anti being colonized. And he's like, you know, I love that phrase because it's everything. And he doesn't like if he thinks I'm trying to colonize him. I'm trying to make him use these exact words that I want him to say. And he's like, I'm not going to do it because I know what happens when people, you know, get too much into their groups. But I think there's so like even at North Point, like there's been this massive growth, very sudden, too. It's like there's so many people coming in. And so all my thing is like, well, what are we going to do with all these people? We can't like Sunday mornings, not good enough. And so entering John Mark Comer. So I discovered John Mark Comer because we we did like one of his books in my group and I never buy those. Did you send me that video? A bunch of people, a few people sent me that video. I sent you a video a long time ago of him talking about he talks about the a community and the culture of outrage. And then he does community in a something. It's always like he uses the alliterations, but something political polarization. OK. And his take on it was just like, it's like. Looking for something that transcends it, you know, because when you get into it, it's super muddy and it's super it's like cotton wool. Like you just can't parse things out and people just become so ideologically possessed. There's no conversation. And I feel like a real a real Christianity, a real following the way should be able to transcend it. You know, and it's hard because as soon as I try to have these conversations with people, it's like even if I'm so careful about what language and what words I use, it's just like you've activated their political system. Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. It's like it's like one of these movies where there's a bomb that has to be, you know, you're going to have to you're going to have to you're going to have to deactivate this bomb. There's all these wires and it's like, hmm, is it the green wire or the red wire? But, you know, which word am I using? Well, that's where I feel like I get that same sort of imagery around like because it's like, oh, he's got to write. He'll just invent words. We'll just invent words. I'll tell you what those words mean. And you just have to experience it to figure out what it means. And that's how we're that's how we're going to do this new world thing, because I don't necessarily see a way around it. You know, yeah, there's no way around much of anything, actually. It's you know, it's the a aphorism. There's, you know, the only way past is through. I mean, that's that's the way it is in this world. And that's and in many ways, that's the point of the cross. And that's the point of Gethsemane, where Jesus is basically asking, is it really true the only way forward is through? And the answer is yes. And that's why you must die. And, you know, your point about. I mean, what is it? What is it? What is a Christian? I mean, I still hold to my definition. A Christian is someone who trusts Jesus more than they trust themselves. And. It's. It's it's really hard to trust Jesus. I mean, because you don't trust Jesus, the idea. Yeah, but then it's trust Jesus with this. Right. And and of course, again, the cross is at the center of it, because I have to I have to trust the father. And a lot of it's so funny because I once I was talking about the resurrection and and people are like, and I say, well, you know, we have this we have this example that Jesus actually goes to death and comes out the other end. And and people are like, yeah, but he knew he was going to be raised. And it's like. You know. It what you're just not that's. In many ways, you do have to sort of immerse yourself in the Jesus of the Gospels. And this Sunday I preached on one of my favorite stories with the woman. Yeah, it's one of my favorite. I listen to I listen to all your sermons. Well, thank you. So it's. You know, and I think. I think part of the modern. That's not just modern. We. This is an issue with church, too. We tend to want we have all these different ways of trying to avoid trusting in Jesus, and that's the idol making thing. So we'll turn the church into an idol. And I think part of the reason the church is always messed up is that's part of the way that. God helps us not make it an idol, if at all possible, even though we make all kinds of things into idols, because how can you? I was just listening to the front end. I haven't I haven't been I haven't got the whole thing yet, but Andrew Sullivan talking to Justin Briarley, Andrew Sullivan had just a priority on his podcast. And, you know, Andrew Sullivan was talking about the fact the fact that it was his archbishop. At the heart of the pedophile. And it wasn't just him covering it up. It was, you know, and there's there are a few. You know, there are a few things in life that are just as. Clearly evil. Yeah. As molestation of children. And then to have this at the heart, you know. And and and so then Andrew Sullivan talks about the fact that he he had to get over this. In order to somehow stay in church and and to a certain degree, as as clergy, as a minister, on one hand. The. That there's a there's a practical idolatry that you have with the church in that you you want it to be, but it's you want it to be great, but it's so self-interested because you're so deeply a part of it. Then there's another part of it, whereas clergy, you see how the sausage is made and you really have to be careful with cynicism because and I don't know much about John Mark Comer, but the people have been sending me tidbits. I made that little video about him and and when I heard bits of it in that one interview, when he starts talking about small church, because that's right. That's right. In that, at least with a small church, I mean, people are always say, well, if I came to if I lived in Sacramento, I would come to Living Stones. And I just laugh because Living Stones is so raggedy. It's so almost dead. It's so uncool. That's part of the reason I keep putting the Freddie Freddie and Paul show up, because it's like you if you if you can't stomach 20 minutes of the Freddie and Paul show, you're going to really struggle with an hour of Living Stones. Because but that's but it's amazing how many people do love the Freddie and Paul show. Yeah. Yeah. There's a few hundred people that watch that every week. It's probably it's probably a bigger number than people dip in. But but it's but this is I mean, so many it's so many every idol has to die in your relationship with Jesus. It's just the way it is. And Jesus will I mean, and your story nicely. So, oh, this this is it. And what this is in every case is something that I can trust in instead of Jesus. And it'll whack that down. And I know maybe this maybe if I do this, I don't really need to trust Jesus, but whack that down. Well, that's what I feel like I came to this point where I even knew like, so I knew that everything had to fall apart because it was built on the wrong foundation and that it necessarily had to fail. Like even my own my all of my religious construct, like all of my I had built up this, like, whatever profelicity, this profile of a really good Christian. But it was all built on the sinking sand. And so like I had that sense. And then also, it's funny, because I've had so many experiences, too, of like, and I thought it was someone I really looked up, too. But then like, and someone commented on the second, I never like went into it because I was like, it's too much to say in a YouTube comment thread. But like, it's gotten to that point where I don't put my you just don't put weight, you don't put weight on that. You know what I mean? Because you know that people are absolutely going to fail. They have to. And then I wanted to say something, too, about Jesus and Gethsemane and whether whether he knew because this is something that's been playing in my mind a lot was whether or not Jesus really how much Jesus really knew. You right. And I had one day this thought that it seems to me, like when I reread the Gospels through this lens, it's made it's still held. And it made sense was that Jesus was what it would be like to be fully human and fully reliant on the Holy Spirit, right, or by the Spirit of God to live, because it almost felt like sometimes in his interactions, like he was like even at the at the Last Supper, you get this idea that he's like, one of you is going to betray me. Like he got that sense in that moment. And, you know, just like he had to just demonstrate that for us. What it meant to live and to face life. Yeah. Yeah. And to face human suffering and to bear up your cross. Yeah. And even though like absolutely everything in all of your reason and all of your logic tells you that this is a complete fail. It's stupid. Look, nobody's with you. You're the only one doing this stupid crazy thing. But kept going, you know, and like all you have to do is read the Book of Acts. And, you know, I that's wild. Like the Book of Acts, every time I read it, I'm like, I forgot about that part. Like, yeah. But you just see the kind of certainty that they had. And even Paul, like, but, you know, and Tim Keller, he'll talk about what it means to commit your steps. He's like to commit your steps, meaning you put all of your weight on that step, believing that it's going to hold you up. Yeah. And like that's, you know. But for everything, there's also a there's there's a shadow idolatry to it. And you see that with the believism where it's OK. So if we're always looking for these, we're always looking for these substitutes. So if I if I really, really believe and it's like, well, now you've just put your belief in believism. And it's it's always it's always got to be in Jesus and in him alone. And what's so amazing about it. So we've got, of course, in this little corner, you know, we've got every of course, we've got Sam, Sam, the Unitarian, and we've got Jacob, the Jacob, the very interesting. I don't even know how to describe Jacob's Judaism because it's just kind of weird. But you've. The. We imagine we can get into Jesus head and it's like, I don't even know my own head and I'm going to somehow it's I'm going to somehow transcend two thousand years and get into the head of the God man and make and I think the reason that that Orthodox Catholic Christianity, small Orthodox, small Catholic Christianity arrives at, you know, the Trinity and the doctrine of Christology is it just kind of put boundaries on there and to say, you know, once you make him not God, something of this falls apart. And once you make him not man, something of this falls apart. But if you think you can sort of, you know, find the formula for this, you know, now you've got another idolatry. And so it's the basic, the most basic level is trust. And that's where, of course, Gethsemane. You know, if Jesus can be surprised now, whether or not, you know, you just go round and round these things. But Jesus was surprised by this woman that sneaks up and pickpockets a miracle out of his cloak. That was another example of what I like what I was saying. He seems genuinely surprised. Yes, yes, yes. So it's and then with the church, too, you've you've just got to live with these uncertainties. And the only way to live with uncertainty is trust. And that sounds crazy because wait a minute, trust is the opposite of uncertainty. Yeah. Well, I think trust, though, it acknowledges the uncertainty and it does it anyway, you know. Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. And that's and that's so often. Because I think the uncertainty is also part of the posture, the proper posture of man before God is like, what do we know? You know what I mean? Yeah, yeah. It's just like I'm just a man and or a woman in my case. Yeah. So you found Peterson and then you found Peugeot and then you found the corner. And now you're are you are you going to church anywhere now? Are you just kind of I'm standing I'm still leading worship at North Point. Are you really? Yes. Oh, my. And it's I mean, you know what? It's so interesting, because I've always been so cynical about church and something I just have grown so much love for these people. And I honestly I feel like it's started out just like it's an obedience. I felt very strongly that I was supposed to just start going to church somewhere, start building community. I joined a women's group and I have like all I mean, it's a lot of older women. I absolutely love being around older women. Yeah, yeah, yeah. Oh, my gosh, they're hilarious. And yeah, I'm just sort of like, they're done playing certain games. Yeah. Oh, my gosh. And they're so different. And it's just I just love it. We have all kinds of people at that church too, by the way. So that kind of keeps it fun. Yeah, yeah. I believe in the leadership. It's like, they're probably going to see this too, I imagine, because I send out like, PVK videos, like they're candy. I'll be like, have you seen this? Have you thought about this? Because they're always dealing with all the complexity culture, what's going on in modernity, and because they have this huge flux of people coming in that are bringing in all these ideas, and they're trying to sort it out too. Yeah. So I'll share, you know, with them stuff that you anyway, so they're very they're familiar with you. But no, I, I love them. First of all, they're very they're genuine. They definitely care. And they do things in a different way. I don't know. I mean, but I think that they regret ever giving me their cell phone numbers. And I kind of joke. This is another thing. I'm going to say this, even though I know they might see this. It's like, you know, they'll bring in, like, a lot of in a lot of ways, like here in Austin, the way the music like the worship teams and stuff. It's like a lot of hired hands. Yeah, yeah, yeah. It'll be like gigs for some people. Yeah, yeah. So like, they'll bring someone in who's never sung at the church before, whatever. And that person, like, they speak between songs, you know, whatever. They don't let me say a word. Never. Like, and it's so it's so obvious, like, anyone else will be given a speaking role except for me. And and you can't help but wonder. And I don't want to ask because I think at a certain like, maybe I just don't want to know, like, I don't want to even know what the answer to it would be. I've let it go doesn't hurt my feelings. I mean, it's not like I'm just I'm anxious to talk to, you know, whatever either. But you wonder, like, because we had so we had estuary yesterday and someone brought in a someone brought in a situation where the week before he's talking about a situation at work where at last two estuary meetings, we've been talking about public lies. Public lies are very interesting things. And so here at this work, one of the issues was right now, this is going through the state of California is because set well, you live in Austin. So again, another state capital. So a lot of you're basically California now. Yeah. So a lot of state. So so basically, the word came on high that, you know, everything's been, you know, remote work, and now people are going to have to be coming into the office, blah, blah, blah. And but they had sold off a whole the state had gotten rid of shed a whole bunch of office facilities because of COVID. And we're not going to everyone. But anyway, so so this went out and in this particular department, a whole bunch of people knew there's nowhere near enough places in that building for all of us. And this this isn't going to work. And then so this person was talking about, you know, why why does the organization lie like this? And then the he comes back the next week and says, Well, it was really amazing, because they basically admitted that there's not enough room for this. And you know, and, and, and it was like this moment of fresh air where the organization kind of told the truth. And, you know, somebody opened the windows, it was like, ah, and then someone comes up with another thread, and just, you know, rips through and then got to lock it down again. And, and it's, it's the difficulty is always, just like you say, you got to run this chaos and order thing. But when you're doing it as an institution, it's so much trickier. And so then you have these public lies and, and it's, oh, it's, that's why I'm so happy. I am in a, I am in a small church that no one, no one, you know, I we are our things are little. I know. Well, it's like, you know, John Mark Homer, even because like, I did the same thing with him, like I did with everyone. If someone says something interesting, I want to hear like what they're about. And I take like a large sample of their, what they have to say. And he, his whole, by the way, like, this is what I would love for you to look into, because this is what I'm looking at now. It's his whole, his new book is called practicing the way that's his nonprofit organization. And it's like, going back to the basics of just like, apprenticeship to Jesus. And in one of those interviews with that same carry guy, an old one, he said that it, that he would never church plant again. And he said, I don't know what I would do. He goes, but the whole, like the theater of church, I don't think is where it's at. And he said, I really think it needs to be people basically at a table together. You know, it needs to be people coming together, practicing the way together, reinforcing. And like the whole thing of practicing the way is just creating the space in your life for God to be doing things. You know, it's, it's a resistance against the spirit of our time against the world, the flesh and the devil, you know, it's putting up those boundaries and those resistances in your life that actually give you the space for actual life transformation. And doing that work together with other believers and helping each other along. Anyway, his work is really fascinating. But whenever he said this about what we do on Sunday morning is so much theater. I'm like, it absolutely is. And it's really hard for me when I was young, when I was a brand new believer, read the New Testament for the first time, I just was like, this doesn't look at this is looks nothing like what I expected this to look like. And it's funny. I remember being in like middle school, and they made the mistake of doing that financial presentation during Sunday service. Like, I don't know if you guys ever do that, where you give like the financial health of the church and what's our growth and what's our strategy during the Sunday service? Yes. And I was there, I was present. And of course, like the first thing I did, because I was such an annoying child, like so annoying, seriously annoying. I went to all the elders or the deacons. And I wanted to I wanted them to defend this idea of a church being in debt in order to build buildings. Because I was like, what is church? Is it the building? I'm telling you, I was so annoying, Paul. Anyway, but it's true. It's like you think about it, you get into this massive debt. And then it's like, you have to justify the existence of this building. And whether or not God shows up, whether or not anything is really happening in this building, you still do this thing every Sunday. Yeah. Well, you know, and I so you weren't you weren't at the channel yet. If you go back a year or two, I did I did a conversation with James Wellman, who is a professor in University of Washington, sort of a sort of a guy who's what he's a he's a he's sort of a refugee from the death of the mainline. And he's an interesting guy. He wrote a book high, high on God, which he studied the mainline. He studied the he studied the megachurch movement. And the conclusion of his book was really rather startling to me, because he says, actually, this movement does a tremendous amount of good in the world. And so I, you know, you talk about me not getting flustered. Well, maybe it's because I'm old. It's because I did the foreign missions thing. And I did the megachurch thing, not that I pastored a megachurch, but I was very much in terms of church planting. And, you know, this was our goal. And we were reading all the books. And we're doing all that stuff, because the denomination in the 1990s was like, Christian from church has to jump on this, because this is going to save us. And it's just a just a failure for the most part. And then the house. So so, you know, I ran the whole gauntlet and then the house church thing, you know, the cell groups. Oh, yeah. Yeah. And so I, you know, I walked through all is that and then I was then it was Tim Keller and now it's Jordan Peterson. So I'm I'm just a frickin mean following the current right along. But you see enough of this stuff and you see and you begin to say, yeah, you know, there's something to that theater. It has its value. It has its value. Yeah. Just don't make it everything. And that's sort of what I look at. So then when the Catholics and the Orthodox, big see Catholics and big Orthodox come at me and and I say, yeah, your tradition, it has its value. And and all of these things have that have their value. But it's this dynamic of constant, constantly taking the gifts of God and turning them into idols is where it's like, no, it's it's it's always Jesus alone. It's it's it's just you can't you can't get behind him. That was, I think, the most potent thing about Peugeot's speech was that whole part of idolatry, how he flipped the script or he yeah, he flipped the idea of what what idolatry is. And that's been so useful, man, to me, I've I mean, you know, when you rerun things through that. Yeah, you that perspective. Yeah. And it's so true. So all right. All right. We've got little time and time left. I don't know if there's anything else that you wanted to get into or anything you wanted to ask, because again, usually sort of the story takes the story takes center stage. And then we go from there. Well, yeah, we talked about a lot. But, um, oh, I did wonder how long have you known Freddie? Was he part of your church for a? Freddie was born and baptized as an infant in this church. Really? How old is he now? Are you allowed to say? He probably wouldn't like me saying. Okay. But because he's older, younger than me. I don't know how old you are. I'll be 40 next month. He's older than you. Okay. I can't really tell, you know. No, I know. And he likes it that way because he's he's very much a kid at heart. And then the older guy, the one, the singer. Oh, Dave. Dave, Dave's new. So, Dave, I got to. Yeah, I got to. He he was a regular commenter on the Freddie and Paul show because I do read the comments and I pay attention to account names. And so he was a regular commenter on the Freddie and Paul show when there weren't a lot of them. And his comments stuck out at me. And then one day, um, he shows up at church guy. I didn't even know he lived in the area. And, um, and then he and Freddie have, have become friends. And so they go out to lunch together. And they remind me so much of my family. Like, I, I think that's why I even like love watching that is because I got my family's from Southern Illinois and it's reconsider it like very backward and like people would call them, maybe they just write them off. Like they're just worthless hillbillies or something. And I like my uncle is a professional trapper who, you know, he'd, he'd show he loved it because he thought I'm a city kid. I'm from, I wasn't from the city, but he thought I'm a city kid. He would love bringing me dead animals and stuff and, um, couldn't understand a word he was saying. He talks like boom house or, you know, on, on a king of the hill or whatever that guy's name is. Anyway, so like when I watched them, it's just like that feeling of like, when you sit around the living room and like, there's, they're playing music and they're talking and I don't know. I just like, I just love it. I love it so much. I can't even tell you. And like, country, I feel the same. If you visit living stones, you can probably talk your way. If you, if you leave a comment, you can, if you leave comments on the Freddie and Paul show, you can probably get on the show. Otherwise, Freddie's a little, someone comes in and, you know, maybe if they bring a peace offering, um, but, uh, but no. And the Freddie and Paul show, I mean that if, if someone looks at my channel, goes back to videos, you'll see that the Freddie and Paul show started before the whole Jordan Peterson thing. No, I know. I, I mean, well, I did the same thing with you, Paul. I benched all of your stuff too. So I didn't want to like, not all of the stuff. I'm not all of it. It's impossible. It's impossible. I like it that way. Yeah, but I did. I saw, I saw the Freddie and Paul show. I just didn't know what was going on. Um, the same thing with Grimm Grizz. I, and I, I understand, it's good. I guess it takes a while to understand Grimm Grizz, but I feel like, like the first time I was on his video or like watching a live stream, I commented, were we supposed to drop acid before watching this or something? Like, I feel like, I feel like if you're watching, you go into the movie theater and you didn't know it's a three, it's a 3d movie and you need the glasses. Um, so, but, but I still watch them because I think one day I might know what they're talking about. Yeah. Well, he's like Peugeot and that when I first started watching Peugeot, it was like, I, it was, I had to, it took a while to sort of, okay, okay. And, and I still have that sometimes I'll go back and I'll watch an old video and I'll see, I'll see that I have been changing along with the conversation. And so, yeah, no, Grizz, Grizz is a genius. He really is. He, but you know, so one of my, Chad mentioned, I mentioned one of my older videos about, um, you know, simple Christians and sophisticated Christians. And that, that is something that I learned very early on. I learned it from my father because my father's also a minister and, um, his, his memoir is available on Kindle. Um, Chad managed to get a hard copy, which is, and it's a, it's a, I, if I ever get, if I ever get the time, I would like to edit his, I would like to edit his, um, his book because it could use some good editing because it's too long, but he just wanted to, he just wanted to get all the stories and actually can only get the stories that are publicly presentable. So, um, because he's got some, but I grew up, you know, I grew up with his stories and, you know, life in Patterson was, I mean, you had these African-Americans coming up from the South and Patterson, you know, if you listen to the hurricane, Bob Dylan song about hurricane Carter, um, that was in Patterson about the same time I was growing up and, and it was some, you know, there's, there's an angle to Dylan song on there too, because life is always more complex, but I grew up knowing in church that there were saints around me that would never be known by the rest of the world. And so when, um, you know, when I, when I started doing the channel and Rando started coming up, part of the reason I wanted to share Rando's conversation on the channel was at least to a small degree, I want the world to know about some of these saints and all of these saints are sinners. They're all sinners and they've got sometimes huge, sometimes huge issues in their lives and they can be moral issues. They can be doctoral issues. They can be, but, um, God has a way of working through things, which is really incredible. And you see this in, you know, this is part of what's fun about the mining that's going on in classical, patristic and medieval period, cause you find some saints in there. And one of the, one of the authors that best, um, that best sort of captured it was Frederick Beekner. I loved, have you ever read the book lion country? Pick it up. You'll love it. Um, and that's, it's part of, it's a much bigger book of Beb. So Beb is this character that he makes up that's running a diploma mill out of Florida, of course, Florida. And, um, he's, it may be there's suspicions of maybe a child molestation case against him. Cause he's got to go to the edge. And then there's also rumors that he wants, um, raised someone from the dead. And so Beakner puts both of these together in lion country is kind of the first book. A reporter hears about this and a reporter decides he's going to travel down to Florida to debunk and expose and hopefully get this guy into jail. And the guy goes down to Florida and he is by no means prepared for what he finds. And he can't, he can't get his mind around. Beb is sounds like Javert and Jean Valjean. Yeah, but it's, it's in Northern Florida, which of course in Florida, the more you go North, the more you go South. So, um, and, and so, and, and Beakner captures that and Beakner had a way of capturing, you know, aspects of this. I think he also wrote, uh, this book called Godric, which is a, basically this is long before I found Jordan Peterson or Priscila or any of this stuff. And I read that book Godric. And again, it was a, it was trying to write, it's basically a person from our time trying to get his head around a, what a, the weirdness and wildness of a medieval saint. And, and I think that part of the reason why, part of the reason why we're seeing life, we're seeing new life in Christianity around characters like Peugeot and Martin Shaw and Paul Kings North and Jordan Peterson is, and, and, and John Vervecky is because that wildness is re-emerging. And, you know, Justin Briarly as a journalist is kind of on the hunt for this thing. Um, that wildness is re-emerging as the scaffolding that had sort of obscured it is crumbling and falling apart. So. Yeah. And I think too, uh, I don't know if it's because I'm very high in openness anyway, or if it's just my life experience, but it's like even like the guy who abused me when I was little, like being able to forgive a person like that, because I'm able to, for whatever reason, I'm able to see a person in all the complexity that is human existence. And, you know, when I look back in history and I know people like to like cancel people because of the things that now we're completely offended by. Um, and I feel like I've always just been able to see people in the context of where, where they were and where they are, you know? And also because I know that my own inability to overcome things in my own life, there's, there's just a certain kind of humility, I think that is required of us in dealing with each other because like, is there hope for those people that, you know, I sure hope, I sure hope so. And I hope that, you know, I think, I think too, we know in a sense that when we hear these stories of radical forgiveness, radical reconciliation, we're so moved by it. And we recognize that there's something deeply profoundly good about it, whether or not we think that person deserves to be forgiven or whatever, like something within our entire body responds to that. And we think like, that is God, you know? Um, and so, yeah, I think I'm right, I'm right there with you. And I think, especially with Christians who, uh, maybe they've like been raised in a very narrow sense of what it means to be a Christian or a follower of Jesus. I feel lucky because I think my exposure was right away, youth with a mission was people from all over the world. So I saw so many different views. Um, when I was in Africa, my room had six different countries in it, you know, uh, that'll change you how you view people and what, what each culture thinks is okay or not okay. And you got to figure out, you got to figure out how to live and together, you know? Yeah. No. And I think it's one of the things that Peterson got right when he said, when you visit Auschwitz, if you're walking through that place saying, it's terrible what those people did. When you visit Auschwitz, you should say, I'm capable of this. This isn't these, these people aren't a different species from me. And so when we, when we see these stories of radical forgiveness, we can begin to believe that that can reach even me. And, and, and that's that, that is, that is so powerful. Have you read, um, Corey Ten Boom's The Hiding Place? Yeah. Uh, it would be a long time ago. Yeah. Yeah. I, I every now and then, well, he's the one who met her, met the, yes. I mean, because the, the story just unfolds about it. I've cried every time I've heard this. Yeah. You mean, as she tells the story, you just see how much she loved her sister and what a saint her sister is. It's almost an hagiography for, about her sister. And then her sister is killed and then she's, you know, and, and sort of a nice evangelical thing. She's on her mission about Europe and then a guard responsible for her sister's humiliating death comes and is happy to receive this forgiveness. And, and, and, gosh, every time I get to that point in the book, it's just like, I can't, I can't take it. Like, would you be, well, and so, I mean, not to keep going, but like, this is what I think I feel this urgency about is I feel like we are approaching something that will be so, I mean, we have an election, we've got wars, we've got rumors of regional wars that could easily go into third, the world war three. And I just think about is the church, are we in a place where we're going to be able to look across at another human and see them as a human, or are we going to dehumanize people by reducing them to their ideologies? And are we going to treat people's ideologies as, as a license that they don't, they no longer deserve to live because they don't think right. And I see a lot of that on both on all sides. And it frightens me. And I think, well, the only cure for that is the actual gospel that I'm not sure that a lot of Christians have heard. And I'm not, yeah. So yeah, heard, heard is, you know, this is coming from a preacher, this coming from a preacher, not the right word, because hearing, I mean, it just gets into that whole question of, you know, what did Jesus know? Okay, talk to me about knowing, because, you know, part of what, what John Vervecki brought to it, well, there's four Ps of knowing. And so suddenly, and you realize that as a person, okay, do you, do you know this? Well, what, I mean, in many ways, and Peterson was right, you don't know it until you act on it. And that's actually faith. But again, it can't be reduced to believism. It's, it's so, and in that sense, again, it's, it comes down to God's grace to us and, and living in that giftedness. So anyway, anyway, I don't know, where is the time to land the plane? Or you got anything else you want to put out there? I mean, I think, I think I covered it. I just, I'm so appreciative of what you do. And I don't want to be like stroking your ego or whatever. But I just don't know if you and I'm sure you do to some degree, you probably hear it a lot, like, just your presence, the fact that you even exist out there. Just means so much to so many people. And I know people, I've heard it said so many times, like how patient you are with people. And I can tell how much you love people. And yeah, and just thank you for even like responding to my comments and letting me harass you because I harass you. But you know what, I've been able to like leave the leave my church leaders alone. I told them, I was like, I found somebody else to bug. You can harass me. Yeah, but be gentle, be gentle on those poor church leaders. They have a big church to try to, they have, they have a, they have a big, they have big edifice to maintain. As do you, but I've joked with people too. I'm like, and there's so many ways I was like, PBK has been like so much of a pastor to me. Like you just have no, you just have no idea, but I just deeply appreciate you. Well, I thank you. I appreciate it. It's, we will see where, we will see where this whole thing goes. I'm here for it. I'm here for it. All right. Oh, one more thing. One more thing. And also thank you, because I know as much as people would love for you to like weigh in on political stuff, like, the day that you do that, whether it's something I agree with, even if you were agreeing with me, I'd be disappointed. You know what I mean? I know. I know. Well, I saw, you know, I just saw that Preston Sprinkle seems to be talking about the question of, I think it's ideological capture and political capture. It's, it's a difficult thing because, you know, and I tried to talk about it in terms of religion is dollars and politics is sense. And the reason that I talk that way is because we never fully escape the political, but we have to relativize it. We have to, we have to make sure when we're talking politics, we're talking pocket change. Right. And that's why I got so mad at Peterson. You know what I mean? I wanted him to not do that thing. Yeah. Yeah. And I can, it's, it's also different as, because we don't, we also don't want people, we also don't want Christians to not go into politics. We can't go that way. So that, like many other things is, is just, I mean, you talked about, you talked about the chaos and order line. There are many such lines in life and that business with politics is one of them. And, but, but again, I think you have to, the best guide to this is Jesus. Because if you read the gospels, understanding the, the political culture war that Jesus was enmeshed in, and then you look at, you look at how he tried to walk through that minefield. I think that, I think Jesus is showing us how to do it. Yeah. But you also have to remember that if you really do it like Jesus, because they may very well kill you because that is exactly how the story goes. Did you watch the chosen? No, I have a real hard time watching on screen portrayals of Jesus. Okay. Me too. I watched it on accident. Let me tell you that I, after my dad died, I couldn't sleep and I'd heard people talking about it. I thought it was some kind of a weird dystopian show. So usually I listen to podcasts to fall asleep, but my brain was so loud. I could hear my brain over it. So I thought I need something visual, just turned it on. And now like in the opening scene, I was like, is this about Jesus? And I, at first my thought was like, I do not want to see a show about Jesus, but I couldn't stop watching it. It's one of the best, you've probably heard this, but yeah, people love it. Jesus. What I was going to say is that something that they did so well was really give you that sense of what was going on politically and all these different things like on paper make only so much sense, but you see them playing out with the Centurions and what that would have looked like. And also like in his, within his disciples that you have like a zealot and a tax collector and you know, they had to be having like raging conversations. They don't mention any of that, right? And that always fascinates me. Yeah. And I mean, I think, I think you're right. And I think too that, you know, I was talking to this young Ukrainian guy the other day that was at, that was at my food trailer and he was talking about when people start trying to get involved in a war stuff. He said, by the time you're at war, he said, that train is so freighted and it's been coming from down here. It's barreling. It's got so much momentum. You're going to step in front of a train and you're going to get hit by it. And also I wondered, is that where the word fraught comes from? Is it freighted? Oh, I don't know. It could be. All of a sudden that I was like fraught. They sound right. They sound like they should be. Yeah. They sound like, yeah. Yeah. It's true. These situations are so freighted. They're carrying such a load that it doesn't even make sense to try to stand in front of it. And the scary thing about the Ukraine situation is it wasn't that long ago. Although, you know, the situation within the Soviet Union and those countries, I mean, the world is just so complex and we, the truth is to look at it from the outside, we know so little about it. That, that I think should sort of help us also have a bit of humility about these conflicts around the world that we know to a degree, the resolution around our own conflicts with people who are very much like us, you know, you know, even in a marriage. I mean, talk about a, I'm like, I can't even fix my problems with my husband. Now I'm going to go fix the world. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. So a little bit of humility is in order. And also one of the things that I, you know, even with my own denomination and the struggles there, I don't need to, I mean, there are times when I have to say vote on something at a, at a Senate or a classes. Okay. Well, then I've got to vote. And I guess for national elections, I got to vote too. But, you know, we can hold our things a little bit lightly and we can listen to each other when someone comes and says, yeah, but have you thought about this? And usually the answer is no, I haven't. And that's a good point. So I'll throw that into the hopper too. And it'll all be in that big soup. And then someone comes on Twitter and was like, choose now. It's like, well, and I feel like also like the more I understand about stuff, the more I realize how very little control I have over absolutely anything that even if we were all to like vote in one direction, like there are all these like power plays happening. Like I had sent you a video and I won't like go over it, but it was, that was another one of those examples of there could be like one little piece of a puzzle that someone hands you. And suddenly you're like, I've got to redo this whole thing, you know? And so then it comes back to Jordan Peterson and the 12, 12 rules for life. I mean, getting your own room in order and that's hard enough, but if enough people are learning to do the hard work of that and learning how to practice the way, go back to the John Mark Comer stuff, I don't know. That's where I'm trying to just focus my. Yeah. Yeah. Because that's actually, it's in your life with your husband, your children, your church, your coworkers, your customers. There's where the rubber hits the road. And can you, I haven't done the video yet because there's been so many other things I've wanted to make videos about. Because I'm taking up your time. No, no, no. You got to balance. You got to do all these, you got to keep all these stuff balanced. But the introduction, the first chapter of GK Chesterton's biography of St. Francis. I'm not sure where was I going with that. It's. His comment about St. Francis was basically, you know, he didn't, Dostoevsky makes the same comment. You know, Dostoevsky points out that people love humanity, but hate people. That's the woman, the woman who's confessing to the priest. Yeah. And she's saying like, she's afraid that she'll basically resent them for not being appreciative enough of her. And then that she was actually trying to ingratiate herself to the priest by even confessing that. And there's like five different layers right there. And I, yeah, I know exactly what you're talking about. And, and, and, and the first of all, you have to loving the people around have to take priority, especially if you say you're a humanist. And, and then, and then figuring out if you can do both and to the degree that you can do both. That's, that's really where it's at. And that's, that's again where Jesus is so powerful because he both manages. To love the people around him. And also all of us. At the same time. So, and I know I just got some people with some of the reform doctrine just set off alarm bells because I've got those people in my head too. So we're not going to go any of those places, but, and I know Luke Thompson is out there cheering somewhere and he will be. So anyway, he's interesting. Oh, Luke is very interesting. He knows all like the doctrinal stuff. And it's like, I've never paid attention to a whole lot of that because I was more interested in like getting my shit together. You know what I mean? Yeah. Oh, and that, and that to me, someone just put out, I just, I just posted it on Twitter was actually. He goes by the, the discord named Charlie Brown. Stefan, I met him when I was in Germany last fall and I'm really cool guy. Really got to spend a little bit of time with him in Germany. Really. He just made a little documentary kind of, of, of the corner. And again, the reason that the cool thing about the corner is not watching videos. The cool thing about the corner is being able to make a few friends and being able to know some people like Luke and Sam and Grizz and Chad. And, you know, that's, that's the cool thing about the corner, which again, I did not, I did not sit there. I was so smart that I could design this. No, not at all. And just, well, you know, I, I envision it like, you know, you're talking about the hallway, which is a, that's like, a analogy that I've used for a while too. And it's like, you know, I peeked into a room and I saw this dude telling interesting stories around a fire. And then, you know, a couple of that's kind of like, and then I I'm warming myself by that fire. And I have that imagery in my mind when I come into the corner, it's like, it's a source of honestly, very real joy. I feel comforted. I feel like, I feel like these are my people, even though I don't know any of them, you know what I mean? In like, real country, by the way, I Saturday morning, I'll be like, I'm like walking around the store and I'll be like, just tearing up crying because of these poems that they're eating. Yeah. Yeah. Like, I don't know, just lovely people. Lovely people. All right. We're going to land the plane. I'm done. Food truck Emily. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you for thank you for thank you for sharing yourself. You know, because you are a worship leader, you already do this to a great degree. But they don't want you to talk. So I'm glad we got a chance. Well, they know I talk a lot. That's probably it. Yeah. And you know, those mega church services, they're on a clock. You get this song has to be three and a half minutes. No more. And then, bing, bing, bing, bing, bing, bing, bing. Yeah. So anyway. All right, Emily. Take care. Great seeing you in person. All right. Bye bye. Bye.