https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=YN36OjSYAso

 Well, I got your email and you told me quite a bit about yourself in the email, but I the time is yours So some people like to use this to tell their story, but whatever you'd like to do with it. Yeah, I've I've been preening down since scheduling Because you can't talk about everything and I've been listening to the questions you ask most people and I think for the time being it might be relevant to stick to how I got to Peterson and That's kind of a little trip in itself and I think if I diverge much past that I might be putting myself in hot water with family and And then I I wanted to ask I know you avoid politics, but unfortunately my art school year was 2016 so should I talk about your politics? Okay? Well, it's just it's part of the whole thing okay, so about myself I'm from Western South Dakota and I specify Western South Dakota because we are a ranching community as opposed to farming which Maybe no one else cares, but we care. It's different. It's a grass-fed Cattle not feedlotted and I'm on a group on a third generation ranch that my great-uncle Although it wasn't as smooth as I thought when I was a kid eventually He sold it to my folks, but at a much lower rate than he would have it to a non-family number and then my mom taught the little tiny K through 8 rural schools and My dad did other stuff besides just the ranch because the little ranches just don't pull enough to live off of really Yeah, and one of his little jobs that he ended up with we had a little old preacher that was preaching a church of about Oh anywhere from 6 to 12 depended on the Sunday and He had a condition where he was losing his voice So he asked my dad to preach for him and then my dad said yeah sure and it turned out to be 16 years that he preached at that little church as a temporary pastor but Kind of speed through that. So that was a very sheltered growing up Little they call themselves non-denominational I say I think my folks lean towards the Baptist because definitely no speaking in tongue and Then directly after high school I I joined the army and I did four years and the army was That because when you when you sign up when you go to maps that they have you take the test and I took the test and it's a different kind of test than a lot of standard tests and when I got to maps They said well, what do you want to be and I'm like, well, I don't know. I thought maybe field medic or something I don't get grossed out. So that'd be okay, you know grew up on a ranch and they're like, oh no You have to choose from these jobs And I'm like, okay sure and they're like, well, do you like maps like maps are okay. And I Get to my secondary training after basic and I look around and I think to myself These are all the nerds And I just didn't really realize it because there just wasn't like That group there was like the rodeo kids and the kids from town and everybody else that was That was who I had in high school So I did that I actually attempted to go to art school a first time in 2008 and I got accepted to Cambridge in England But but I didn't have the money to go not really and it had never been approved by the GI bill So I was the one who got the art program approved by the GI bill because I was the first one to ever attempt it Wow, I I never got to go. I went for a month and a half It was a fun month and a half. But anyway, and then That fell through with my first marriage more or less And I got in the army a second time and did National Guard while I was doing tech support in Colorado and then I Was either gonna have to be promoted or demoted Really quickly because the guard wanted to have people drill on When they were on orders, which is That's like a military if you're on orders, you don't drill and People had shook hands on that they were gonna do it But not how they were gonna do it and it was crazy And I straight up had my first sergeant said if you if you don't like it and you mess this up You'll never get hired as and he meant as a civilian and I was like, okay, we'll see and I didn't renew my orders and I Applied to upwards of 75 positions throughout the United States and ended up going to DC for 13 months And During that time I got with who's my husband now and then we moved to North Carolina We were there all of four months and got a better job in st. Louis and then I ended up at Southern Illinois School of Art and Design because I had switched jobs twice in a row and we We worked the same job which meant we couldn't be on the floor at the same time So one of us was on days and one of us was on days And after doing that for four months and then switching again jobs and I was just just Decided to use my GI Bill and it had been from 2008 to 2015 And I still wanted to do art school and I thought well, I haven't got rid of it. So I went and I Started out with a major in painting and I Started out with a major in painting and I Came up across something crazy and at first I didn't know what it was and I just the political correctness thing I knew about it kinda, but not really and Just the cultural difference anyway, I Was feeling just nuts and we're having things like teachers that wouldn't assign a due date not really Because they'd sort of assign a due date and then people like me would just do it just whatever it took to do it You know three in the morning Whatever I'll do it and then you get it done and then 70% of the class doesn't have it done And then the teachers like well, I guess that was unreasonable So we'll just do it another week and then I'm like well, I'm done He's like, okay, I have more time to work on it more And so there was a real culture shock and so I started getting on YouTube and at first I found Steven Crowder That's who I found first and I watched everything everything and I felt sane again because like okay, it's not just me There's something going on and that's how I found Peterson Peterson I found him I Think it was it was right after the c16 thing cuz that's when he was on Crowder was not very long after that and then I watched I watched everything I watched all of Maps and Meaning multiple times. I watched all the old lectures I like the old lectures better. I like him when he's a little nervous still Reminds me of my family then and Then but one of the things that really hit me about Peterson that's maybe unusual Because I am from rural South Dakota. I Relate to where he's from. Yeah When he he has one story he talks about when he's a teenager or early 20s and he's driving with his friends in an old Car and they're wiping the window with vodka and if the car stops, they're all gonna die Like I'm like, yeah Cuz I drove 54 miles one way to high school from when I was 14 on and This was no cell phones like you just did it, you know, yeah Yeah, there was a couple of times where I got to school and after I got to school the school canceled But I had had to leave so early. They didn't know they were gonna cancel yet. Oh Because of snow, you know And I was driving a little Ford Ranger pickup and what I would do is I would take cement bricks and put them across the back Axle with a chain traction. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah So that was I just I connected to him on that level and then when he started talking about postmodernism Everything got better for me because I could recognize That that was what I was upset about and not the people Because the teachers I wanted to like them, you know, because you know, they weren't bad people but there was something about About the political correctness and about this. I've I've determined I have this theory So postmodernism one of the basis of is there is no truth You know because everything's a matter of perspective, which is sort of true But kind of not well in art I think that because there is no truth leads to this there is no objective beauty and Because there's no objective beauty You get forced to prove it And so you're actually Forced to make ugly art and if you make something beautiful They'll call it oh, that's that's really saccharine, you know, that's just too sweet It's cliche It's oppressive and Same with anything Illustrative or anything with a narrative basically if it has meaning If it has meaning that's upsetting and then I ended up taking metalsmithing Because I really I really loved it Because I really I really like the teacher and the thing about metalsmithing was it's it's constrained by physics so you will be taught skills and Because it's so constrained by physics. There wasn't time to Clamp down on subject matter. So I ended up taking my surrealist paintings and making them as tiny metal sculptures Huh, huh And I really do I love the skills that I learned from it and someday I'll use them But right now I'm I'm straight back to 2d as soon as I left school because I don't have a workshop Sorry, I've been I've been writing and rewriting what I'm gonna say So Yeah It's very interesting even you know Because maybe it's my own little art project, which is this channel. It's it's been interesting how The whole thing has even evolved in terms of you know people having that just on the last few days about a number of Conversations with people like well, I've got all my notes down and I'm getting ready and then after we do the video They're like, oh it went terrible. I said no, it didn't go terrible and I'll send the video They're like, oh, I guess it wasn't so bad. So it's Down so I could throw out half of it a couple of times That's wise that's wise Um Let's see. So you finished art school. Well, no, let's go. I have to I have to do a little at least a paragraph Okay on on Trump's election. Okay, go for it. All right, so While I was in art school because I wasn't the only vet there, right? Yeah, so I'm assuming these other vets They can't be buying all this stuff, right? They can't be just agreeing they're acting like they're green but they can't be and so I end up like side talking to some of them and They just can't say anything because they're straight white males. Oh So they they just they one of them ended up completely Didn't complain. Yeah, one of them just completely quit and the other two they don't know this but in my head I called us the conservative cartel and we would secretly meet far away from the art studio over in the cafeteria and just talked about how crazy we thought it all was and then Right after well to trying to decide what's important Straight up had a teacher cry before a test after Trump got elected. She was asking us to walk out She's like if you guys need to walk out and just because of this you can it's okay And I was so proud of everybody because we were just like nah Nah, give us the test. Why would you need to walk out of class? Why would you encourage it? Yeah, and and so that was but then I Decided that it was imperative that I come out to everyone as a Trump supporter Because I got it in my head that if they really thought Every Trump supporter was this monster It was a really bad thing You know because they're freaking out these are you're in Illinois, right? Okay, okay, because it's just I just decided it was a really bad thing if they think they don't know any Trump supporters And they think they're all monsters that are now in control of the country. So I told Through a project of mine In sculpture class I did all these little these little mean people running away and then this great big It's actually this guy He's my straight white male And he he at one time was holding an olive branch, but it didn't survive moving and I I said So this is this is my piece because this is how I feel because I've learned about my internalized misogyny and That I'm oppressing everyone and it was really hilarious because when I said it people had I'd let them look at the sculpture first because that's what you do and People actually pulled away from sculpture much like the little mean people that were running away from It was crazy and then I ended up with people Like really confused and really wanting to either explain to me why I was wrong or Or just like trying to figure me out and it was it became Crazy stressful, which I knew it was going to be but I figured good God if the freaking ex staff sergeant can't tell people that they voted for Trump who can the guys can't because You know, so I just anyway it didn't it was funny It was funny because it was better and worse than I thought it would be It was better with the teachers than I thought it would be they didn't they didn't decide to chew on me indefinitely But it it actually destroyed like what I thought were real friendships Wow, and it blew my mind with people my age to like people in their 30s Not the the children were easier with it like the 19 20 year olds Yeah, they were easier with it then the people might yeah that was and then there was a full-on antifa guy there that Had to tell me about how violence was okay, which Still didn't agree with also also words are not violence violence is violence But anyway, that was a fight I had with the sculpture teacher and What else secret Catholics? some some of this I had to put it into this part of the conversation because I don't want to accidentally identify them but some of the Professors that I found tolerable Your secret Catholic secret Catholics. I'm a Catholic. Don't tell anybody. I'm gonna go to the people's Republic of China so I can come out So bad for them what I thought I was like, oh this is why you're saying still because it immunizes you to the madness because you actually have a faith and Yeah, so I don't know and then I Don't know. I think I think that's that's probably enough about school It's just so weird that I feel like I have to tell people because I'm sure there's somebody else doing school right now Like is this is this really happening? Like are people wearing double safety pins? The word safety pin thing and then if you won't wear a safety pin, oh lord 40 what 40 some 47% of Voters voted for him. I mean, that's a lot of people so well and like like me General Mattis like the man is legend the end if he's cool with it like and it's not like that was the only thought but big freaking deal to a lot of people and Yeah, like I don't know anyway and I'm not saying that he's perfect I never did it just I Actually was in the services when Hillary was doing things and I actually know some of the things that happened and can do that Anyway, so moving on So there's our Trump section so anyone Stand Trump can now had to put that in the block you the people can rage as needed. I've already been there Um, yeah, so oh gosh Well, should I should I just jump into like the main Peterson things that have affected me go right ahead Well, I would say a Lot of his little his little tropes that he puts out like like do it poorly Man That's a big release right because I I had been struggling with the truth thing I actually started trying to do the truth thing in 2010 when I got divorced and when when I first started trying to do it It was it was definitely poor and like I had just decided I had to do it Anyway, I wish I would have found I wish I would have found Peterson then and been able to integrate that but I was doing it Really haphazardly on my own and like I just knew at a certain moment I absolutely had to quit with anything that wasn't completely real Well, I guess I don't know if I can do this quickly but I'll try so my ex-husband He had a fake dead child For four and a half years He told me that he had had a kid the first time he slept with anyone in high school And she had died of leukemia When like right before he got into the army And and that was not true. It it fake dead child. Why did you make this story up? All right, cuz yeah, why would you do that? Because it garnered him sympathy. Oh And then you know if you're a raging alcoholic who's a little bitter it doesn't matter because you're around everybody who's 20 and 21 And they're all stupid and so they just believe you he was he was 19 and 22 So that would be the one thing where I've developed a little bit of being more chill Because he was also an idiot child, but good god Anyway, I was like I was like I was like I was like I was like I was like I was like I was like I was like I was like God anyway, so I got some like suspicion problems everything but Yeah, yeah, so that was 2010 was a sharp turnaround for me because I had Like one of the easiest lies to tell somebody when you're in a relationship is when they're like, I love you Because you're forced to it right you're forced to you like I really forced to it you do if you wanna If you don't want a whole lot of drama, yeah, you're right you're right You're not really forced to you think you are when you're stupid when you Yeah, you say well you love me well, that's thank you There's a lot of it, but it's just it's just not the response that the person is looking for obviously Oh Or night are we frozen now are we back I think we're back Okay. Well, there's the inadequacy of the word love too because I loved him like I love other humans I loved him like I love a dog Should that be how you're loving your husband? No, no, it should not But you know anyway What else from The things that Peterson really brought out to me You only have three options in a relationship to be the tyrant the slave or to negotiate that was huge for me because I had this fictional idea of I should just take it, you know and Deal with it later something and that that's it was no good Let's see, let's see that in his book I don't remember hearing that oh That's in one of his that's in his old In one of his old college lectures, I don't know if it's maps of meaning or the other lecture because there's the personality lecture, too Yeah, yeah. Yeah, you you've only got three You can be the tyrant the slave or you can negotiate and that's not just with like spouse relationships that's also with you know, and and it's really helped me because I was not somebody who just Put my like I don't like to fight it's not enjoyable to me so you find yourself being a slave often Well, and not just that causing the other person to be a tyrant when they didn't know it mmm, cuz if you never say no and You if you don't if you don't share like what's true with yourself and they they can't know and so you're just You're creating these loops like you're actually And that's how he talks about it and I'm like, wow that really that made sense to me and I just wish I'd found it sooner Honestly, because it could have been I could have done it so much better And then it affects it affects my art everything with Peterson the archetypes I had been trying to do that to try and find the core story And I didn't I didn't know what I was doing and I figured it out a little bit later And so I got in kind of close to it and then when he started hitting on on young and on Joseph Campbell and then I realized that's what I've been trying to pursue this whole time and It was crazy. Awesome. Not to mention symmetry, too Because there's a rejection of symmetry they want you to do everything asymmetrical almost seems like and When I figured out that I was trying to do something that was not symmetrical Almost seems like and When I figured out that the rejection is the rejection of meaning well, of course, you don't want symmetry because it all folds back on you don't want beauty and symmetry is beautiful and It's it's really crazy Yeah So Did the no objective beauty One okay So So the schools like the colleges and academia Had got like this over stack of Being too liberal or being the crazy left liberal not so I was wondering I've been thinking about this Did the churches get too much conservatism? And is that why you can't talk there either? And is the issue maybe not chaos maybe it's too much order on both sides Yes. Well, I think that's that's part of it churches You know part of well communities need order in order to function and and Traditions need order in order to maintain themselves And I think Peterson's gotta got a good point to make when he when he makes the point that that Order can get rigid and order can basically petrify and that's that's part of what happens in church and And it's it can become a function of fear that you know We have to maintain this order. Otherwise, we lose everything and sometimes that's true But it can but that's that's what happens in churches, too Just part of institutions What I'm seeing with my peers The people that still go to church regular either never experience the broader world or Pretend that the broader world isn't part of their experience. So they don't need to talk about in church. So you don't have to Tip the ship, you know And then the people who do want to talk about it Tip the ship, you know and Then the people who do want to talk about decide well church isn't the place for thinking and they either become really agnostic or just spiritual or borderline atheist I and it's just really sad and I feel like Peterson Kind of uncorked the atheist that we're still curious about the religion and I feel like You're maybe Uncorking this this bottle up that the church has had because I feel like people have been really desperate to talk about their true Experiences, but when you start talking about your true experiences, everybody gets uncomfortable Yeah, and like when I when I talk about the fact that I never loved my husband like you should love a man. Oh man People like well, why did you marry him? Pressure and not sharing what was actually happening in my life with anyone and then Doing what I thought was expected Yeah, because we got way too together way too fast And then I thought it was the quote right thing to do and then from my perspective the only way to save my life was to sin and How do you reconcile that I'm still really I struggle with it I'm not as angry As I used to be about it, but I felt like the growing up in the church and growing up Sheltered just left me unnecessarily vulnerable and then kicked me out into the world Now now when you say growing up sheltered growing up in the church and growing up sheltered. What do you mean? um Almost no like R rated movies like well, I mean we lived we were physically sheltered we live 60 miles from any like town per se like and then also like you know the wrong type of music will destroy you and Kind of on and on like it's a pretty common list for people who are yeah I mean standard really which and it's funny too because in some ways my parents weren't like that But in some ways they were more so They they were very chill about Catholics where some people aren't and then about science my dad is very into science, although of course not evolution Because that's a lie Which is I'm kind of I just don't care about it anymore So how is your relationship with your parents now that you've um? It's went up and down. I had about a year and a half I almost didn't talk to my mom when I got into this honesty thing because I was too mean about it And she wasn't ready and then it's kind of strange My folks had to take care of my dad's mom who got very intense Alzheimer's like persistently worse and worse to the point she was Trying to scrape the house and hitting people and really bad and my folks took care of her for the last two years and my mom's Trying to make everything work and trying to just Say what you need to say so everybody can go along to get along Yeah, it was too much and she finally started having to get more real and tell people how she really felt about stuff Yeah, and as that was happening, I tried to just be encouraging but that wasn't like really me doing it That was her and since then She's become more okay With me, but also too. I think for her it was a big shock for me to not be the perfect child anymore mmm, and I mean like I Probably like I started cussing like I just wouldn't be like, okay That'll be great like no it was done. I was I was radically done and I Like I really wish I would have just done it as a teenager because if I would have done it as a teenager You know, but I didn't I was great And That doesn't help It doesn't help. I should have I should have pushed through it then but I just I didn't know how or I couldn't commit or something And it really does work the nature of reality It does it when you're when you're not doing your damnedest to tell the truth or at least not lie It warps the nature of reality and it's a betrayal to everyone else It betrays the confidence that you feel they have and that's been something that's really shocked me because there's a couple of people That other members of my family kind of Dance around because they're really pious and I've started being just as honest with them and Mostly they've taken it really well now, we'll see if I get talked about to no end over the next decade But you so far no so so where has Where are you at now with respect to church or God or Christianity some of that stuff? It's so it's so complicated because I I Wanted to be real and I've always known I knew even at my worst. I knew that the church was my people And I would always go off and on But I do have times where I Don't feel like there's anything else and I'm I'm kind of at a point We're like I would love to see angels or demons and I can't and and people talk about when they're at their worst And that's where God finds them and God picks them up And I didn't that was not the way it felt for me and I I missed myself as a child like I missed the me that just Hands down believed the hands down just didn't doubt or anything now Peterson has helped me a lot because I Reassimilated because if you're steeped in it like really steeped in Scripture You know, there's parts of it that are good for you regardless and it does feel right that it doesn't matter if they're supernatural or not, it should still work and That's why I really appreciate what Peterson is doing and it really helps me Reappreciate third, but also understanding the church With history and with the broader picture Has been big and completely new To my experience. I didn't get that as a child It was like not quite just King James version of the Bible and smile on but the close like I guess the NIV was good, too Really know why? It's a little easier to read But well, I mean if you if you learn on the King James I actually understand the King James really well because that's what I learned on so I memorized everything on. Yep but now I'm It's kind of funny I really like what Peterson says about But how do you act? How are you acting it out? And I don't know that I've ever acted out anything but a Christian life. Not really. I Couldn't avoid it. It's who I am But I do I do sometimes just I don't see evidence of other stuff But then you want to and you can see the serendipitous and if I'm saying that word, right? Like you you see things that are uncannily like that just happen I'm I'm actually Playing with the idea of going to a Greek Orthodox Church I've been there for the last few Sundays and and it's funny as much as I have doubts and conflicts and all this My son is born and the first thing I'm doing is singing him church songs Yeah, can't can't escape wouldn't want to do anything else either like so but yeah, it's I Don't know. How is how have you found the the Greek Orthodox different from the Baptist? Well, I mean there's the liturgy. There's the there's the chanting and the gold foil that's probably damning us all But um No, uh, I really really enjoyed learning about art in the church and learning about the Basilica and the meaning of all the things and like I love the visual and I love the symbolic and the fact that that's like Kind of stigmatized was always very vexing to me And so to see that being used and to see worship differently Yeah is kind of really exciting and I may have went a little bit for the spectacle And I might not be quite done with that yet Because it's just beautiful. Yeah, it's just beautiful and then I Have an appreciation for ritual That it's just lacking It's just lacking when you when you bring out a little plastic communion cup that has a little Plastic wafer in between the two pieces of plastic on the top and you've lost all sub ones of ritual It's not as good I It might not be unholy, but it's not as good and it makes me sad For the church and then I also I'm just I'm very plagued that the church is so segmented because when I look at the sheer power Devastating as it may be Islam has power and It's because they're more unified in a way Maybe they wouldn't say so but it appears so to me and We need that Like we need that power as a Christian Church and until we can sit down Like I always was thinking to myself when I was talking. I have a really strong faith Catholic friend. She was a nun for four years While I was in the army, which is kind of ironic Anyway, now she has six kids But I've always was saying to her I just wish there'd be a new council of Nicaea and we'll just sew the church back together and it's interesting I was I attended the after service church meeting and they're talking about the goals the Patriarch of America has and One of them is as much reconciliation as possible from the church I wish I could have stayed for the whole thing. My my boy got About 20 minutes is a long time for a for a three-month old Yeah, so I'm I'm just trying to figure it out, I don't know I'm not Rejecting it but man like I Guess I guess I'm just that's why I said I was a Thomas It's not that I don't want to believe it's just I don't know It depends on what belief is a lot and I like that I like that Peterson won't commit because that's it's like I don't want it to be I wish it wasn't but I feel like to commit is dishonest But then what are my actions and my actions are well, I want to go to church I I want to be like I want to do these good things I can see where almost like pretty much anything that's little sin I can see where it is devastating to your lived life I can see where it's devastating to your life. I can see where it's devastating to your life Pretty much anything that's little sin I can see where it is devastating to your lived life Regardless of the hereafter it is devastating to your lived life. And so what am I living out? And so yeah that's Which is which is really interesting I really I really like it when he becomes it Sam for Not knowing himself. It's funny Here's here's a quirk I forgot when I was going on about Peterson So some people I noticed this in chat rooms with people some people say They just hate the way people Peterson talks because he's hyperbolic and he kind of is gritty and he's frustrating He's kind of he's annoying basically his annoying way of speaking Mm-hmm, and I'm thinking myself man. I just don't get that and they're like well on the other hand Sam Harrison his it's so much different so intellectual so It's like a bomb. I'm like wait, wait, wait, wait, wait You think that's pleasant and they're like, yeah, I'm like, oh Man, this is part of it. I Yeah, I I do not like Sam's And I don't like the way he speaks not what he's saying just the way he speaks and I felt the same way about Obama and The thing is when I read what they write don't hate it Don't hate but it's just that way of speaking and I think that is just a class disparity Yeah Yeah, and and it's really interesting because um, I don't know if you're tracking Sargon of a cod because you've got a thousand things To track I haven't really been tracking Sargon I know he's running for office in the UK and people keep throwing milkshakes at him He's running for the office for the EU That he doesn't want to be in because it still exists. So he's gonna run for it. You yeah The MEP is the one for the the guy that goes over to the European Union Oh, you've got to be kidding. Yes So him and Paul Joseph Watson and count Dan Hula or I can't remember Dan's real name The reason they're running is because they don't want that position to exist. Oh my word And so they're running like as hard as they can because like this position exists work, you know So it's brilliant But one of the things that he does is he says do you mean all right or do you mean working class? because I think you mean working class and that Makes so much sense as like the difference Because it's just a different way of communicating and the little bit because I know like I get what people are saying Peterson has a little bit of hyperbole and he talks in stories But some people talk in stories and that's what they remember. No, you're very very right and Peterson Peterson is both an academic and can talk working class and that you know I noticed that about him right away So I grew up in New Jersey and people might think I just grew up, you know 17 miles out of New York City But Jersey is a weird state in that it's got it's got rural and urban just right next to each other and and because of you know partly because of the Dutch Calvinist school I went to and the Dutch immigrants the Dutch immigrants that went to New Jersey were Many of them were blue collar working class and some of them still even had farms When in the in the 60s and 70s when I was there So I think you're very very right about class and I think that's a big I think that's a big piece of it I think I think you're very right. Sam Harris is very urban Yeah, Peterson. Yeah urban is the nice word. It's better than We just say he's from town Everybody know what you mean Yes, he's very urban. Oh No, I think I think that's I think that's very right. I think that's so um Another thing so I think one of the things that Peterson is doing Maybe Sam Harris too for that matter. I think there may be reshuffling the deck Because there's the working-class people that don't get mixed up with the academics and then there's younger people that don't socialize with older people yeah, and then there's the church people that don't socialize with atheists and I think this is kind of it's a maypole situation and that's that's what I see when I see the Peterson thing because It's not even that I watch everything he does now But these little groups that fraction off of it and it just keeps going it's it's just really interesting I think that's true where I think we're in a We're in a time where You know for a long time people kind of take their assigned seats in the gallery and everybody kind of has their place and One of the things with Trump is that things were in a time of a lot of mixture So Trump was hated by the Republican Establishment, but he won anyway, and he's kind of taken over the party the Dems have their own issues in terms of the Kind of the woke left versus the pragmatic working class that a lot of whom have gone over to Trump and they were Reagan Democrats, so there's just a lot of realignment going on and And that's a that's a part of this because you know I often reflect on the fact I mean when I talked to Jordan in April of 2018 You know I asked him about this this fast rise. He said well it had been building, but I thought well that there's Peterson had been doing his thing a long time and People had known about him, but there's something about the man and the moment kind of found the damn broke Yeah, and yeah, and and then everything changed, so it'll be interesting to see you know where this goes if Peterson continues to to To gain or you know he just had that interesting talk with Milo on his podcast that I just listened to that was fascinating I I haven't seen it yet, but I am actually really glad I'm really glad that he talked to Milo again And I'm really glad that Ruben talked to service again because people wanted to cast them out as the unruly children But there are unruly children like and we're the club that doesn't just drop you off the side of the cliff when you mess up and So what are it just it really bothered me that they were sort of being ostracized by our side even though I Find Milo exhausting. It's not that I don't like him. I just find him exhausting to watch for too long He is a bit much. I I've seen almost nothing of him And so this is actually the first time I'd ever listened to him in any extended period But he is a lot when when I was in college and he was doing the college tour Uh-huh. I really enjoyed it because if you were in that stifling like like one day I got completely shut down Because I was trying to remember the name of a female artist and I said, you know the chick Painted the chick that cut off the head of the guy better because it's a really famous painting of when Esther sneaks back into camp and cuts off the head and there's one done by a man where it's a little Dainty chick and she's very delicately slicing the head and her little her little frail maid is there to help her and then the one Where the woman made it? It's this kind of burly like looks like a milkmaid chick and she is wrangling him and her maids on top of him I'm like it's so much more like that if a woman could take a drunk guy's head off That's how it would be. It wouldn't be the little petite girl delicately slicing. No, that's But anyway, so I made this I said the chick and we had to shut down the entire conversation about my degrading female artists Because of the word chick And we wait you were in trouble because you use the word chick Yep. Yep, because mid-claw as a woman used the word check. It isn't a guy That's my internalized misogyny. Oh yes, which is why I identify as an attack helicopter now because It's it's a fish I headed in officially on the college fill-out thing because there's that you can put down what you identify as attack helicopter It has to be put if there is anything besides male and female you must put attack helicopter. It's obligatory. Oh Well, we have it we have a few more minutes Sally, so I don't know if you got anything on your list I have to get in I'll I'll put out a couple more minutes Couple of weird things and then ask you question so one weird thing because of the rejection of Illustrative or narrative art in high art. I think that it's being pushed into video games Which is good because it's preserved But bad because it's taken out of the world all of that effort all of that beauty is Being driven into this virtual space and people straight-up take what is practically a pilgrimage to see get this cathedrals in video games Which is great, but then awful because I'm like, why can't you just make that exist in real life? Yeah, and then the other thing is the thing that I would ask you is how How do you get? pastors or men engaged in the meaning crisis pastor specifically because I I was so elated to find you as a pastor that watches modern TV and has cultural references with people and Is engaged in this whole thing and it in understanding how it matters because it does matter I mean, especially young guys man. They're desperate desperate and I mean desperate on the brink of death desperate And and I know it's a first-world problem, but it's the problem that we have And and I just I I've been trying To kind of engage one of my local pastors and he's interested sorta But then he's also interested in you know, the homeless guy and this guy and that guy So, of course, he's got big issues, but he can't see how this is an equal issue yeah, and and it kills me and then just I I don't know. Well, some of it is salience for pastors Pastors deal with what's local in many ways that's which is exactly what they should be dealing with The difficulty is that they can't deal with everything obviously. So the homeless guy pastors also tend to Be directed by their congregation that which the congregation thinks is important because pastors kind of have to keep Congregations happy or they lose their jobs So it's complicated. There are there are pastors out there who are interested in this but I They're they're probably few and far between Yeah If if I wasn't at the little crossroads, I am at my life I would start a meetup here, but I just can't reasonably do so with Kid under six months. Oh, yeah. Yeah, I don't I don't have time for that That child is your priority right now The child will not be this small and this young forever. So that's where you have to focus now Oh, no, no, absolutely. I'm not even pretending but it's It kills me because I do feel like we're on this crest of this wave and if we can just Keep it if we can just catch a few more people. It just it's all the difference. I think Well, it'll be it'll be interesting to see to see what comes we are in a time of realignment That's certainly true churches Churches are funny things, you know these One of the One way to understand I mean there's tremendous diversity in church in churches around the country I mean you found in your little neck of the woods an orthodox church that you could worship in that's an astounding thing because I probably I've been there two Sundays. So I'm mostly going to a meeting in a coffee shop with my beach pastor Going to a meeting in a coffee shop with my beach pastor But but it's Churches churches in many ways The diversity of churches in america in many ways reflect the residue of all sorts of past Theological and sociological waves that have gone through the culture and so depending on how big this wave is There will be There could be churches in its wake You know my whatever contribution i'm making on youtube that's part of it, I suppose But it's we'll have to see It's it's a huge relief to feel like there is a church community where one can just talk honestly Yeah, even even if you're not part of it, even if we would have never had this video Its existence I think is so it's just it's supporting this peterson and I think a lot of things like with stuff online Is it builds a lot of content and then something clips over and then it gets huge And I don't know if this specifically will get huge or some side thing from it But that's kind of how I see it. That's kind of why I wanted to do the interview now because I don't think you'll have time Well, you know i've been doing this for what a year and a half now, so who knows Yeah, and it isn't so huge now that I can't still do this. I There might be a day that I can't do this but it isn't today And so and then to me this is just this is just fun because here You know, there's no way in the world i'd get a chance to meet you and so there you are in southwest, south, dakota In a ranch. I'm i'm in florida now I'm stuck on the coast. It's really strange never wanted to come here. It's so hot Oh Well, it's humid. That's the thing The beach is beautiful. The beach is beautiful. So hot like california doesn't have the humidity. That's why I love california It's a dry heat So yeah I miss out west but yeah Anyway, sally this this has been fun. I will send you this conversation and you can let me know if you'd like me to share it Um, I I think people will I think i'm i'm pretty good with it. I I thought about a long time before you're honest You're pretty honest. Yeah, i'm trying to be and I like just enough to get in trouble, you know I would rather have a person be really honest and disagree with me Completely than to just kind of snow me all the time. That's you know, that's just This it's just a waste of time I tell people I I don't have the apprehension about talking but I have normal amounts of regret Dangerous combination, I've never had stage fright, but I've always had normal amounts of regret Well, I will I will send this to you and you can battle with your regret and we will see where I'll probably do it Anyway, oh good. Good. I think people like it Thank you sally. Take care. Have a great day. Bye. Bye