https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=MuenUQOhut8

 Hi, this is Paul. A number of people over the weekend asked me to make some comment on the Jordan Peterson monk debate. He was in a debate, it's a pretty long video, but it's worth watching, with Michael Eric Dyson, Michelle Goldberg, Stephen Fry, and Jordan Peterson. And I'm going to first do a framing video, as I did for the Delhonte and the Ben Shapiro video that I did the last couple of times, and then I'll go into it in a little bit more depth. First of all, this, as a debate, it's more or less set up as a winning and losing thing. And this, I wasn't familiar with any of the other monk debates, now I'm interested in it, I'm going to go back and look at the previous ones. And so, but, you know, so part of what they're trying to do is quantify this and have a clear winner and loser. And so there is a nature, there is an element of competition in this. And this competition is of course framed within representative democracies, which means that this is about hearts and minds and votes and dollars and behavior. And so one of the first things you should ask in such a frame is who is the audience? Now, there's the audience in the theater, of course, but given YouTube and availability of videos and social media, we also have to consider the video audience now and the video audience in the future. And I would imagine that all of the presenters are keeping all of these audiences in mind as they're speaking, and that very much shapes the debate. What are the assumptions and values of the audience? And you need to know this if you want to figure out how they can be moved, and you also need to know that where are they with respect to your goal. Now, each of the people have a goal, and I'm going to get into that in the next video, but this one I want to focus more on the framing and the forum. Now, there's two ways to go. There's offense and defense. And right now the NBA playoffs are in the Western Conference and the Eastern Conference finals, and I watched some of the Warriors Rockets game last night, and these are some great series I love when you get to the Western, is it Conference or Division? I don't remember. The Western finals and the Eastern finals are usually some of the best games to watch all year because usually the West is way stronger than the East, but not always. You've got LeBron James. Well, okay, let's talk about offense. Do you have a shack? Now, what I mean is in the, towards the end of the 90s beginning to the 2000s, when the Kings were good, and if you watch the Freddie and Paul show, you know that here in Sacramento we have an NBA basketball team, and they are the Sacramento Kings, and they are almost always terrible. But in the one period of time when they weren't terrible, when they were contenders, they never won at all, which makes for a great franchise. If you love cheering for the underdogs, you can get Kings tickets and you can cheer them on to lose more often than win. But back in the late 90s, early 2000s, the Lakers were the Kings' big rivals, and the Lakers had Shaq and Kobe. And to watch Shaq play in his prime was something to behold. He was simply so big, so strong. Once he got into the paint with that ball, he was going to score, and then obviously the strategy was hack a Shaq. And you had all these players, they all get five fouls, you just keep sending them to the line because Shaq couldn't shoot free throws very well. If he could only swallow his pride and shoot the granny shot, you know, he might have been, you know, one of the best players in history. But he didn't shoot free throws well, so the deal was when Shaq gets in there, you foul him like crazy, and poor Shaq would get beat up every game. Do you have a Shaq? If you're on offense and you have a winning strategy, you just keep playing it. You keep playing the same card, you keep playing the same move, and you just try to win, win, win. Now, Eric, now Michael Eric Dyson played offense almost the whole time. And in Glenn Lowry's language, he had the bloody shirt of racism, and he decided he was going to wave that bloody shirt in front of everybody on the stage. And that was his winning card. He was just going to keep hammering that card, and that was going to get him the win. And in some ways, his strategy was a success, but we're going to talk about that. The evening was often three against one, which a lot of people have noted, against Peterson. Even in, and I'm going to play the opening, I'm going to play the opening speeches in the next video that I do. But even Stephen Fry, who's supposed to be on Jordan Peterson's team, and remember, this is a competition, so you have teams, you have some rules. This is a competition. Even Stephen Fry, in a sense, began by saying, well, I'm not really sure I want to be on Jordan Peterson's team. And the two people on the other side just kept mentioning Jordan Peterson aggressively, and Stephen Fry, they kind of make, you know, excuses for, well, you know, he's really not over there by Jordan Peterson. He's really one of us, so on and so forth. So, it was often, it was three to one against Peterson. And so, Peterson had to play defense, I think, more than he likes playing and more than he's used to playing. Now, offense is about passion and aggression, and defense is about discipline and sympathy. And so, when you get to defense, you, basically, your strategies are, you have, in some ways, you have, you have more strategies, you have more options on defense than you do on offense, but none of them are as good. So, attack the game. Play to your base that might or might not be in the room. So, that's a defensive strategy. So, at least when you lose, you can come out and you can be consoled by your base, and, you know, you won't lose status in your base. Religious people are, have almost always the best, are almost always the best at this, because religious people play to an audience of one. And so, you can, you can tick everyone off, everyone can be against you, but as long as your God is with you, you win. And that's a very powerful card that religious people have. Deny the game. Unsettle the audience. Cast out. This is all, this is all an illusion, and you'd see, this is, in a sense, what Stephen Fry played all night. We never talked about political correctness. We never, we never really got into the subject. And, and a number of people are making a pretty good case that, that Fry actually was the big winner of the evening. That, that's, deny the game, deny the conversation. We're not doing it right. We're not playing it right. And so, when the game is over, it's kind of like in the NBA, you know, the Kings lost because the refs were on the Lakers side. And you'll, you'll hear that in Sacramento, and there might even be some comments that come up. But that's, that's, that's a, that's a strategy on defense. Don't lose, you know, you're not, you're not going to win, so don't lose and live to fight another day. That's another defensive strategy. Defense doesn't really add points to the board, but keep the game close and hope maybe you'll win in the future. There's another defensive strategy. So, like I said, Michael Eric Dyson, he was on offense all night. Michelle Goldberg, make sure I got her name right, Michelle Goldberg. She was, tried to be on offense, played some defense. She, I didn't find her performance terribly strong. I think, again, Stephen Fry, and in a sense, played the best defensive game in, in both, both in terms of attacking the game, denying the game, and not losing. And Jordan Peterson, we'll, we'll talk about him when we get into the, the video itself. Now the room, the room was in Toronto, and, and that's important. That's Jordan Peterson's home turf. It's interesting, again, when, right when it starts, Michael Eric Dyson took on some language and a pose that was, that was very cultural. He almost came out like a, an African American from the south of the United States. Almost immediately, first words out of his mouth, that's how he framed himself. And so, this was, this is part of it. So you had some Canadian-American tensions right there in the room right, right away. Michelle Goldberg also played a lot of American cards. In a sense, Stephen Fry, he's, he's playing, he played a fair number of English cards along the way. And Peterson was, he's, he's from Toronto. He's not a native of Toronto. He's, his status in Canada is very complex right now. So, now signals from the audience. One of the interesting things you can tell built in, there's a certain degree of, there's a certain degree of wisdom that's been built into these monk debates against, I had never seen one. When someone runs out of time, the audience is instructed to applaud. Now that's really smart because in a sense, you try to take the audience sort of out of the game without necessarily offending the audience by taking them out of the game. And if you go back and watch say, U.S. presidential debates, to the degree to which the audience in the game is, is often an issue because, well, we're going to get into that a little bit here. So, if you watch the video, my sense, and I may be wrong, I'd be curious to hear some Canadian commenters. My sense was that in many ways, Michael Eric Dyson seemed to have the audience. He, he was very funny. He played a lot of humor, as did Stephen Fry. He was a, he was, he was a professional comedian. So, but if you listen to it, you would almost imagine that, that Michael Eric Dyson had the audience. And if you just listen to it, now, I have just listened to it without watching, and I have watched some of it. And if you think back to the Kennedy-Nixon debates, people who watched the televised Kennedy-Nixon debate thought Kennedy won. People who listened to the debate on the radio thought Nixon won. And so, there's very much an eye-ear contrast going on here, especially with a winning-losing type forum such as this. Now, the, the actual proposition that was to be debated was, be it resolved, what you call political correctness, I call progress. And that, in a sense, puts the left in the pro camp and the right in the con camp, if we want to use left and right. And they did a poll in the audience. And before, before the, the debate happened, the poll said the pro had 30% and the con 64%. Now, that's a huge debate. That's a huge difference. That's over two to one. And, and 66% would be two-thirds. And so, right away, it seems like you would imagine that the pro would play defense and the con might, you know, use their advantage to play offense. But this is where this, this resolution is a little bit tricky, because does the pro side really have an uphill battle? Because this debate on political correctness is really a debate on overreach and not progress. And so, that's why, in a sense, the resolution itself is a little bit misleading. And that makes the debate a little bit complicated. So, does the pro side really have this much of an uphill battle? Basically, what the pro side would hope to gain would be they're going to do another poll at the end of the debate, which was stated at the beginning of the debate. And so, basically, the decision in terms of who wins will be determined on who moves the needle. So, in a sense, all the pro side really has to do is gain a little bit of market share and they can call it a victory. But, again, the resolution itself is a little bit complicated, because we're debating the excesses of a cause that's already been won. And that's really the posture that the left has. And so, what we're trying to talk about is, well, this gets very difficult and it's a difficulty that the left has right now. If you remember the Occupy movement, you had all of these protests and these protests were to do what? Now, if you read the history of the Civil Rights movement, you think about, let's say, the Montgomery Bus Boycott. Many of the Civil Rights struggles and the marches, many of those early movements had a specific achievable goal. Their goal was to desegregate a bus line. Now, many of the marches and the specific goals of specific actions were often to enact what had already become legal or what many in the public, at least in the broader public, maybe not the former slave states, but the rest of the country, what the rest of the country had already emotionally embraced. Now, that's, I'm not going to take anything away from the Civil Rights movement, but that's a big advantage if you're trying to move people's hearts and minds. The difficulty that the left has had with the Occupy movement and a bunch of these other things is that, what was the goal of the Occupy movement? Better. It's not, you can't quantify it. We want less income inequality. Okay, but is it income inequality or is it amount of wealth, inequality of wealth? And so these debates get very complicated. Whereas if you want to stop segregation on a specific bus line, that's, especially when the winds are at your back, culturally and legally in terms of the whole country, maybe not the hotbed of the former slave states, that's a doable goal. And there are a number of advantages that the Civil Rights movement had. And again, none of that is to downplay the enormous cost and the enormous sacrifice, the enormous loss of life that happened in that movement. But now the left has a different, has a different challenge. And often those on the left aren't fully cognizant of how difficult this challenge is. And we're going to get into that a little bit here. So does the pro really have this much of an uphill battle? We're debating the excesses of a cause that's already won. There's an assumption of, there's assumption of equality that the vast majority is not debating. In other words, almost nobody is saying there shouldn't be, and this is again a Jordan Peterson framing, there isn't equality of opportunity. Almost everyone in America will agree on equality of opportunity. And that's a, that's, that's in and of itself, not an easy thing, but it's far easier to deal with any equality of outcome. So most people will say, whether you're black, whether you're white, whether you're a woman, you should have the same opportunities. You should not be disabled by your sex or your race in terms of opportunity. Almost everyone agrees with that. Well, then what then is the debate? Well, this debate here, you call political correctness, I call it progress. And part of the problem term here is political correctness. And as really, I think Stephen Fry tried to frame the most, what we're talking about is a mood. And now if you follow that theme consistently throughout the debate, that gets complicated because especially those on the pro side, Dyson and Goldberg, they want often to have it both ways in terms of the feelings, feelings versus data. And Fry in a sense always played the feeling card, which gave him a certain amount of advantage. Peterson wanted to play data fact cards, and he was in a sense the lone person on that score. So again, in a lot of other ways, it was three to one. Also, the question about this, the movement on the left is, are we pure enough? Now, that's difficult because human beings are not prone to purity. Human beings are, as we're going to talk about, riders and elephants. And the rider likes to pose as pure, but the elephant is usually pretty unwashed and pretty animalistic in terms of what it wants. Now, so let's get into the elephant to the rider. And this, of course, is Jonathan Hite's thing. And if you read his book, his first book especially, The Happiness Hypothesis, he goes through it quite a bit. The elephant is the unconscious, is unconscious practice. This is our unconscious self. This is our reptilian self. This is our animal self. The elephant is incredibly smart, but he isn't conscious, and he's smart in different ways. He's very robust. He's very determined to exist. The elephant is, in a sense, the animal. Now, the rider is the conscious self. The rider is playing a different game. And the rider in Jonathan Hite's framework is a post hoc PR, public relations director. The rider is skilled at post hoc justifications, arguments, and reasoning. This is why we did this. This is, you might say I'm not pure enough. I am pure enough. This is why. So the rider is chattery. The elephant doesn't talk much, doesn't listen to talk much, but is looking at the other elephants, is looking at the herd, is looking at the landscape. Now, this is important, again, if we differentiate between the eyes and the ears. If you listen to the debate, you're mostly talking to riders. If you're watching the debate, there are other factors in play. Notice early on when Dyson comes forward and say, I'm in Petersonland, and then Stephen Fry goes around the back. Now, this is what's tricky about dealing with comedians. Comedians have developed, dry throat, I talked all day yesterday. Comedians have developed a really good set of skills for defense. And this is why, whereas Dyson and Michelle Goldberg really wanted to go after Peterson, why Dyson had to turn his focus to Fry. Because Dyson pretty quickly realized that Fry, being a gay Jewish comedian, could very quickly turn the tables on him and expose the aggressor as an aggressor, which culturally, now this is the frame in which Christianity has been hugely influential. Culturally, we have difficulties with naked aggression. And so, to the degree that Fry could show Dyson to be aggressive, that could turn Dyson's aggression into a negative. And this is, in a sense, what Fry did, and probably the reason why Fry of the four had the best night, because Dyson was aggressive and Fry was able to take that aggression, turn it around, and expose it as aggression, which in the context of the resolution, it's a resolution about overreach. And so, in a sense, Fry can come around the back and say, yep, you're overreaching. So, and again, the elephants are watching this. The riders are listening, but the elephants are watching. Riders in the West already have learned to talk, have already learned the talk. In other words, one of the things that all the riders have figured out is how to talk the politically correct line, which is exactly what political correctness is about. Whatever I do with my body, whatever I do with my money, whatever biases I continue to have, as long as I can mask them, so in a sense, we're talking the persona in the shadow, as long as I can mask my biases, as long as I can play like the nice liberal, as long as I can put on a front that I am a civilized human being and I'm not going to use racist terms, I'm not going to do overly racist things, then I can pass for being a moral person. Now you begin to see the difficulty of the left, because the left wants to keep pulling the mask off, because their goal is to say, you are, you need to be pure, you need to be perfectly race-free, you need to continue to, we need to continue to expose the inner racist, so in my next video I'm probably gonna bring in some John McWhorter who tells a story about going to a conference where there was a white guy who had a privilege coach, and every week his privilege coach would sit them and sit there and teach him about his privilege. Now this is almost an ascetic, almost a monastic, almost a monastic framework, and this is why McWhorter will say the left has turned to religion, and this is fundamentally a religion that's operating here, and it's all about purity, and it's all about being free from sin, okay? So the writers in the West already have learned the talk. We can pose, so that seems to be an advantage for the pro side, but the voices on the left are complaining about the elephant, and so you deal with elephants with carrots and sticks, right? Well the left increasingly are resorting to sticks, and political correctness is mostly about sticks, and so this is a debate over sticks, and that especially advantages the cons, because here's the thing about the elephant, you can't really reason with an elephant. The elephant doesn't have much capacity for reason, in fact, let's say by definition the elephant has no capacity for reason, and so if you're gonna reason with an elephant, you might as well try reasoning with your dog, or reasoning with an infant, it doesn't work. So the signals, the point, the debate in the West, now this is interesting too, because in a sense we're, look at the frame of the debate here, the frame of the debate wants to be reason, now so in a sense even the framework is already conservative to a degree, why? Well because the cherished value in the room is reason, and so this is a very modern room here, we're going to have metrics, we're going to use reason, we're going to try and keep passion to a minimum, now Dyson and Peterson are going to explore the limits of that, usually to Dyson's benefit, because again offense is about aggression and passion, reason or defense is usually about sympathy and discipline, okay? So right now what the left really wants to be is blue church, because this is all about purity, and so well how do you deal with the elephant? You want to romance the elephant, you want to inspire the elephant, it's got to be an emotional appeal, well Dyson identifies himself early on as a preacher, now I got to do a little bit more biographical information, this gets really complicated in the black community, because being a preacher is different in different communities, and this not only has to deal with race, this also has to deal with class, historically in Western European churches preachers were high caste, okay? To be a preacher for example in the Christian Forum Church, which is a Western European church, you have to have education, so I need a BA, I need a BA or a BS degree, so I had my BS in history, and then I went on to three more years of class education and another year of field education before I would be allowed to have a Masters of Divinity in the Christian Reform Church from Calvin Seminary and then be ordained as a minister. The Christian Reform Church traditionally has valued clergy who are highly educated, now that's Europe, America the standards are different, African Americans for a long time did not have access to education, especially in the slave years and in the years past slavery, and so to be a pastor in a black church you don't necessarily have to have much education, now Michael Eric Tyson is a very well educated man, but to be a pastor in the black church you don't necessarily have to have a lot of education, this is also true in many low lower class white churches or I'd say low caste white churches, and so this this has to deal with East versus West in the United States, frontier culture versus establishment culture, so Tyson as I mentioned, oh nuts, Tyson as I mentioned, Dyson not Tyson identifies himself as a preacher almost right away which you know unlike let's say Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. unlike, now also notice I've had a I was a little chagrin when he invited him to a black church because I thought well anyway I'll get into that thought when I get into my further videos, so I grew up in in the black community a lot of experience in the black community, one of the things that you'll often notice with black churches is that there are a lot of titles associated with certain pastors in black churches, the black community in America is a fairly traditional conservative community, now I know for a lot of white people who don't have a lot of contact with the black community or a lot of exposure that comes as a surprise because they often vote for the democrats, it's not that simple, the community itself is from mostly the the former slave states and they bear a lot of that culture, now this is a very long and complex relationship but you will often find in the black church that the most senior pastor it'll be the reverend doctor and if they can add more titles on to that they will, why? Because there's been a degree of self-consciousness in the black church about not having degrees and so when some black pastors get degrees they often front the degree, in other words it's sometimes the reverend Martin Luther King Jr., it's sometimes Dr. King and so the degrees are fronted because there's a self-consciousness often in the black community about not having much education, now Dyson again will kind of play both sides of this in this debate and that's an important piece that's an important piece to watch in this as well. He identifies himself as a preacher and in a sense wants to turn the debate into a revival and so again he's got a lot of cards to play because on one hand he's got these these cards from the black church via the civil rights movement that even in left America have a lot of power if if you just look at pastors in tv and movies white pastors are usually negative black pastors are often positive okay I in my sermon last Sunday I did a little bit of talking about First Reformed that's a Paul Schrader movie coming up and I talked a little bit about it in my rough draft to Sunday so the the pastor of the pastor is a successful black pastor of a mega church because of the history of the civil rights movement because of white guilt in American culture black pastors get a certain pass now a certain pass doesn't mean carte blanche they don't get a free pass they get a certain pass and there's a lot of complexities to this and so you will see the Reverend Jesse Jackson the Reverend Al Sharpton and and so that card will get played quite a bit and and also the relationship of the the African-American community had few institutions that they could build coming out of slavery and coming out of Jim Crow there were some educational institutions some black colleges that were built but for the most part the church was one of the few institutions that they could really call their own that they could really dominate and so there are some traditional black denominations so they could have a space of their own a thing of their own and that gives the black church in the context of the black community a very different place than let's say the white church for example the city council person Larry Carr from my district here is is a black man and he is I love Larry Carr Larry Carr is a terrific city council person now if Kevin Johnson was former mayor of Sacramento former NBR basketball player former NB All-Star was a great basketball player was mayor of Sacramento not without his controversies now if if Kevin Johnson had been invited to a black church the assumption was that he would get a chance to one speak from the pulpit during a service two maybe even preach whether or not he's a pastor okay that would be that's part of the liturgy it's part of the tradition it's part of the history of the black church my church has a very different history a politician comes to my church that person is not going to address the congregation from the pulpit why because the pulpit is you have a strong distinction between politics and church so no politician is going to address themselves from the pulpit unless they have religious credentials now this gets complicated in the Christian Reformed Church because one of our great saints is Abraham Kuyper Abraham Kuyper was both a leader of a separatist religious conservative movement in the Netherlands called the um well I'm not going to get into too much Dutch church history a separate religious movement and he was prime minister of the Netherlands for a point and that's part of the reason I've had some conversations with Roland and probably going to have another one at some point in the future so but if a politician comes to my church they are not going to preach a sermon unless they have credentials as a minister they are not going to address the congregation from a worship service unless it's perhaps during a prayer request time where which is a little more casual part of the worship service where people can voice things they might there might be a special meaning after church but that will be separate from the liturgical thing those traditions are not as distinct in the black church again for the reasons that I said so Dyson comes out as a preacher he's playing a lot of cards here and these are some powerful cards another thing that I believe is that for many Americans right now the at the end of the enlightenment there's a crisis of ethical authority you go into the the cold war and I've talked about this in other videos in a sense what the church tried to do because the bible was being assaulted in terms of science and history was to say the bible teaches ethics but the bible does not teach science and history and so in a sense you you split the bible well now at the end of the cold war the real crisis is where do we get our ethics from and this is where atheists like De La Honte will come and say we get our ethics from reason oh okay well how about the left are you going to get your ethics from reason well we're going to get our get our ethics from the in a sense the sacred self I talked about that a little bit at the end of my last De La Honte thing so read David Brooks the road to character this the new rise of ethics is the sacred self and this is again where in a sense Stephen Fry is a interesting piece because the ethics of the sacred self is all about feelings and so when the left gets a little too strident about purity all the people who've been kind of moving in into the position of the sacred self they don't like purity too much because the elephant isn't terribly good at purity and so this is where you kind of get limits on the left and this is where the discomfort over political correctness really arises because increasingly the illiberal left increasingly the authoritarian left are annoying the the people who have in a sense the group that has the sacred self going on and that's really where Stephen Fry is so you have the ascendant morality and that's really where this debate is being raised how far will the ascendant morality go and this is Jordan Peterson's question what are the markers between the reasonable left and the radical left now pay attention to those terms too reasonable left why use the word reasonable well because reason is what you trust in reason is in a sense your your path to the supernatural or the sacred now for the for the for the sacred self your path to the sacred is are my feelings are my introspection okay but Peterson wants to distinguish between the radical left and the reasonable left well you can win praise from riders all day long but it's just the rider and so if you look at the picture here of the rider and the elephant the elephant is really big and really strong and really powerful and the rider is really small but now if you're listening the rider makes a lot of noise until the elephant makes a lot of noise and you know when the elephant is talking because the elephant is often not using words and if again you listen to this debate listen to the times that Michael Eric Dyson uses non-verbal audible messaging now pay attention also to the crowd because that's the only thing that the crowd has now there's applause and there's laughter and there's groaning now again the elephant does not use words the rider uses words so sometimes if you want to talk to the elephant listen to the non you know listen to the sounds listen to the tones watch if you're listening to the language if you can say put it out all into text now the riders are talking okay so you can win praise from the riders all day long oh racism is bad oh sexism is sexism is bad patriarchy yeah that doesn't sound good white supremacy yeah that's clearly awful so but what now again the left are running a purifying campaign now again if we look at the left in the history of the left you should think back to the progressive era that happens in the wake of the civil war the abolitionists begin the war the abolitionists begin the war as kind of the radical left over the course of the war the north is in a sense radicalized and they adopt the position of the abolitionists the abolitionists were people like john brown you know the bloody kansas the abolitionists were often highly religious people now the north kind of adopts the posture of the abolitionist and then slavery is abolished by constitutional amendment reconstruction period starts but now progressivism continues and progressivism expresses itself in um the temperance movement i was just driving through i don't remember where i was driving through but i saw a temperance hall now if you think about what's the difference between a church and a temperance hall well a temperance hall is in a sense a church for temperance well what is temperance temperance is a purity movement it's a it's a movement about getting rid of alcohol a little bit of alcohol no getting rid of all alcohol it's a purity movement the left wants to get of get rid of all racism wants to get rid of all sexism wants to get rid of all bias okay well this and again the question of political correctness is a question about purity can we purify and how can we purify and this is part of the reason why purity movements take on the um the tone of a scourge it's strident it's demanding it's church and now again when i play john mcwarter this is going to come up strongly for john mcwarter so okay you got your purity movement but now be careful because don't tick off the elephant because the rider the rider can be powerful to the degree that the rider can guide the elephant but the elephant is only guided to the degree that the elephant allows itself to be guided and there are limits to that now there are private ballots and one of the things again questions about the relationship between peterson and trump now peterson is a canadian peterson did not vote in the american election but peterson has wisely or unwisely talked about if he would have voted who would he have voted for and i think peterson is being honest when he says temperamentally i would probably have voted for hillary or for the democrats because again the canadian political spectrum and the american political spectrum are different the dynamics the canadians have a multi-party parliamentary system it's usually not quite so binary in the american system we have two political parties things become very binary very quickly and the choice that most americans had between democrats and republicans last election very many people were quite unhappy with them because you had two candidates with high unpopularity ratings now in a sense you had two pure candidates hillary in a sense was running a purity mission we're going to break the glass ceiling we're going to continue the movement trump was now trump is all animal this is who he is okay um i was reading purple strategies i forget the guy's name he's an hispanic guy he's on the sunday morning talk shows he wrote a piece in politico not too long ago and and he made the point trump is all animal he is he is all appetite and that is who he is and you can see why he is driving the purifying left absolutely out of their minds because their value is purity in a sense for the left if they could get rid of the elephant completely they'd be happy and in that sense the left is rather gnostic well we're going to see the limits of their gnosticism now the right in a sense the fact that these two candidates one says something about the country and the culture right now the left was continuing on their purity crusade and the right is getting the elephant is getting ticked off more and more and more and jordan peterson about expresses it because he's like you know i probably would vote for a democrat because generally speaking jordan peterson's jordan peterson's politics probably line up more with democrats but looking at this and looking at the purity candidate he might just walk into the booth and say f it vote for trump that's what that's what jordan peterson said the thing is jordan peterson probably only said that once and it will never be forgotten because again all of our watchers are attuned to all of the signals and these are signals that elephants watch so for the ascendant morality for playing this purity game don't tick off the elephant because the ballot box is private and while if you listen to scott alexander before the election he's saying you know i don't know anyone who's fessing up they voted for trump and i know a lot of people who probably voted for trump very few of them really want to admit it now they might admit it to me because i'm their pastor and i you know if they tell me in a certain context i can't tell but that's pretty common a lot of people voted for trump because it was the puritan now again should listen to maryland robinson about puritans because i think we're giving the puritans a hard time but in terms of the cultural in terms of cultural snapshots puritans are purifiers and that's where the left is puritans are animals puritans can be really annoying an animal to a degree i can kind of predict because they're going to follow their appetites and that's exactly what we've seen well i'm not going to get into scott adams in this one but money sex and power these are strong instincts in the animal now peterson talks about hierarchies elephants understand hierarchies perfectly the animal kingdom works hierarchies all the time now in a sense again the left looks at that say ah power but i think peterson is right peterson says no not all power we're human beings we create multiple hierarchies the elephants really only have one the the chimps have one the lobsters have one they've all only got one hierarchy but but even in chimp communities it isn't just about power so you might argue that they have a nuanced hierarchy human beings we have so many hierarchies and we are so attached to nuance nuance so the elephants inside of us are really strong discriminators when it comes to status now we're having a debate in the affluent west most people in the west even many of the poor are not dealing with hunger they might be dealing with you know too many carb poor nutrition but hunger is not the dominant problem the homeless man who used to sleep against my door people would always give him food i would give him food food was more or less a problem of convenience and taste than um than it was staving off his feelings of hunger okay we want to we want to make some of those distinctions the west is affluent not ascetic now this is this is what is in a sense making the job of the leftist puritans more and more difficult because we like money we like status we have big egos we like winning michael eric dyson on that stage strutted his ego now there's again a narrative on the behind this that he was going to say hey i'm big i'm black deal with it i'm i'm articulate i'm smart i've got a phd i lecture in the university i'm on television i i have status in multiple venues nobody's going to put me down okay all these narratives have are are have their contexts and if you say compare michael eric dyson to barack obama i think obama was a far more skillful a far more skilled player why obama was you know obama understood that when you're dealing with elephants you gotta watch the strong card because here's the thing with human beings we have multiple hierarchies which means on one hand you have multiple venues in which you can succeed on the other hand you have multiple vulnerabilities that that could come back to bite you and so michael eric dyson is all aggression and strength he's playing offense but see barack obama understood how to come from below as did dr king now this coming from below is a is a christian coming from below has its roots in christianity pre-christian romans didn't come from below very much christians came from below and and barack obama could play that well listen to barack obama's one of the best speeches he gave that was on race listen to that speech um he knows how to come below and in a sense part of what christianity has perfected is the strength of coming from below i don't need to prove myself why well in christian terms i don't need to prove myself because i play before an audience of one in other words everyone can hate me everyone can kill me my own friends can betray me but i will still be vindicated by the resurrection this is the christian narrative that's a very strong card to play especially in our culture that has been overwhelmingly groomed by christianity and so barack obama played that well michael eric dyson not playing it so well and the fact that he postures himself as a christian preacher he's gonna have some negatives there and he's gonna have some negatives when i am as a preacher listen to him and say okay but who is your real master and what are the qualities of your mat your your real master and what are the teachings of your real master because it was jesus who said you know the greatest among you is the servant of all and it is jesus who on you know the night of the of the last supper strips down and washes his disciples feet and his disciples say peter says no no no i'll never let you wash my feet and jesus says unless you let me wash your feet you'll never be clean and then peter says then wash all of me and jesus is like boy you really are a gland problem your feet's enough peter okay we're this this there's a point here okay get the point let's not be too literal here peter so this is this is what's going on don't tick off the elephant the west likes its affluence we like money we like status we like big egos like we like winning never underestimate the elephant's capacity for envy okay if you play it big people will hate you if you win people won't like you and here's the thing if you're playing the game of winning and losing there are almost always more losers than winners and when those losers gang up the winners lose and then you go back into a period of chaos now let's pay a little bit of attention to the internet because the internet and hypocrisy are funny things one of my favorite videos about human nature is this piece from the atlantic which had the i don't know founder of okay cupid talk about how people are he's like everyone's a little racist yeah that's right the elephant is an animal and a lot of this stuff that is in us from the past is in us and this is a point that peterson has been making this is a point that that brett weinstein has been making that and in fact if you look at the jo rogan peterson weinstein video one of the points weinstein wants to make which is a really important point he says you know the the male female struggle that's now it's a man saying okay that's not probably quite as dangerous as the race struggles because men and women tend to need each other and want each other it's easier to exclude someone on the basis of race or ethnicity than it is on the basis of sex now why am i saying sex and not gender sex and gender are two different things okay and i think we should preserve the distinction between those two words because i think it makes our conversations more high resolution all right so we have an easier time excluding people on the basis of ethnicity on the and and race than on the basis of sex and so people are animals and what this guy says with okay cupid is that women are up until usually around the ages of 40 women tend to be attracted to someone about their own age who are men attracted to men are dogs they're attracted to the 20 somethings they just are and now men have their own things to deal with in terms of in terms of dealing with their elephants but and people are people are a little bit racist and people are a little bit sexist what people are not a little bit of is basically bound to their own desires and bound to their own self-interests and bound to their own survival people are very bound to those things so the sum of the evening the pros ticked off the elephant um the pros only had to expand oh i guess i got my initial number wrong 36 to 64 the pros only had to expand their number a little bit and in fact they lost ground and and the others gained ground and so why even though even though the crowd seemed to be with dyson why did they lose if you finished listening to it not seeing the tally at the end of it it would have been easy to imagine that dyson won so maybe dyson won fry two peterson three goldberg four now a lot of how each of us rate this is dependent upon probably where we stand with respect to it because we are not impartial observers but looking at the audience here's the thing who votes a lot of times it's the elephant especially if it's a secret ballot especially if nobody is looking this is why in the internet you get all kinds of trollish behavior why because elephants and riders elephants are really big and if you let people be anonymous if you let people cover the rider the elephant comes out and especially if the elephant has to um yeah the elephant comes out so now this can be convenient the convenience of the victim narrative the and the the pro could say see my point is proven um and so beatings will continue until morale improves the problem is exactly that if your strategy is that beatings will continue until morale improves you're probably continuing to tick off the elephant and you're probably going to see more of what we saw let's say in the trump election um employ that for further moral scourging now then you have the question well how do you change the elephant well the the left has a problem in fact they probably are facing a limit because there's a limit to the degree that you can change the elephant now if you get into historical religions this is part of the reason that gnosticism and a lot of dualistic now dualism is such a complicated word because which dualism is am i am i talking about material immaterial in terms of greek metaphysics people are elephants and there's a question about to what degree can you really change the elephant now this is in a sense what monks try to do monks devote themselves let's say of their eastern religion to meditation western christian monks um you know meditation communal life together rules accountability that's western monasticism you can change the elephant to a degree but in a sense monasticism itself is an accommodation to the elephant to say the elephant will be with us so then you have the question well platonism when we die we're rid of the elephant and the rider gets to the rider gets to live free without the elephant and travel among the forms christianity has resurrection we have a renewed body now if you get into paul into first corinthians 15 paul calls it a spiritual body now a lot of westerners read that and say ah see it's not material no when paul uses spiritual in that sense he's not saying immaterial he is saying that the body of the new christian will be completely subject to the holy spirit and not subject to the sarx or to the flesh which is what which is in a sense one of the understandings of the elephant the elephant is my base nature so you know there were stories of of george hw bush george w bush's father who's now a very old man in a wheelchair and there were stories about him you know grabbing you know saying inappropriate things to nursing home nurses and you know touching them etc etc here's the thing get back into my cs lewis videos about nature and reason well what you could say about a 90-some year old man whose faculties are increasingly diminished he's more and more subject to nature if he's irritable i mean because in a sense the reason and nature the rider and the elephant are always kind of fighting this battle and reason keeps trying to colonize nature nature keeps having its revenge so the left with a purifying movement there are limits to which the left will accomplish and now in some ways what the left has tried to do is have an exchange and say i will give you sexual liberty but you must stay within these rules well that's not an unusual thing to do because in a sense christianity made a similar exchange by saying you can do you know there are great there there is great there there is great freedom within marriage between a man and a wife sexually but it must stay between the man and the wife sexually and it must stay it must there must be consent so you know they're always doing these kinds of exchanges when you have purifying movements so elephants are trained they're not talked at and this is to a certain degree why the purifying left wants to institute structural changes why because the structural changes so if you look at jonathan height's elephant and the rider there's a third element that often gets pulled in you have the elephant and the rider and you have the path you can change the elephant by changing the path so if we can deal structurally via law to change the landscape maybe we can mitigate the elephant niche of the population and bring in these more pure reforms from the left and that's changing the path it has to work long term though and this is in a sense where peterson comes in peterson in a sense comes in and says i think that there are i think science can inform us to the degree that the elephant will tolerate a path i was recently doing college tours with my youngest son and one one of the thing that's fun to look at at college tours are the footpaths because you have all these nice walkways that the engineers and the architects design and then almost always you'll see a footpath a cut off over the grass and you'll see this nice walkway that nobody's walking on and everyone's on the footpath and this is what happens with elephants the shortest distance between two points you try to move that elephant by changing the path well peterson is saying there's some flex here but you get to a certain point and the elephant snaps back and part of peterson's point is you keep hitting this purity bell at some point the elephant's going to come over like the hulk and smash your bell it's going to do it and now we have the chaos and order conversation that you know is when the order gets too rigid and too tyrannical and too authoritarian chaos comes up and smashes the bell and and this is in a sense why in my next video when i get into who the different characters are stephen fry is loki he really is and and i'll get into that a little bit and and michelle goldberg and michael eric tyson are promoting what's been called blue church and church is the right word i don't think we have a representative of red religion on the stage peterson has a different point what's interesting is that peterson is clearly the enemy now you don't have an enemy unless you feel a threat and what's very interesting is the degree to which peterson is being seen as a threat and he is being responded to as a threat and that's that's of course one of the big issues going up with peterson and that's the framing so next video i'm going to take a look at the four opening remarks by the four different people and then we're going to try to figure out what their religion is you've got blue church you've got loki and you've got peterson so until next time there's the framing