https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=NJ-3FMkfCMY

 Hi, this is Paul and I've got a big video for you today. Last night we had our first ever weekend meetup and this was we, I always hold it at my local church and we had a nice group, not everybody's in the picture, but only those who are willing to have their picture taken to be associated with our our meetup and one of the biggest, one of the big topics we talked about last night among many topics, we always just have a free-flowing conversation and the conversation doesn't lull or get slow at all and we, I try and I call time at two hours and then we'll have folks that'll stay another two hours plus and we'll just, we'll just keep talking, having a great time. One of the things we talked quite a bit about was breadpilling, church history and the enlightenment and part of that was sparked by this this new video that came out. Ben Shapiro interviewing Jordan Peterson and really, I thought a terrific interview. I don't know what Ben Shapiro's goals were for this interview, that part of the problem with interviewing Jordan Peterson is that once he gets going, boy, he gets going and I don't know if he had caffeine or what but he was, he was on and he was sharp and he was, poor, poor Ben was trying to, you know, trying to lead the conversation, but Peterson just kind of breaks out and, and goes where he goes but there was a lot of, I thought, some really good stuff in this interview. I know that one of the things we often talk about are at our meetups are saturation and I know a lot of the long time Jordan Peterson fans, while he's in the middle of his book tour, there's not a lot of new content coming out. He hasn't restarted the biblical series and so a lot of people are just kind of treading water waiting for for Peterson to do something new. Well, there's some not totally new stuff in this interview, but he goes deeper and what seems to be obvious is that he's rereading Maps of Meaning for the the audio version. He's, I think he's continuing to think about the Book of Exodus that surely came through in his Easter, his Easter video and I'm not done with that video yet. That's still in mind. I've, I, part of my process is that I'm trying to keep up with the new stuff without totally letting go of the old stuff because the truth is that with each month I learn more about Peterson. I can better articulate what he's teaching. I can better integrate it into my own ideas. So it's, when I go back to things that I've looked at before, I almost always have new insights because I see Peterson more clearly than I did before. And a lot of what was rolling through my head was the conversation that James Fox Higgins and Jonathan Peugeot had, which I made some comments on in my Saturday video, which was very rambly. So I called that my worst video yet. Kind of tongue in cheek, but it was it was totally rambly. I'll try and stay on track today. But part of what this this prompted and we had some of this discussion in our meetup as well is this question between, you know, the Orthodox Church, the Roman Catholic Church and the Protestant Church and more specifically with respect to Calvinism, which is of course my tradition, but again, which is a very broad tradition and and trying to figure out where Peterson fits into this because I continue to think that Peterson is is making and is going to make a significant contribution and it's happening. We had we had at least three people who would probably say before they started listening to Peterson, they were pretty anti-religious and anti-Christian. And those of those three people, one person is investigating, you know, Orthodox Christianity and Orthodox Christianity is not a small ask. One of the things that Peugeot and and Higgins talked about in their interview was that, you know, you can go into an American evangelical non-denominational Pentecostal church, you can just stroll in and some churches, boy, you can be a member and get baptized next week. The Orthodox Church, not so much. This is a church that has continued to maintain rigorous discipline and rigorous accountability. And if you want to become a member of that church, you're going to have to study for probably at least a year before they're going to baptize you. And now I don't want to get into the intramural business about, you know, baptism, rebaptism. That's a conversation for another day. But a lot of the question is, so then we had last night, you know, if I think everybody in our group kind of understands Peugeot's argument about Peterson's position, but then there's always the game we play. Well, if he would join a church, which would it be? And one of the person says, I got $20 on orthodoxy and I, I don't know. I don't know. I don't know the man personally, but here's the thing. Peterson's contribution is not just a revision, a going back to before the enlightenment. Peterson and the enlightenment are deeply tied. In fact, I think as we're going to see a little bit in this Shapiro video, Peterson sees the enlightenment as a faithful expression of the, you know, I would, I call it God from below through Darwin. And so I don't know if Peterson could live in a pre-enlightenment Orthodox church. You know, Jonathan has, people have asked Jonathan if he's read Jung and Jonathan says I don't read Jung. I just read the church fathers. There's, this is a, this is a really interesting situation right now with the inclusion of the Orthodox church on the North American landscape. And I'm not going to get too deeply into church history today, but I am going to go into church history and a little bit of history of philosophy. Some of this will be review for some of the videos that I've done in the past, but it's, it's often good to review some of this. So let's, let's, let's jump in a little bit more. So would Jordan Peterson fit into Orthodoxy? Peugeot says, boy, you know, here's the thing. Sometimes in my little Christian Reformed church, if I start going too much over an hour, people get antsy. Now, now some of the black folks, there used to be an in church two, three, four hours with lunch and such. When I, when I was a missionary in the Dominican Republic, in the Haitian churches, we'd go two, three, four hours sometimes and then have a meal afterwards. But you know, the, if you're going to be part of the Orthodox church, you are making a serious commitment, a serious commitment of time and energy and learning. And I'm not, I'm in no way trying to tell people not to make that commitment. I would love, I would love everyone to be as committed to Christ as the basic requirements of Orthodoxy expect of its membership. I'm not, don't interpret it what I'm saying in any way against Orthodox liturgy or the Orthodox church. But what I'm saying is that for a lot of Americans to stroll into that kind of religion, on those kinds of demands is not easy. And that's what Jonathan Peugeot talks about in his conversation with with James Fox Higgins. That this is not something you just stroll into. This is not joining your neighborhood non-denom church and say, I love Jesus and whoosh in the water baptism and okay, we'll set you up for tithing. Maybe or maybe not. Maybe come to church twice a month. You know, we're just grateful if you show up at all. I mean, that's kind of the state of most of American Protestantism right now. Not all. There's some, there's some very conservative branches of the reform tradition that are still practicing some of the traditions that were brought over from the old country. And but even in the CRC, which is a fairly, fairly conservative, it's not at the far right end of the CRC, at the reform spectrum. But you know, CRC has been pretty significantly impacted by American evangelicalism. So, I don't know. I don't know. It's a fun game to play. But there's, but, but it's hard. It's important for us to recognize that right now in terms of a lot of the Jordan Peterson stuff, the battle royale is what to do with the enlightenment because the enlightenment gives us modern capitalism and modern science and Western democracy. And, and the, the enlightenment has deeply, has deeply penetrated and impacted, especially the Protestant Church. This has some big, long, complicated history, but there's a deep relationship between the enlightenment and Protestantism. And, and this is part of the reason that the, the science, the, the Bible science conversations in the Roman Catholic Church and the Orthodox Church are different from what they are in Protestant churches. And we're going to go into a little bit of that history and hopefully I can explain, give you some indications of perhaps why this is the way it is. But, and then we get into science and morality. So let's talk first about how the enlightenment split the world. And now it's, it's tempting often to see the Protestant Reformation as this bolt out of the blue. That's not true either. The Protestant Reformation is, I would say, the culmination of pent-in volcanic forces in Northern Europe. And Martin Luther was the explosion that unleashed all of that pent-up energy because they were, there were pre-Reformation figures like Jonathan, like Jan Hus and, and Wycliffe. And, you know, there, there was a lot of this stuff going on before the, the Reformation just kind of split the whole thing open. But yeah, Luther was at the center of it and Luther, along with many, many others, sees a terribly corrupt medieval Roman Catholic Church. Clerical abuse, sale of indulgences, constant warfare between church and state, the buying and selling of ecclesiastical offices, the Pope, you know, enmeshed with all of the politics of everything that's going on. And, and Luther, you know, you know, I don't, I got to be careful when I use the word pietism, but Luther is a very devout monk and he sees all of this as this is not the way the church should be. And, and now this, it's important to recognize that the reforms that were launched in the anti-Reformation often addressed many of the issues that Luther raised. And so you might say in a, in the broadest sense that Luther was successful in, in reforming the Roman Catholic Church in the West, but it was, it was in a sense around the, around the back end, because the Roman Catholic Church, part of them recognized there, there were reform voices within the church that stayed faithful to the church. And so if you just look at the areas of Europe that, that went with the Reformation and those that resisted it, there are so many layers to this. You know, you look at France and Spain, you know, you have these, you have these powerful monarchies. And for example, in France, the battle, the battle happened for a long time in France and England too, but, you know, John Calvin was a French refugee who went down to Switzerland, to the city of Geneva. And, and in then Switzerland, they were able to express their reformed convictions. And remember the reformed movement is a second generation reformation movement. Now, now what's happening in, happening in this is that they are looking for a new foundation upon which to build purity and community. And, and so if you, one of the ways to look at what Luther does is that the fight between Luther and the Catholic Church is a fight over authority. And the Catholic Church in a sense says, we the church are the authority and, you know, apostolic lineage, we are the authority and by that the church gives its authority to scripture. Luther flips that around. Now this is many ways as a product of the, of the, of Renaissance humanism. Europe was discovering new texts. Erasmus, the great Dutch scholar was, you know, he, he puts out this, this, this book where you can compare Greek texts with the, the Vulgate, Jerome's translation of the New Testament into Latin. And so suddenly on the scholarly level, everyone at Europe, in Europe can begin to see some of the ways in which the 16th century reading of Greek differs theologically, sometimes significantly with Jerome's interpretation. And this obviously in terms of an academic scholarly world is going to contribute to discussion. And then the question is, will the church change, will the church change doctrine in order to meet the Greek text? Now that's a really big deal because obviously, as Ross Duthought now with his latest book about Pope Francis and changes in the Roman Catholic Church, can the, to what degree if you, if you house your authority in an institution, whether that's a conciliar movement, the council of, the council of cardinals, or a papal movement invested in the authority of the heir of St. Peter, as the Roman Catholic Church would say, once you invest your authority within an institution, what are the ramifications of that investment? Can the institution change its mind? And currently, of course, there's a big discussion whether the Roman Catholic Church can change its mind with respect to divorce and remarriage. And the Orthodox Church has done things with this. The Protestant Church has long been expected to, in a sense, keep up with the times. And now that has taken, when we get into the modernist, fundamentalist split, that will go in a lot of different directions. Amish are Protestant. No one will accuse them of keeping up with the times. But, and so, deeper beneath this conversation is the question of authority. What is the source of authority? And so, the church, the Roman Catholic Church comes to Luther and says, the authority of the church is based in the institution. It's in the church itself. And Luther says, no, the church's authority is derived from Scripture. And to the degree that the church departs from Scripture, that church loses its authority, and that gives Martin Luther a sense of his own authority to stand against the church and to demand that the church basically explain itself to him and justify itself to him. Now, there's a lot in there. There's individualism in there. There's also what Luther sneaks in there is reason. Okay? Because, in a sense, in authority vested in an institution basically says, trust me and comply. And that's what they told to Luther. And Luther says, convince me that I'm wrong. Now, if you understand it this way, you can begin to see the seeds of modernity. Because we have the seeds of individualism that the church must satisfy the demands of my conscience, me as an individual, and then me as a group of individuals in a church who covenant together, who by way of a confession come together. And so, you see the seeds of individualism. You also see the seeds of reason that says, the church must hit the bar of reason for me. So, when Luther basically at the diet of verms is on trial, Luther demands an explanation. And it's almost a conversation between parent and child. The child says to the parent, I don't believe you. Why should I obey you? And the parent says to the child, because I said so, because I'm your father. Well, again, you see the seeds of modernity in this. Because Luther basically says, no, you can't make me. And then, well, they would have made him if not for the patchwork of civil authorities of their Holy Roman Empire and the political layer that all went through this. So, you know, this is the setting. And so, this is we're beginning to see that the breakup of the medieval order. Now, as you know, I continue my conversation with virtual conversations, sometimes real conversation with Jonathan Pageot. At some point, the Roman Catholics, I read a great comment today that, because the Orthodox are now in the conversation. I read a great comment today from someone in my comments who said, yeah, the Orthodox blame the Roman Catholics for the Enlightenment and for Protestantism. And I think that's exactly right. And so, you kind of hear when you listen to Jonathan a sense of, you know, the Enlightenment was a big mistake. And if we can only get before the Enlightenment, well, then, you know, then we can have faith again. Then we can believe again. Then we can believe again. Then we can be innocent of these troubling questions. Then we can have polysemy interpretations of the Bible. Then, you know, and at some point, I'm hoping to have a conversation with Jonathan and Rachel, and we're going to have a conversation. Well, I don't want to give it away yet, but we're talking about a conversation. And that I'm really, I'm increasingly looking forward to that conversation because here's the question. Could the Enlightenment have been avoided? Should the Enlightenment have been avoided? Would we be better off without modern capitalism, without modern science, without Western democracy? Because there's no unthinking the thoughts of the Enlightenment. And so often when people come to me and they ask me questions about history and the Bible, I often remind them you have to understand that the Bible was written within a particular cultural context and that culture had its own ways of imagining history and truth and authority. And it is, it doesn't do you any good to try to impose your current filters on this ancient text. Now, some of you will say, yeah, but it's inspired. And I'd say, yes, it is inspired. Well, let's talk about what inspiration means and how that impacts how we do theology. And these are the kinds of conversations that theologians and pastors and scholars have all the time. So what happens with Luther is this tradition of reason and conformity. Because one of the things I keep reminding people is that this monarchical vision is employed in service of trying to create community and conformity and agreement. Because here's the thing about human beings, when we're divided, we fight. When we're united, we can do all kinds of things. Read the story of the Tower of Babel. So reason and community, or reason and conformity work hand in hand. And so Luther's basic idea is that the word of God plus reason, now he doesn't, reason kind of gets snuck in here, but that's always how our culture works. We're blind to our culture. It's the water we're swimming in. And so to what degree Luther was conscious of the rise of reason, how it's being employed. Now, I'm not going to assert that reason was never employed. I think if we look back, people are always using reasons when they're trying to make logical arguments. But this is modern reason. And oh boy, this stuff gets so hard. Think about, let's say, even Philippians 2, this lovely Christ song. Every knee will bow, Luther imagines, once he's got God's word and reason. But even so, every knee must bow. And so just, and that's the essence of authority. The church that believes authority rests in her looks at Luther and says bow. And Luther says, no, look at the word of God and reason in terms of my interpretation that I'm giving you, you must bow. And in some ways we have the replay of the Orthodox church excommunicating the Western church and the Western church excommunicating the Orthodox church and who must bow. And right away we have the hope that reason can adjudicate. And if my adversary would only listen to reason, have you ever heard that? Have you ever said that? If you'd only listen to reason, you'd see things my way. Reason itself is, I don't want to say tyranny, but it's almost there. Reason, you must submit to reason. And the frustrating things about human beings is so often we simply don't. We say, you and your reason can go hang. I don't care. I'm going to do what I want. So Luther hopes the church will be reformed according to his vision. And it all goes terribly wrong in some way. The church, even in Luther's time, people, Carlstad that Luther was close to, he and Luther can't agree on things. And so here you have a question. Is this a breakdown of the word of God? Or is this a breakdown of our capacity to do reason? Now, I've been thinking a lot about the story of the Tower of Babel. When God confuses the language, one way we might think about that is that in a sense, God limits their capacity for reason. Think about that. Well, I'm going to have to keep thinking about that. Oops, I accidentally paused. This is where this is going. And so I've used this diagram in my previous videos. So this conflict of the Protestant Reformation breaks out into terrible political bloody wars that they're a mixture of politics and religion. And so at some point people say, we've got to stop this fighting. How can we arrive at certainty? But it's not certainty for certainty's sake. It's community. It's Rodney King's question. Can't we all get along? Well, how are we going to get along? Where we're going to have to agree? Well, how are we going to agree? What can we use to agree? Well, can we use the word of God? Well, that doesn't seem to be working because we're fighting over the Bible. And even Protestants can't agree with one another. So maybe we can try reason. And let's try applying reason to things that are common to all of us. So now we're getting the beginning of, as we talk about the scientific method, we take out time and we take out subjectivity. And we have the beginning of the monarchical vision here, where what we're going to try to do is use reason, which seems to be from above, and empiricism, the data from below. And if we can bring these two things together, maybe then we can all agree. Maybe then, you know, nobody's going to disagree with one plus one equals two. Nobody's going to disagree with H2O equals water. If we can base our world on these foundations, then we will all be in agreement. Well, here's the difficulty. Agreement over what? Because when it comes to one plus one equals two and H2O equals water, that's pretty easy. But when it comes time to how many sacraments? Is God personal or impersonal? Where should the line be between Germany and France? That's not one plus one equals two. Those kinds of claims are enormous magnitudes of complexity greater than what we hope to accomplish. But this is the project, okay? This is the project. So modernity. What begins to happen, I'm just going to pause now and take a drink. Okay, what begins to happen is that this, you remember when Luther challenges the authority of the church, he does so on the basis of the authority of the text. And this tradition lives on in the Protestant Reformation. And Protestants still butt heads with the Roman Catholic Church that the church says, it's the authority of the church in St. Peter's throne and upon this rock I will build my church. And the Protestants come and say, yeah, but you get that from the Bible. It's the authority of the word of God. This is what we stand on. And well, what happens in modernity after all of this war, people are like, I don't know if texts are going to do it for us. And that's why we want to start finding things out from the natural world, okay? And you have this shift, and I went through this in some of Philip Carey's philosophy and religion in the West, the great courses series that I've talked about in previous, my videos. Initially during Luther's time, if someone wanted to study physics, they studied the text of Aristotle because the authority of the ancients was there in the text. And just like the authority of Moses is there in the text. Well, what begins to happen is that they start noticing, and this again is some ways parallel to Jerome versus Greek texts and Erasmus. Well, they start noticing observation from Aristotle isn't quite lining up. And to give Rupert Sheldrake, and I know he's a very controversial figure, Rupert Sheldrake is in that tradition too when he says, hey, those constants keep moving. I thought they're supposed to be constant. What about these laws of physics? They're not looking very law-like, or maybe they're looking a little too human law-like. And that is this physical world we're seeing as fixed and stable as we imagine it to be. Those constants move. You know, quantum physics is a very weird world, and I'm not going to go too deep into that, but one of these days I probably should talk more about that. So here in modernity begins, not only is Luther bringing in reason and individualism, but also what's coming in is this movement to science based on observation. And I'm reading a clockwork universe right now, and it's fun things about the Royal Academy in London, putting all kinds of things in a vacuum tube to see what would happen. Blood transfusions between men and sheep, blood transfusions between crazy people, insane people to see if it would make, just we look back at those things now and we say, my goodness, but this is part of the project of observation. And so, don't tell me what to believe. I'm going to go out and find it out myself by observation out in the world. And you can, again, this is a deep thing that's leading into our world as well. Now, the same implied mechanisms for certainty and community remain in place, however, because we would say, hey, these constants that Newton is describing seem to be holding. And so, Newton is helping to describe the world. And so, if we can kind of build our community on these laws of physics now, again, if you go back to the Jordan Peterson-De La Honte conversation, that's exactly what De La Honte says word for word. It's the laws of physics that we build this on. Well, this is the whole relationship between certainty and community that Jordan Peterson, you're not going to deny me the laws of physics because you can't, because I can prove them to you. This is in a sense, the kind of tyranny of reason that if I show you by reason, you must comply. And if you don't comply, well, what if you don't comply? Well, then you're kicked out of the club of rational human beings, and we will now despise you as being irrational. Well, now we're going to get into conversations, some of which we had last night too, about hierarchy and equality and the tensions between those two axes which run all through human history. So, and you can hear this right now in both Christian apologetics and atheist apologetics. It's the same game. And yes, I did get in my last video confusion being Craig Evans and William Lane Craig. I'm dyslexic. I get a lot of things confused, right? My wife crazy. But when you look at modernist apologetics on both sides, they and the atheist apologetics are doing the same thing. And they're saying, just how many Josh McDowell books, Lee Strobel books, you know, evidence that demands a verdict. This is all the same project. And what is noteworthy, what people very quickly learn is, well, it's kind of interesting looking at all the data and looking at all the facts. And those things do kind of move in my heart, but they don't really solve things. We don't see William Lane Craig and Matt Dillahunty go onto a stage together. And at the end of the night, Matt Dillahunty says, well, you win. It never happens. Yet we keep this language of winning. I mean, it's just like presidential debates. Who won? Well, who'd you ask? And, you know, then it becomes this whole game. And so, you begin to see the, you can begin to see the practical limitations of modernity when it comes to human beings. Because for all of the discussion about facts and reason, well, you just have to keep saying it. Whereas, you know, if I did endless videos, one plus one equals two, two plus two equals three. And there's, you know, two plus two equals three, two plus two equals four. You know, we wouldn't have raging going on in the comments section about, VanderKlay, your two plus two equals four. No, it always equals three. My grandma told me it equals three. You know, my grandfather was a very wise man. And he said it was, you know, it's uninteresting to us. But, and this is where I mentioned in my last video, in a sense, modernity gives way to phenomenology, which is, of course, where Peterson is going. But I want to back up this story a little bit and talk about the physical layer, which is now, now remember, again, Luther says authority can be found in texts. Aristotle, physics meant learning Aristotle. Then the movement towards direct observation. Now, this is obviously observation of the empirical of the physical world. And what happens in science is that you have, you know, Newton measuring things, but you know, physics gets increasingly weird into into the quantum period and look up some time what quantum means. Quantum is in a sense saying the, the electron was here and then it's here and we know it didn't just go this way. We only know it's in these two places. So we're going to assume our ignorance of it and just assume the next state of it. That's quantum, in a sense, and I should, I've got to find that. I've got to find that, that quote for you at some point. But in a sense, so, so what quantum mechanics does is build in what they can't know and go on from there. And this is a lot of what, of a lot of what Einstein did. And, and, but so this journey from this observational world of, of facts and observation and reason, and you must comply and you must believe, you know, that it's not shaking out in terms of meaning and ethics. So in the 17th century, you have someone like Rene Descartes who, you know, God, you know, I, I know, I think therefore I am, so I'm here. But then how do we know the, our ability to trust our observation of the physical world around us? Well, God would not let us be fooled. That's Descartes, that's Descartes way of getting there. Now, most of you would say, you know, that, that can't hold water, but that's the 17th century. Well, what happens in the 18th century? Well, again, read Charles Taylor's long account of this process. It's debated, but, you know, it's, it's part of the conversation. Peterson always brings in Charles Taylor. He's a Canadian, Canadian philosopher. Now, my understanding of Taylor's that he's a Roman Catholic and, and that varies into a lot of the reformed conversations about Charles Taylor, but the 18th century kind of God establishing the laws of physics. Now, now again, pay attention at a little, little rumble in the debate section about what I mean by laws of physics. Well, the reason we call them laws is because just like God gave the law of Moses, God gives us through general revelation, the laws of physics. That's the 17th century. That's why we call them laws, because God decrees them and the never, the never changing God, which, you know, there's some Platonism in there. The never changing God gives never changing laws that we are to obey. And in fact, the rocks obey them and the leaves obey them and the trees obey them and the waters obey them. The world obeys the laws of God and we see that manifest. And so what we do is we learn those laws through direct observation. That's what we learn. Now in the 18th century, God gets a little weaker and thinner. You have providential deism where, where God sets up the laws and, you know, lets it run. It's the, it's the watchmaker. And, you know, so if you're, if you're used to say conservative reformed Christianity, you're used to things that say God upholds the order. You can find that in the Belgian confession. You can find that in the Heideberg catechism. But increasingly people are thinking like, well, you know, is, is God really making sure that every act of gravity is always in compliance with his law? You know, is there a rebellious stray snowflake that's going to float up and God's going to say law breaker and send a lightning bolt through it? I mean, this, they said, no, no, no, God sets up the world to, to, to act this way. And that's where you get in the 18th century, providential deism. And so the, the laws of physics already, the, the laws already begin to shift away from the, the whole meaning of the word law to this kind of impersonal mechanistic clockwork world that was the, you know, the 18th century. Now the 19th century, the skepticism will continue to grow and it will grow with respect to, it will grow with respect to Darwin and origins, because the Bible doesn't seem, the Bible doesn't seem to be telling us the truth about history and physics. Now, now bear in mind when I say history, we're looking at now a newly modern conception of history. History no longer is fat, the authority in history is no longer found in a text. It should be found in evidence. And so we're going to do archaeology to see if the Bible is true. This is a modernist mechanism that we're doing here. Okay. This is a modernist mechanism that we're doing here. Okay. How will I know the Bible is true? Well, I'm going to have to go into the Middle East and I'm going to have to do a lot of digging and I'm going to look for signs that the children of Israel were enslaved in Egypt. And I'm going to be looking at Egyptian cons, you know, inscriptions. I'm going to be looking for the Palace of Solomon. I'm going to be looking for signs that David was a historical figure. And I'm going to be doing this by looking in an observational way. Now, again, this is so completely a part of our culture today. We don't even realize that you can think in other ways. One of the people at the meetup last night mentioned, I think every young person should go live a year in a developing country. And I thought, amen to that. I lived seven. And you will learn a lot living someplace other than the United States about order and chaos and the rule of law and all of this and realize just how special, you know, living in the West is. There's a reason people want to move here because not just California because the weather is great, but because there's rule of law and there's order and, you know, Jordan Peterson's motivation for saying, let's not lose this thing. This is really precious. This is really important. So, but, you know, we don't recognize that history didn't always mean, you know, if I really want to validate something in George Washington, I have to go back and look at documents. So see right there, it's kind of muddled or I have to go back and dig around in Valley Forge and find the ruins of his encampment because in a sense, you know, texts have lost authority, not completely, but they've lost a lot of authority. And we're basing knowledge on direct observation plus reason. That's the modern project for certainty and because of certainty, therefore, community. When we get to the 19th century, things really start to come apart. And now you have the beginnings of the modernist versus the fundamentalist fight within Christianity. Now, to give the modernists their due, they are trying to save Christianity. They are on one hand practicing the modern ways of knowledge, that of empiricism and rationality of facts and laws of nature and all of this. They're practicing all of this and they're saying this pertains to the physical world, but what about ethics? What about the role of women? Should women be allowed to vote? Should women be allowed to divorce their husbands? Should children be made to go out and work? Is it right to enslave people by the color of their skin or by their lineage? What should we do with slavery? And so on one hand, modernity says the laws of physics are governed by general revelation. Special revelation governs ethics and morality. And so if we want to answer the question about what women should do, what slaves should do, if there should be slavery, we should go to the Bible. Now you can read Mark Null's wonderful book on the fight between the two readings of scripture leading up to the Civil War. It's a wonderful study because it in a sense proves the skeptics that your Bible is not sufficient to lead you to living right. And so now we're seeing the seeds of postmodernity in some ways perhaps where we can't count on texts to tell us what to do. And so throughout this history, you see the progression of this, but still in the 19th century, general revelation governs history and physics. Special revelation, God's word tells us how to live, gives us ethics and morality. Now the fundamentalists said, oh boy, you're splitting the world. You're going to lose a lot. You're going to lose Jesus. You're going to lose the second coming. You're going to lose the miracles. And you can already see why this battleground develops as it does. Okay. 20th century, the divide widens progressive liberation movements. So the abolitionists were kind of the crazy left wing and many of them serious, serious Christians. And they were demanding the end of slavery in every form. And the Civil War begins and the abolitionists are not in charge. And what kind of happens during the Civil War is the abolitionists win the day. And the Emancipation Proclamation gives way to constitutional amendments. And the abolitionists take the field, at least in the North, that slavery is no longer thinkable. Well, now we have the beginning of progressivism. Well, what comes on after abolition? Well, the women's movement and the suffrage movement, but also don't forget prohibition. That's part of the same movement, child labor laws, trade busting. You have this whole progressive wave that begins at the end of the Civil War and continues up until World War I and Woodrow Wilson. Now, again, our tastes in the year 2018 are significantly different from the tastes in 1917 or 1918. Woodrow Wilson, who people, he was a progressive and he was imagining the institution of the League of Nations by which wars would be no more. And he you know, Versailles almost destroyed him because he saw the beginnings of what would lead to World War II by the ways that the Allies were treating the Germans and what that would set up in Germany. So, but you have to understand the 19th and early 20th century progressive movement. You can find it on Wikipedia, do your own reading. But this fits into the religious landscape too, of course. And so you have these progressive liberation movements in the 20th century. The Bible goes from describing and this happens, you know, okay, so you've got the despair of World War I and the skepticism that brings, especially in Europe, kind of the downfall of modernity in a sense, in a sense, but not completely. You've got the Depression, you've got the Second World War, you've got the Cold War, and especially in America and the West, the cold, in America, the Cold War keeps the church alive and church attendance numbers reach their peak in the Cold War because politically we need God to help us fight the godless communists because, you know, the existential crisis of World War II becomes the existential crisis of the Cold War, which of course will birth maps of meaning and Jordan Peterson's angst and his search thereafter. But yeah, so you've, oh, I went way ahead. So you've got in the 20th century then, especially after the Cold War, with the rise of the struggle against Islamist fundamentalism, the Bible goes from being a wonderful plan for your life. And as we often joke, you know, the Bible is a wonderful plan for your wife, which is the basis of the fight between the egalitarians and the complementarians within the Protestant churches to God is not good. In other words, in modernity, history and physics were governed by general revelation and the laws of nature. Morality and ethics were governed by special revelation in God's word. Well, that crumbles. And the atheists come along and say, you know, you're this, these ethics you have in the Bible, they, so you can see the progressive liberation movement coming together here and saying, you know, all men are not created equal. Well, where do we get this? All men are created equal. We got that from Thomas Jefferson. Where did Thomas Jefferson get it from? John Locke. Where's that from? The Enlightenment. So now the Bible, which has already in a sense been thrown out by the modernists as a guide to history and physics now gets thrown out by the main line, by much of the main line church, or at least very disabled as, you know, a guide to family life. And well, what's going to replace it? Well, what replaced history and physics? Science is going to replace it. And now you have the rise of psychology. And so now when, for example, you have the same sex marriage debate in the United States, the question of, well, what does the Bible say about it is not, because again, the United States is a secular nation, and we've been tracking the Enlightenment throughout the US is far more a product of that than, you know, and then Europe was initially, because this is the great American experiment. Well, the courts don't ask what does the Bible say about same sex marriage? The courts do ask, is same sex marriage harmful? Well, who would you ask? You would ask psychologists and sociologists. And how would they, how are they supposed to come to a determination based on data? Data how? Data from observation. Look at Jordan Peterson. What is his background? He's doing metrics on personality. And so when, when someone comes and says men and women are exactly the same, Peterson says wrong. They are not exactly the same. Why aren't they exactly the same? Well, they're not exactly the same because they measure differently. Well, this is observational. Okay. So now suddenly the Bible's out, except of course, for the fundamentalists who never gave it up at all. And then that's a spectrum, of course. So you've got fundamentalists that are building your Arc Museum in Tennessee. And then you've got other, you've got the Catholics and the Orthodox who are treating science in a very different way because they didn't pass through this, but this is a big fight within Protestantism. And so you've got the main line and you've got the fundamentalists and you've got all these other denominations in between. And they're all continually working through all of these issues that have been developing over the last 500 years. Okay. So now modernity starts to yield to post-modernity and not only have we lost faith in texts as authorities like Aristotle or the Word of God, now we're losing our faith and our ability to read texts at all. You know, two people come to this text and they read this text in any old different way. And so the text doesn't matter. And of course, Peterson talks quite a bit about this. And so post-modern skepticism basically says, you know, the facts, the facts are all made up ideas by people with agendas and therefore feel free to disregard any of the facts. Now notice what this is going to do to modernity and to science because modernity established, modernity established certainty and therefore hopefully community through a little bit of tyranny of reason. And by that way, we as human beings are supposed to be able to get along and be productive in all of these things. That's the project of modernity. Science is embedded in that. Well, what we're beginning to see is that in post-modernity, you're going to lose science. Well, what do you think about that? Well, I know let's not lose science. I want to keep my cell phone and not lose science. The modernists are saying it ain't going to work because, well, laws of physics. Look how that has migrated through time. So now, you know, Peterson did a, Peterson did a, I didn't, I forget, I should, I didn't pull that up. He did a very interesting talk. He looked so angry and and focused during that talk that he, you know, and he basically said, you know, so, so, so post-modernity takes out all the facts and neo-marxism slips in an agenda underneath. And that agenda is the new ethic of oppressed versus oppressor. And now we're going to have, you know, tribal warfare. And in a minute, I'm going to have Ben Shapiro talking about that. And all of this is in fact to shut us, to set up the Ben Shapiro video, because I think the video needs some setting up. Because if you want to fully appreciate, I think what Ben Shapiro tried to do in that video, and Peterson just went, Peterson's a rocket man, you know, he's been on a status rocket. You put him in a room and, off he goes, you know, try and keep him corralled. It's not, it's not real easy. So what we're going to see now in the Shapiro videos are multiple battles. There's modernity versus post-modernity and neo-marxism. And this is, and this is Jordan Peterson is part of the intellectual dark web. And so what you see in this intellectual dark web are basically people who've been politically liberal, for the most part, not all, who are lining up against post-modern neo-marxism, because they're saying this is a new tyranny that threatens to undermine science. And so you, so, so, I always forget which Weinstein brothers, which, but the Weinstein brothers and Jordan Peterson and Sam Harris, and you mean they're all lining up. Now do you put Scott Adams in that group? I don't know, because again, there's a political dimension to this. But, but all of these people are saying, hey, post-moderns, we're going to lose science. And if we lose science, we're in real trouble. And what's interesting is that in a sense, this is, there's some, there's some strange, there, all of the old alignments are being mixed up right now. And we see this in so many different ways. We're in this period right now where there are these radical realignments in all kinds of ways. And so, and I think that's a very interesting thing, that there are radical realignments in all kinds of ways. And so when Ben Shapiro has Jordan Peterson on his first Sunday morning special, Jordan Peterson is an ally. And, and Jordan Peterson and Ben Shapiro are going to line up and they're going to be part of the intellectual dark web, and they're going to stand up against post-modern neo-marxism that is threatening science and threatening civilization. That is what, part of what is behind this video. But now there's lots of battle lines because the next one is the atheist modernity versus all others. And, you know, when I, I started rereading mere Christianity and Lewis begins mere Christianity with this, rival conceptions of gods. I've been asked to tell you what Christians believe and I'm going to begin by telling you one thing that Christians do not believe. If you are a Christian, you do not have to believe that all the other religions are simply wrong all through. If you are an atheist, you do have to believe that the main point of all the religions of the whole world is simply one huge mistake. If you are a Christian, you are free to think that all of those religions, even the queerest ones, contain at least one, some hint of truth. But when I was an atheist, I had to try to persuade myself that most of the human race have always been wrong about the question that mattered to them most. When I became a Christian, I was able to take a more liberal view. But of course, being a Christian does mean thinking that where Christianity differs from other religions, Christianity is right and they are wrong. As in arithmetic, there is only one right answer to a sum and all other answers are wrong. But some of the wrong answers are much near than being right than the others. Now what is interesting about this is listening to some of the modernist atheists and their anti-Christian things. One of the arguments they almost always pose is you Christians think you have it all right. And here Lewis kind of flips it around and says it is actually you atheists that are pretty much against everyone in the world and you are not winning. And in fact, it increasingly appears that given that the fact that you are facing not only your traditional enemies of religion who haven't bowed a knee to tyrannical reason, now you are facing post-modernity, now you are facing resurgent Islam and Islamic fundamentalism, now you are facing Jordan Peterson. And Jordan Peterson is breadpilling your disciples. And they are not unhappy about it because it is actually a burden if you have to keep being really anti-church because there is a lot of churches around and there is a lot of religious people around and it is not just Christians. We are living in a globalized world. There is all kinds of people. Hating or imagining everyone else is just dumb takes a lot of energy. And so you know, right now I think modernist atheists are really in a pickle and part of it is what again C.S. Lewis pointed out in the 40s. So behind this video between Shapiro and Peterson, there is modernity versus post-modernity. And so Peterson and Shapiro are on the same page here. Jordan Peterson is shaking the anti-religious certainties of atheists and skeptics and their leadership is increasingly displeased with them. So when Jordan Peterson meets with Sam Harris, this is going to be a modernish debate and people are going to be thinking about winners and losers. And one of the people who is a skeptic came to last night and said, you know, the first conversation between Peterson and Sam Harris, I have listened to that a few times and I think that was actually a really good debate because they actually were more productive than they thought they were. But so here on one hand, Jordan Peterson and Sam Harris will align themselves against post-modern neo-Marxist, but at the same time, they are adversaries when it comes to this question of truth. Because Peterson, whose truth was debunked by rationality rules, and Peterson's definition of truth is different from that of Sam Harris, because Sam Harris again is a modernist. There are facts and there are reason and facts and reason to build solutions. Now Peterson will look at this and say, but that's built on a certain degree of certainty of our ability to engage with the natural world. And that leads us to the next interesting battle, which is within this, where you have the pragmatists like Peterson versus the realist objectivists like Harris and Shapiro and many theists. So, and this comes actually at the end of the video with Ben Shapiro, because now remember Descartes, I think therefore I am, and then God fills out my ability to know the rest of the external world, in a sense. That's what Shapiro says in this video. And many theists are not with Jordan Peterson with respect to pragmatism. Now the relationship between pragmatism and modernism is really interesting, especially if you listen to a guy like Scott Adams, because Scott Adams basically assumes a modernist framework and tries to validate it with pragmatism. I know truth when I can predict, so it works. And so if you listen to Scott Adams, he's, you know, I brought him into the conversation earlier, is because he's an interesting mix between the modernists and the pragmatists. And so, you know, there's Scott Adams. But, you know, Shapiro is in some ways a classical theist with his Judaism background. And so he's in a sense, in some senses pre-enlightenment, because God ensures for him this objective realism outside of himself, and God ensures in him his ability to engage in that. Now I can bring up Alvin Plantinga, because Alvin Plantinga is kind of in the same boat there. That God, you know, Alvin Plantinga will look to John Calvin. The census divinitatis helps us to know God, but the presence of God also gives us confidence that we can know an objective world. So again, here in some ways, you've got Peterson, who's breadpilling people on some side, lined up against him, are all of more the classical realists who are imagining an objective world. Their division is between the atheists who are saying, no, we can just do this reason thing, and the theists who are saying, no, God gives us the ability to engage in an objective concrete world. And so these battle lines get very, very interesting. And so all of this just to shut set up his video. Now I think I'm an hour into this, so I'm going to stop here, and I'm going to render this video and probably post it. And the next step is I'm going to dive then into this video and start looking at some of the very interesting moves that Peterson makes. So I guess that makes this part one. Where's my mouse?