https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=Y-AwvSht4MU

 Good morning. Welcome. PVK Q and a BOM. Bridges of meaning thing. Coming to you live from Sacramento, California. I was telling Rick this might be the last Q and a for a little while. Maybe maybe not. I have to look at my schedule. I don't know if I'll do one next week the week after Tyler of the local meetup gets married. So I'm doing his wedding on the 4th and I won't invite you all because it's not my place to do that. Trying to making I'm trying to make sure Rick comes what we really have to do is start a movement to make sure Rick comes to Thunder Bay. That's the I was just telling Rick is that Rick you got to come to Thunder Bay. I don't know. You drive your motorcycle from California to Thunder Bay. You got to drive to Minneapolis and right up right up. You know who wants to who wants to do have a motorcycle trip with Rick from Sacramento to Thunder Bay. I think that would be awesome. Yes, absolutely. Rick Sacramento to Thunder Bay on your motorcycle all the way there. Rick has to get a passport. Rick doesn't like to travel. Which is really wonderful for Living Stones because then Rick is always here now. Let me let me open a browser here. There's there's some lovely Google background and I'm going to go leading church.com someone's come on me from California. We can ignore that summer 2020 PVK live events. So if you go to Paul VanderKlay dot me 2002 0520 slash summer 2020 gosh who wrote this 2020 it's you know, it's like it's like pandemic amnesia. I will correct that and it will say all right. Let's let's go here. Let's go to posts all posts edit someone someone of course is going to come into the comments and say no, it's 2022. There we go. Summer 2022 PVK live events. See if it refreshes here. Through the miracle of the internet. It is fixed can't do that with paper. So upcoming events. We've got a meetup event for June 7 in Chicago this morning. I released a conversation that I had with Sam and Esther otherwise known as Bethel, but she'll always be Esther to me. And so that'll give you a taste of the of the red meat of the politics and religion of the of the scorched earth evangelical warfest that's going to happen in Chicago. Not really, but meet up in Chicago bridges of meaning. They've got an event June 7. They've got another event June 8 and they have special VIP events. I don't know that the big cheddar that Sam is charging to have dinner with little old me, but you know, Sam's got to pay for this trip somehow. Fortunately, the airfares on the Christian Reformed Church synod, which is nice. So there's two events June 7 June 8 and contact Sam if you want in or you have special questions or you need special accommodations or you want exclusive access to whatever good things are happening there. June 17 now the difference between June 8 June 9 through 16 is the Christian Reformed Church synod. So I will be busy with that. I have no idea how many videos I'm going to make while I'm at synod. If things go well, I might give little daily updates about synod. Julian says he really likes denominational inside baseball. If that's the case, that series of videos will be for him. If something tragic happens, like I get elected to some high office and I have zero time, then you might not get anything. Or if I know too much and can't talk publicly, you might not get anything. So June 17 it all starts up again. That's the morning after synod. I will have one major synod hangover, but the Vendonk will be in Grand Rapids at that point and we will be having a church leaders estuary meeting and that particular event is targeting church leaders. You don't have to be Christian Reformed Church leaders. You can be church leaders from any denomination. You don't have to be a pastor. You just have to feel yourself a leader of a church or a leader in the church in general. Even even Luke Thompson would be welcome in an event like that because Luke, however, he categorizes himself certainly as someone who loves talking about church and leadership and all of those things. So yeah, I just can't get you off my mind Luke, you know, it's just it's just a thing. So June 17, there's a link. All of these again are on my blog, paulbandoclay.me and you can find links to all of that. I don't know how many I don't know how many randos conversations I'm going to be able to have this summer. So if you're one of these people that writes me and says I check the link every day. First of all, don't check it every day because I usually only free up slots on Monday afternoon or Tuesday morning. So just check it at the beginning of the week. Number two, Gavin, who's an exile from the bridges of meaning discord server wrote me and told me he he hacked my Calendly system so that he will get notifications every time new spaces come. He promised not to abuse it. So, you know, if you really want to up your game, you might find Gavin, but I don't know how many how much time I'm going to have this summer because of this crazy travel schedule that we have here. I cast dispersions on Jordan Peterson and I'm doing the same thing. What a hypocrite am I? So June 17 estuary church leader breakfast and that's breakfast is on the donor that Vendonk lined up. We might ask for pass the hat to help Vendonk and I pay for the room because we had to rent the room from the print center, but it's a beautiful space. There's lots of parking and we're going to have four hours of little bit of presentation first eating because you got to eat and then some presentation. I'll tell my story and most of you know a lot of that but don't will tell his story. Then we're going to facilitate a conversation about church leaders about estuary plus and minus pros and cons how to host one what the idea behind test your estuary is the whole thing. So that's the morning after Senate intentionally hopefully to grab some CRC ministers who maybe aren't leaving town right away too many of them do leave town right away because their churches want them to preach again on Sunday and I can't imagine what kind of lame sermons those preachers are going to preach the Sunday after they've spent all week at Senate any church that makes their preacher preach after Senate is not using their heads. Okay, and there's also a nice little write-up on the CRC network about that. We've we've gotten a degree of participation and even a limited degree of endorsement from our denomination for this which is awesome. So and there's there's some there's some real excitement by it from some of our denominational leadership about estuary and the possibilities of it and you know, they're interested engaging in the conversation. So that's that's that's really wonderful. Now for those of you who don't like church or don't consider yourself a church leader, but are in the West Michigan area and want to want to participate in something and you don't want to pay, you know, the heavy heavy cash that Sam is going to charge for for PVK access June 18 the West Michigan estuary is meeting and I think that's a free event. We'll see what Bernie does with it, but that will be also in a church in I think Details are on the beat up.com listing of that link is in there. August 2022. There's the bridges of meaning festival in Germany, which burn power and I will be at which we are really looking forward to before that. There'll be some sort of public event in the Netherlands and our Dutch estuary peeps are really active and lining up things to to have me be on and fill my time and space in the Netherlands and I'm going to see Friesland the place where my ancestors came from which I'm looking forward to they're a little concerned because nobody speaks the language because the Fries, you know, they don't want to they don't want to touch. They don't want to talk touch like the preachers and the lawyers. I've told that land. I've told that story before. We are working hard to line up my schedule in the UK. There's a cluster of pastors and churches south of London that are talking together about how to organize something there. Mark Connolly from more Christ from the more Christ Channel is working hard to get me up to Belfast to organize something up there and John Van Donk and I really want to get up there and work on that. There's a bunch of things I want to see David. I want to see David Fuller. I want to meet with some other individuals that I know. So we've got about eight days eight nine days in the UK that we're trying to schedule out. So if you're in the UK contact me on Twitter or send me an email if you figured out my email address. My email address is real hard to figure out if you look at what the name of the channel is just a little you know little clue there. So so that's so the European tour will be from August 22 until September 8. And so we land in Amsterdam. We do some things in the Netherlands. We get to Germany where we do we participate in the festival from there. We're going to try and we're going to take a train hopefully from from Germany to Switzerland. I'm going to see Geneva home of Calvinism and might even spend a couple days up at Le Brie with Burn Power and talk about because Burn Power has contacts at Le Brie and John Van Donk went there in the 70s just like all those old hippies did. I of course was way too young for that. And from there we're going to travel by train again to Paris and we're going to have sort of a whirlwind little tour in Paris and then by train we're heading from Paris to London. And again our London UK schedule is all none of its determined yet. So if you have input and you have ideas our priority is going to be people who can pull together things so to really you know make the most of our time there. And then if that doesn't exhaust me and lay me in the grave then we've got I think one of the you know a super exciting event coming up which will be the Thunder Bay Gathering. And those of you on the Discord server of course know Catherine Catherine is putting that together if you have questions about that you can talk to Catherine. You know some people are complaining that Thunder Bay is hard to get to. I think in some ways that makes it even more fun because they've got room for about 280 people. I think those tickets are going to go fast. So this is the first time that Jonathan Peugeot and John Verveke and I will will meet and I think this is going to be an event to remember. So Rick should definitely go. Rick's got to get working on his passport now so that he's ready to go in September because passports take a little while. And if you don't have your ticket to Thunder Bay now you can fly there from Toronto. You can fly there from Vancouver. You can drive up from Minneapolis. And if I didn't have to if I didn't have to fly I might be tempted to you know drive up there because you know northern Minnesota the environs around Lake Superior. That's just beautiful country. So and then when we get there we're going to have airsoft which I don't exactly know what it is. It sounds like we're going to shoot each other with pellet guns or something like that. That sounds painful. But you know hopefully there won't be any serious injuries. Rumor is is that but that Peugeot and Verveke are also going to participate. Catherine asked me if I wanted to do that. I said absolutely yes. I would not be a fan of Grim Grizz if I said no to such a thing. So this is you know this is the closest thing to the instantiation of paintball for Jesus we have yet. So I don't know if Grim Grizz needs to get a vaccination before it can cross the border. You know I'll just have to leave that up to Grim Grizz but this will be a gathering not to forget. And they're emphasizing you know conversation and contact. So you know I do a book signing if I'd ever write a book. So in lieu of that let's just sit down and have a conversation. So all of those are the events that are coming up. I'm going to have to turn my fan on here and take a drink of water. Let me take a peek back into the discord. Did I scare Luke away. I did I scared Luke away with what I had to say. Go ahead Chad you unmuted. Sorry I didn't mean to. I'm just working quit bothering me Paul crying out loud. I'm just kidding. So anybody have anything else they want to say about the the coming events. All right let's dive into the questions. Pray for my foot and back asked is it a virtue to see Christ in the entire Bible. Not sure that virtue is the right word in the question. Virtues are much more much broader things. Now it's it's it's very much true that after the resurrection Jesus showed how the Bible spoke about him. The Gospel of Luke says that and I think it's a function of being a Christian that not only do you see Jesus in the entire Bible but you see Jesus in your entire life. So if it's a virtue it's a Christian virtue. But I it's a that in many ways. Many religions are in some ways overlays upon other books and the New Testament one way to understand the New Testament is it sees itself as an interpretive key of what Christians call the Old Testament. Obviously rabbinic Jews disagree Muslims disagree. They see the Quran and the teachings of Islam and the traditions of Muhammad as being interpretive keys onto the Old and New Testament. The Book of Mormon and the Latter-day Saints Church sees their writings as interpretive keys upon the Old and New Testament. In some ways, you know, I keep trying to prod my denomination into confessional conversations. This has been happening long before I ever got on YouTube because in some ways Protestant confessions are attempts to be interpretive keys upon the Bible even though in sort of a circular way the confessions themselves are supposed to be answerable to the Bible. So there's a lot of using let's say today we would talk about frames using Jesus as a frame through which to read the Hebrew scriptures. Now someone might say well, that's a that's a terrible thing because then you're using a frame. But I would argue that we always have to use frames to do the relevance realization because you can't simply absorb even a text as limited as the Hebrew scriptures all in and of themselves. There are various implicit interpretive keys and frames through which we read everything. And this is, you know, all the cognitive science and the verveky stuff. That's that's a big part of this little corner of the internet. Is it a sin to imagine Jesus in the Song of Solomon? I don't think so. It depends on how you're imagining him there. The church has had all you know, there's pre-Protestant readings have had allegorical interpretations of many things and they see Jesus all over the place in various ways. When Jesus in the book of Revelation talks about the church as the bride of Christ, you know, people found it quite easy then to hop back to a book like Song of Solomon or Song of Songs and find Jesus in the book and find his church in the book. And it was it's a fairly standard Protestant thing to say, oh, Song of Songs is a love song between Christ and his church. Now, I know a lot of Jews would bristle at such an interpretive move, but that was that has not been an uncommon move in Protestant theology. And I would imagine there's you can find people in Orthodoxy and Roman Catholicism that have done so as well. So hope that helps. Jack Harris asks, hey Paul, I recently visited John 7 14 to 24. All right, you recently visited it, but I haven't so now I got to pull it up. John 7 that's after John 6. And I just try to see if I can remember the passage in my mind. It's a lot better if I just open it up. All right, here's my Logos Bible software. Close all the windows. John 7 14. I'll open passage study layout. Bada bing bada boom. Let's put this commentary over here. We don't want that in the way. But the middle of the festival Jesus went up into the temple. Okay, this is this is after Jesus brothers are saying and just just a little guide here. These these these paragraph headings in your Bible. You know the the editors are trying to help but it's not really part of the Bible. Just keep that in mind. After this, this is part of what's difficult about reading the Gospel of John. You start reading it in the middle and before you know it, you're reading the whole thing. After this Jesus went about and Galilee did not wish to go about in Judea because the Jews were looking for an opportunity to kill him. I kind of like David Bentley Hart's application of I know it's it's very hip with modern scholars because if you translate it the Jews it gets so freighted with all kinds of really difficult European history. So let's say you did not wish to go about in Judea because the Judeans were looking for an important opportunity to kill him. Now the Jewish festival of booths was near so his brothers said to him leave here and go to Judea so that your disciples may see the works you are doing. It's interesting that the editors of the NRSV saw this as the unbelief of Jesus brothers. I think you can read this in a variety of different ways. For no one who wants to be widely known, no one who wants to be widely known acts in secret. If you do these things, show yourself to the world for not even his brothers believed him. Well, there we go. So PBK proved wrong by facts, logic and the words of the Bible. Jesus said to them, my time has not yet come, but your time is always here. The world cannot hate you, but it hates me because I testify against it that its works are evil. Who says Jesus isn't a Calvinist? Go to the festival yourselves. I am not going to this festival for my time has not yet fully come. After saying this, he remained in the Galilee. But after his brothers had gone to the festival, then he also went not publicly, but as it were in secret. The Jews were looking for the Judeans were looking for him at the festival saying, where is he? And there was considerable complaining about him among the crowds. That's interesting. While some were saying he's a good man, others were saying, no, he's deceiving the crowds. Yet no one would speak openly about him for fear of the Judeans, really of the Judean leaders. About the middle of the festival, Jesus went up into the temple and began to teach. The Judeans were astonished at it saying, how does this man have such learning? When he has never been taught. Then Jesus answered them, my teacher, I am a Christian. My teaching is not mine, but his who sent me. Anyone who resolves to do the will of God will know whether the teaching is from God or whether I am speaking on my own. Those who speak on their own seek their own glory. But the one who seeks the glory of him who sent him is true. And there is nothing false in him. See how far does he want me to go with this. Through 24. Okay, a little bit more. Did not Moses give you the law? Yet none of you keeps the law. Why are you looking for an opportunity to kill me? The crowd answered, you have a demon. Who is trying to kill you? Throughout the story, it's been, yeah, they've been trying to kill him. Sometimes crown him, sometimes kill him. Jesus answered them, I perform one work and all of you are astonished. Moses gave you circumcision. It is of course not from Moses, but from the patriarchs. And you circumcise a man on the Sabbath. If a man receives circumcision on the Sabbath in order that the law of Moses may not be broken, you are angry with me because I healed a man's whole body on the Sabbath. Do not judge by appearances, but judge with right judgment. Okay, there's the text. In this passage, is it fair to say that this is also a pattern that academia and technocrats are creating? And what are you currently following? So I started out talking about frames. One of the things that we absorb from each other are our frames. We do this so pervasively, we do this so implicitly that we don't even notice we were doing it. In fact, in some ways, as a community of people, we didn't even notice it until we tried to make robots like us and computers in our image. And suddenly we realized, John Vervecki just had a really excellent video. Mark pointed it out to me on Twitter. Vervecki sort of very nice and succinctly laid out the frame problem of relevance realization. Getting computers to see. A lot of us can quite easily distinguish between a fake tree and a real tree. And what do we mean by fake and real? Gosh, this stuff is just all over the place. We have enormously subtle and powerful abilities to recognize patterns to the degree that all those little capture things point out all of the pictures that have traffic lights, if you want to answer a question on a website or something. And it's like, you know, we're going to have to do a lot of that. And sometimes those pictures can be kind of hard. And so you just kind of pick out all of them and you look at is that traffic light really in it? Because there's a little portion of it. We're astoundingly good at pattern recognition. When you talk about things such as autism, autistic people can be super brilliant, very high IQs. But there's a certain function that they struggle to possess, such as reading faces and mind reading others. I mean, we are astoundingly nuanced creatures. And we don't even know that we're that powerful and nuanced because we do it so automatically. And again, in this recent video, for Vicky, just in a really great way, just sort of lays that out. So all of that is formation. All right. What we do with education now in a modernist way, we think that education is sort of building a stairway to heaven. And education is always within a religious ideology. Or a religious framework or religious worldview built on presuppositions of that worldview. And those presuppositions act as frames. So part of why the crowd is astonished is that Jesus has power. Jesus has power. And so we have to be very careful about that. And so we have to be very careful about that. And so we have to be very careful about that. And what I find that is astonishing is that Jesus has power. Jesus clearly has incredible, mimetic power because his words as conveyed through these four gospels continue to transform the world. And he had miraculous power. He had all of these things. And we tend to associate these kinds of things with the structures of the powers that be. And Jesus seemed to come to them out of heaven. That's in fact part of the point of the Gospel of John. Jesus is the man who comes from above. And he tells Nicodemus in chapter three, you must be born from above. And so again in that excellent video by Vervecky, you have emergence and you have emanation. And watch as our little corner of the internet continues to colonize more and more of the internet. Watch as Peugeot and Brett Weinstein talk as more and more you'll notice that all the scientists are about emergence. And more and more we're going to talk about emanation. If you go for example to YouTube, I'm making Rick work today, Vander Clips. You go to the Vander Clips channel. I posted two videos this morning from Karen Wong's conversation with Wolfgang Smith. Fascinating conversation. So I posted two clips on the Vander Clip channel. I posted one clip on Twitter. And what Wolfgang Smith is talking about is vertical causality. And that's coming at a lot of what Peugeot and Vervecky have been talking about from a very different angle. And so in many ways what's happening here in John 7 is, hey Rick did we lose my picture? There I am. In many ways what we see in John 7 is vertical causality. This is Jesus coming from above. And his teaching is from above. Now Jesus is claiming something really audacious here. Again this gets to my point that I often make that people are like, well I think Jesus was a great spiritual teacher. All of those stories about his miracles are legendary additions to who Jesus really was. Because of course miracles don't happen and so they never happened back then. Oh, because you've never seen an albino gorilla they don't exist. I understand. So Jesus, the kinds of claims Jesus makes in the Gospel, C.S. Lewis pointed this out, are simply audacious. And in the Gospel of John they're far less subtle than they are in the synoptic Gospels. Now in some ways what Jesus is claiming is analogous. It's a higher claim but it's analogous to Moses going up the mountain and receiving the law from God. And receiving tablets of stone that God had made for him and bringing it down the mountain. Again, thanks to Jonathan Pujol, I've got far more sensitivity in terms of these narrative symbolic elements that are sort of cross-cultural and over different language domains as well. So Jesus is claiming that his teachings are direct revelation from God. And that's what Christianity asserts. These are high claims. And when people say, I don't believe Jesus did miracles, okay. What do you think about a claim like this? That's an audacious claim. Now what that means is that if you want to sort of demythologize Jesus and make him, I just had, so I've been wanting to get my friend Raj onto the channel at some point. He sent me an email again because we had some more time and then I didn't pick it up, which is a shame. So my friend Raj is a Sikh and he comes to the local meetup. He's also very high in openness and he listens to my channel quite diligently. And so what we often do when he stops by my office is we have conversations about similarities that he sees between his exploration of the Sikh religion and Christianity. And so what he and I often do is we compare notes. So by virtue of my conversations with him, I'm a little bit more careful about how I use the word guru because for the Sikhs, a guru is a very big deal. I think Sikhs see that word is quite a bit higher than say Americans see that word. I mean around Living Stones, Rick is a networking guru. I mean I sit down and try and do things. Rick's making me laugh. I sit down and try and do things and Rick's like, oh, let me do it. Click, click, click, click, click, click, click, click, and boom, it works. And in some ways, that's what Jesus is doing. And of course, people see that and like, wow. And so you can be skeptical about what Jesus did, but you're also going to have to be skeptical about what Jesus said. And that's going to begin to undermine your appreciation of what Jesus taught. And that's sort of the basis for CS Lewis's famous trilemma. So this pattern of in-group in-house thinking, we shouldn't just point at the academy or technocrats. Religious communities like Christian communities get guilty of exactly the same thing. And it's a function of the fact that again, we are limited creatures. And so in our little short lifetimes, we only have time to really drill down and learn other things. By the way, this is a gift from one of the viewers and thought, oh, I'm going to learn how to do that. And thought, I have the perfect plushie for Peugeot. So here we have Jordan, here we have Sam. Over here in the corner, we have our monkey, that's Joe Rogan. And now we have our little Jonathan Peugeot in the form of, what was his name? Bob Ross. So thank you for the little plushie gift of, a lot of people have had ideas of who Peugeot should be, but this person put their money where their mouth was and sent it to me. So there he is up on the shelf, a little bit more curly hair than Peugeot, but here we have it. So that kind, you know, when I talk about the fact that hierarchies bind and blind, this is part of it. If you're going to spend all of your time studying, let's say, Dutch Calvinism, that's a wonderful thing. I mean, you can learn boving, you can learn kiper, you can learn, there's all these Dutch theologians that I won't mention right now because most of you won't care. And you can learn a ton of things through that and you can become an expert in that. But you might not have time to learn cognitive science or Peugeotian symbolism or Jordan Peterson types of ideas or all the other kinds of things we talk about. It's just a function of our limitedness and Jesus sort of comes through and breaks that open. So that's, that's what's going on there. Anybody in the room want to say something? I got to take a drink. I'm thirsty. It's getting hot in Sacramento. The fact that there are plushes of Peugeot is awesome. Also something. Yeah, go ahead. I just wanted to say something. That's all. Oh, thank you, Chad. Thank you, Chad. Thank you, Chad. All right. Hi, Paul. I was hoping you could give me some advice on what I should do. I'm a new Christian. I've grown up never meeting any Christians that I was aware of and not knowing much about it, but have discovered it recently and have been listening to people such as yourself and reading the Bible. But currently I'm unable to attend any churches until I have my full driver's license. Since I live in a remote area, in the meantime, I should be reading the Bible and listening to commentaries about Christianity while I'm not in church. Or should I wait until I'm in church before doing so? Thanks. You're a really cool guy. Well, thank you, Mystic. I wouldn't say, oh gosh, this is so hard. Listen to my channel and only my channel. No, I'll do that. I'm kidding. I know. I think it's absolutely a good thing to look around for Christians that you find helpful. When you are finally able to begin to connect to a church and you might have to look around and find a church that really fits you or a pastor you connect with, you'll find things begin to get very specific. And you might have an instinctive reaction that, well, I listened to Pastor Paul online and you're not like Pastor Paul. And that's okay because we're not all the same. One thing you actually could do is if you go to Google Maps because you clearly have an internet connection. If you go to Google Maps, you can start church shopping now. One of the good things about COVID was that a lot of churches started putting their things online. My recommendation isn't necessarily find a megachurch. Now, my critique of megachurches isn't as broad and sweeping and negative as a lot of other people's. I think megachurches actually are playing a very important role in the church in America right now. And you can read James Wellman's excellent book on that or look at my conversation. I should have another conversation with Tripp and James. That was an awesome conversation. But right now you can via the internet go and begin to explore the websites of churches that you might want to visit. And here's something. See if you can get some of those pastors to either answer phone calls or return your emails. That's a little tough and it's gotten a lot tougher for me. But back in the day before the internet, I was very easy to get a hold of and I was very easy to get time with. You know, this is part of the injustice of all of this. And I remember when I first started doing randos conversations, Jess just kept coming in for slots. And Jess is like, there's going to come a day when I can't get at you as easily. So I'm going to get all my things in now. And so, you know, blessed are you who found Jordan Peterson before 2016. Blessed are you who found PVK before 2018. Rick was smart. Rick listened to a video and it got right down to living stones, got right in the front of the line. So, you know, Rick's a pretty smart dude. You got to know that about Rick. So anyway, I would start going to websites of churches that you might be able to visit once you get your driver's license. And I would, and almost all of those church websites have about links or staff links. And almost all of them will have either little fill in the blank message things or email addresses for some of the staff. See if you can strike up conversations and start building relationships with the staff even before you visit. And again, it'll be easier to do that with smaller churches. Smaller churches are more desperate, more hungry. And whereas, you know, they might be small for a reason in that maybe the preaching is boring and maybe the music is crappy and maybe the church is just filled with all sorts of idiosyncrasies that make it sort of difficult to get into. But every family is like that. Every family is difficult to get into. And now again, you might not be, they, none of these, you know, you might, they're much more difficult to get into. You might, there might only be one church that you look at and say, wow, these people really fit me. They get me. I get them. I can be part of their family. But all you need is one. And so I'd start, I'd start writing these churches and checking out their sermons. And, and, you know, the, the big churches will have very particularly crafted mega church sermons and great lighting. And great music and, and you'll never get a chance to meet the pastor. Smaller churches will have struggling music and sermons that hit and miss. And, but one of those might become a family you can really become a part of. And if you manage to get into a church at that level and it's a healthy family and a healthy church, then suddenly its small size is a, is a benefit and not a liability. You know, I, there are some people who grew up in families of, of eight, 10, 12, 15, 16, 18 children. That's kind of big for a family. Most people want to grow up in a family that has like three to six children. It's sort of the right size because you get enough of a sense of sibling hood. But yet you're always special because you're one of a small group. So I would, I wouldn't turn off YouTube. Of course you can subscribe to Living Stone's Christian Reformed Church Sacramento and get my Sunday sermons and Sunday school class. By the way, next, this coming Sunday is different. We're having a joint service with our other church. So there's no Sunday school and that service will look a lot different because it'll be a big group. It'll be a lot different because it'll be much more city life rather than Living Stone's. But, but yeah, use, use the pandemic and what it did to churches and go ahead online and especially focus on churches that are within driving distance that you might like to visit. Because when you walk into a church on a Sunday morning, so much of what you see is just projection of your needs and your interests and your filters and your biases onto that church. It's, it's not unlike falling in love. You know, when you psychologists have these ideas about, you know, you what you do when you go out there looking for a spouse is you've got all of these unresolved issues and your parents marriage and with your relationship with your parents. And then you, you see somebody that's that, you know, fits all those holes and it's like bang. And what you do is you project everything you want to see on them. That's why we say, you know, we talk about rose colored glasses. And then of course, after you've been married a few years, reality begins to emerge from the projection and oh, oh, this is, this is who I married. And then the task of marriage is to learn to love and to actually address those things that you came to the relationship with and to eventually craft a life giving, meaningful, intimate relationship with that other person. So, and that's similar to what happens with churches. So you can for you can front load the process by just start, just start emailing staff in these churches and see who responds. And like again, a lot of small churches will be, someone's interested in us. Someone, someone might, some new person might actually walk through the door. See what people don't realize is that all of these little churches out there are sort of like wall flowers at the prom. Nobody's ever asked them to dance. Nobody's ever brought them a corsage. Nobody wants them. You show up in one of these little churches if they have any degree of health at all. Now, again, some of these little churches are, some of these little churches are probably tremendously dysfunctional and you'll probably figure that out soon and then you leave. Every church has some degree of dysfunction. So don't let any dysfunction drive you away. But most of these little churches are just desperate for some attention from someone outside them. And now that doesn't mean that they necessarily will be able to sort of get into the inner rings and the inner circles. That'll take time and persistence. But a lot of these little churches would probably love to talk to you and love to answer your questions and build a relationship with you and, you know, maybe even be able to meet some needs that you have. And so that's why I recommend people start looking at little churches and yeah, the music might not be top shelf. Yeah, the preaching might not be top shelf. Yeah, there probably aren't a lot of programs going on, but there are some wonderful pastors. Remember before I was had whatever I've become now on my little internet channel, I was an obscure pastor of an obscure dying church and everyone who came in the door. If you come in the door once, it's like, oh, okay, they're not going to come back again because people visit once and they never come back again. Then they come two Sundays in a row and people are like, there's a chance. Then you come three Sundays in a row and people are like, oh my goodness, I might get a date to the prom. And then if you keep coming, very, you know, at some point you're going to be part of the family and that's really what you want. So that's the beauty of small churches and their desperation. And yeah, you'll have to tolerate some stuff, but the real things that you want from church, I mean, especially right now, you can get great preaching on the internet. You can get great music on the internet. Why do you need a local church to give you great preaching and great music? You need the local church to give you the sacraments. You can't get that on the internet. And you need the local church to give you in real life community. It's really hard to get that on the internet. So there's my recommendation for you. Oh, Ethan, Ethan, Ethan has been for the last two weeks. Ethan has been driving from Reno to Sacramento to help with the great fence project. And this is a wonderful thing. Because yeah, there it is. That's a live view of the fence. And some we're going to see somebody having their dog do a number on our the dogs looking, the dogs looking, but that dogs like, I want to go in there and see the fence. Oh, what happened? Oh, Rick, Rick, Rick, this is your time to shine. Oh, you should show them what the camera can do. Oh, one of our things blew over. See, we got our. See, we got our. There it is. There's the Living Stones parking lot. There's Rick's truck. There's my car. Don't show my license plate. Rick, I'll have all kinds of people following me in Sacramento. If Rick could probably find Billy and Gerard way there in the back, they're probably still rummaging around back there. There's the smart and final. Yeah, this camera, this camera's got some skills, boy. Yeah, Billy threw Billy's been throwing cardboard boxes over. I think he wants to sort of construct himself a home back there. But it might have. No, there's. There's Billy. There's Billy. Gerard's usually over there to the right. Billy's probably wondering. Oh, no, Billy's got a visitor. Oh, yeah, I won't. I won't come in. I won't come in. Oh, yeah, I won't. I won't tell you what Daniel calls her, but she's around. She's quite nice. Gerard's usually over to the right now. It looks like he. There's a little bit more. I think Gerard got up and took off. So yeah, that's this is these are the people in your neighborhood in your neighborhood in your neighborhood. Well, these are the people in your neighborhood when you're walking down the street each day. There's your Sesame Street moment. So anyway, back to Ethan. So he's been driving in from Reno and helping us with the fence, which is really great because, you know, I'm almost 60 and the old body doesn't work like it does. We've got Gerard. He's young, but he's Gerard's increasingly becoming a desk guy. Rick is a desk guy. Roger, our 72 year old, is out there, you know, doing all this heavy labor. Scott comes in, but Scott's a little older than me. And so we got all our old decrepit bodies working cement and doing all this. And Ethan comes down with his young self and he's got tools in the back and boy, he's been a godsend. But he asks this because Saturday is usually my day off. And if we're going to do something with volunteers, Saturday is the day to do it. So tomorrow is the last day of the great fence project. And we're going to be putting on the gates. And I don't know what poor Billy's going to do. Once we have gates on, I think it's going to make, we'll see what happens with Billy and Gerard. I think they're basically going to discover that that little corner is a bit too much of a pain. And then they'll probably find another little corner. But yeah, so thank you, Ethan. It's surely been awesome having you work with us. And it's, yeah, we've, you know, we've had some people from the Anglican Church. We've had, we had a volunteer from City Life, our daughter church that meets in our facility. We've had bridges of, we've had local Sacramento estuary meet up people there. Joey's been there. Tyler's been there. We've had a lot of people from the Anglican Church. Local Sacramento estuary meet up people there. Joey's been there. Tyler's been there. So bit by bit we've, we're getting it done. There's a guy from the CRC denomination who contacted me. He's one of these advancement people. He contacted me. And you know, when you get a call from the advancement people, it means they're looking to raise funds. And it's like, if you're looking to raise funds from Living Stones, you're probably in the wrong place. Go further down south there to Reno where there's a Reno, but down to Ripon where there's some deep pockets. But I said, but he's like, oh, I know. I really want to meet with you, pastor. I said, okay. He said, how about Saturday the 21st? I said, that's a great day to meet with me. Don't wear nice clothes. So I told him to meet me tomorrow and I told him to not wear nice clothes because it's a church workday. He says, I'll be willing to work. I thought, okay. So I'll get to meet the advancement guy tomorrow and have him paint or whatnot. So tomorrow, last day, you two can participate in the Great Fence Project because after that, Roger is going to Africa. He's got a daughter who's a missionary there, and he's going to be spending some weeks there. So what we don't get done tomorrow, Rick and Jared are probably going to have to keep futzing away on and then later in the summer, we'll have to continue working on all this stuff. Yep, that's it. So I'm hoping to get a day off soon, but it's going to be a very busy summer. Okay, Lindsay. Hi, Paul. I used to be uneasy calling myself a Christian because I was afraid it reflected poorly on me to the world, but the Lord has been working on me. Now I'm uneasy calling myself a Christian because I'm afraid I reflect poorly on Christ. Good for you, Lindsay. Good for you. Good for you. Good for you. Those two sentences just brought joy to my heart. I know what an old sinner I am, and I know my sins are forgiven, but I also know the world is not so generous. Do you have any advice? It sounds to me, Lindsay, like you are doing great. Yeah, you're a follower of Jesus Christ. And now there's this old story that Tim Keller used to tell of, oh, what's the English? Oh, I've got some of his books here. Oh, shoot. Anyway, people would come to him. This is a Calvinist thing. People would, Martin Lloyd-Jones, people would come to him and they'd say things like, I'm trying to be a Christian. And he would sort of chastise them. But I'm going to reframe this story a little bit. Imagine if you went down to some place and you're meeting with some people and you said, I'm trying to be a wife. And people would say, no, wait a minute. Either you are a wife or you're not a wife. You are not a wife by virtue of your performance. You are a wife by virtue of your marriage. And so you are a Christian by virtue of Christ claiming you. Now you're certainly trying to be more like Christ. And that's a good thing, but you already are a Christian. And he is quite clearly working on you and through you. And so it's kind of a dangerous and terrifying thing to ask him to do it more, but that's what we all ask. And so, yeah, yeah, that's my advice. You might say that you're like the apostle Paul, you're a wretched sinner. And I'm sure you're that too, as am I. And Paul said, in fact, he was the worst. Many Christians feel that way because whereas perhaps we've sort of cleaned up the outside and people look at us and say, you're not so bad, but you don't know what's in my heart. And this is why you're saved by grace through faith, not that any of us can boast. So keep doing what you're doing. It sounds like you're doing well. Eric Youngart, hey Paul, can you explain what the imagination is from a Christian perspective? From an artist's experience, I've been fascinated with the world's most beautiful, most beautiful things that I could create and escape into within my imagination. This ability to engage and escape into my imagination is a source of my creativity. And every good writer or artist I've spoken with has spoken to, has described a similar process. When I get into this creative flow with my imagination, it feels more like I am discovering something that is already there and something that has revealed new images and ideas to me. I imagine every ancient biblical writer created their inspired books using a similar process of creative flow states. How does the imagination fit into the Christian worldview of spirit, souls, and minds? I think that's right. So again, this video that Karen Wong just put out on her channel, let's see, I'll try not to, I can go, I know I put the, okay, this is the video that Karen just put on her channel. Dr. Wolfgang Smith, renowned physicist on vertical causation, irreducible wholeness and meaning, has 60 views so far, has 60 views. You want to get on the ground for something? You can be one of the first 100 viewers of this video. It's a great conversation. And he has, early in this video, he's been talking about the idea of he has, early in this video, this, what he calls an icon. You want to show that, Rick? And when they talk about it, as is the case with a lot of things, it takes a little bit to learn, he says this is an icon of ontology. And I look at that and it's like, what do you mean? He says, you know, physics inhabits the outer ring. And you might, in fact, be then this point of light at the bottom of the ring and your connection to what's at the center of the ring. He says this is basically Platonism in his words. But there's a lot of intersection with Christianity in this. And listen to the whole video if you want to sort of understand this little icon as he calls it. But he says that there's the center, there's the circumference, and then there's all the stuff in the middle. You're right, the imagination is in the middle. The imagination is in many ways how you participate as a sub-creator of the center creator of being. And you're exactly right. Now, it's not only good things, however, that are in the middle. Now, Paul Heiber, a missiologist, talked about this in terms of a three-tier unit. In terms of a three-tier universe. Angels, spirits, levels up, et cetera, et cetera. That's all the stuff in the middle. And as Wolfgang Smith says, the West basically excluded everything in the middle. And that was sort of this scientism trick or science trick where you put one hand over one eye and you only see through the scientific image. But that's what's going on here. And you're right in that the imagination is this intermediary, this space in the middle where you're really moving from sort of the most real point, which is the connection of upper and lower register, the connection of heaven and earth, or in Verbeke talk, where emanation and emergence sort of meet. When you're in the imagination, you're sort of up in here. You're not too far from the lower register. And then what you do with your art, then, is you bring it back down into the lower register. So I think that's one way to understand the imagination. It's also sort of how we map things in our minds and in our worlds. And I want to, if I have some time this afternoon, I should mention that also on this afternoon, it's not going to be recorded, but I'm going to have another conversation with Justin Wells. Justin is that documentary maker out of Biola. He's going to be in Europe during my trip. He has a different job in Greece, and then he's coming up to Germany, catch the festival, and we'll see how much of the trip he can go along with, because he's a really smart documentary maker, because one of the things I've learned about capturing things in photographs and video is you never get a second chance. When David Fuller visited me real early on in this whole thing, here at Living Stones, I mean, he and Olly were here, and they had their cameras, and he took video of all kinds of things, and people at Living Stones were like, what the heck is going on? What is happening? These people from the UK have come and they're videotaping our service and our pastor, and of course, one member of the church thought, oh no, they're going to take our pastor away from us, but here I am, and David hasn't used most of that footage, but David has that footage, and so one of the things that Justin Wells is trying to do is crowd source a documentary. Now, this is something that Chad has been talking about, his desire to make a documentary, and so basically one of the things that Justin Wells and others are doing is figuring out, when we get a chance, let's capture some moments of what's happening in this little corner of the internet, of the German Festival, of what's happening in the Netherlands, of maybe the conversations at Le Brie, of all of this stuff, because you might not post it or it might go to some obscure YouTube channel, but if down the road some of this gathered spread or this gathered broader importance, oh, then you've really got something there because you've captured the moment, you've captured the video, or at least you've captured aspects of it, so there's a lot to this creativity, and that's one of the things that I really appreciate about Karen Wong because, I'm going to say some things about Karen now, that Karen, I mean, Karen's channel has done quite well. Karen's an artist, and if you understand why Karen got so fascinated by Jordan Peterson and how that connected up with her art, I think, I've known Karen for a few years now, but it's taken me a while to sort of understand what Karen has been doing and what she cares about, and so when she sent me an email this morning, she sent me an email this morning and said, you have to watch my conversation with Wolfgang Smith. I've got enough trust in Karen to know I should probably, that should go up on my hierarchy, so then I went for my little levy walk this morning, and I could listen to the rest of his history, I could listen to more Peugeot, I could listen to Jordan Peterson, but I thought, now I'm going to listen to Karen's conversation because Karen was always telling me about Michael Levin before I was interested in him, and then once I realized what Michael Levin was up to, it's like, oh wow, Karen was right, so I thought, well, she's been talking about this Wolfgang Smith now for a while, there must be something there, and then when I listened, it was like, wow, yeah, she's right, so, but she's an artist, and she explores this stuff. I'm a preacher, and so words are my craft, and speaking is what I do, so it shouldn't be a surprise to anyone that YouTube in some ways favors me because this is sort of like television, and this is a medium that preachers tend to do pretty well in, but Karen is doing a ton of important work on her channel, even if a lot of people can't immediately realize it, and it has a lot to do with these questions of creativity, but that's all in that middle realm. All right, oh, we got all kinds of time this morning, it lets me babble in Babylon. One of my, so Coffee Break has been studying the book of Revelation, and of course the book of Revelation has the Whore of Babylon, one of my Coffee Break ladies decided to name her Babs because she started showing up in her dreams, so now he names her Babs, that's the Whore of Babylon, Babs. Is there a proper place for regret in a Christian's life? I don't know, I don't know, Is there a place for regret in a Christian's life? The following was my verse of the day in my Bible app, and I hadn't put thought to it previously, 2 Corinthians 7, 10, For the sorrow that is according to the will of God produces a repentance without regret, leading to salvation, but the sorrow of the world produces death. I would have to ponder that for a while. It's hard not to have regrets. I think regrets are certain kinds of temperaments and personalities are much more subject to regret than others. My temperament, you know, one of the things that I've you know, one of the greatest gifts God ever gave me was my temperament. When I did my Big Five personality profile, let's see, I'll pull it up now, don't show it quite yet, Rick, let me just pull it up. There we are. I'm 61% in agreeableness, 72% in compassion, 45% in politeness, I'm not as polite as my wife would like me to be. 85% in conscientiousness, 93% in industriousness, that's why I make so many videos, 60% in orderliness, which is why my office is the way it is, 94% in extraversion, which means I love YouTube, 89% in enthusiasm, that makes me somewhat fun to watch sometimes because I get excited about things, 92% in assertiveness, I can't get assertive. 1% in neuroticism, that probably wouldn't keep me alive in the Serengeti, but it sure is nice in an urban context, 3% in volatility, my wife sometimes says to me, you're the most stable person I know, I am very stable. Openness to experience, 98%, intellect, 97%, openness 95%. I'm a really happy person, which means I don't have a lot of regrets, for me the glass is always half full, not half empty, but I know lots of people who are haunted by regrets, and I think this is actually an area where a really strenuous belief in providence is super helpful, because you can look at your regrets and say, I sure wish I hadn't done that, or I sure wish I had done that, or I sure wish this had been differently, but God knows and God has a plan, he is large and in charge, as Freddy likes to say, he is the best person in the world, and he is a good God, and he is going to do with my life and my work better than I can possibly ask or imagine. That's the faith, I had a video about faith this week, that's the faith we want to have, and that kind of faith squeezes out regret. I'm not going to say regret is a bad thing, I think we ought to regret some things, because if we learn from our mistakes, we can learn from our mistakes, but to be emotionally hobbled by regret, I think is in some ways a reflex, a lack of faith and belief that God is as good as he says he is. So, thoughts about that, but never really thought about this before, Chris, I'm going to leave it at that. I'm going to leave it at that. I'm going to leave it at that. I'm going to leave it at that. Never really thought about this before, Christian, you always ask very insightful, provocative questions, so that's really good. Anna, apologies if you've already talked about this, what, I don't repeat? Some of you have been watching my channel a long time, say all you do is repeat. So, I don't mind repeating. Talked about this before, but what is your interpretation of John 3,8? We're playing the Bible game today. John 8, that's in the New Testament story. The wind blows where it wills, and you will hear the sound of it, but you do not know where it comes from or where it goes, so it is with everyone who is born of the Spirit. This actually connects fairly well with, because I know this chapter a lot better than I know chapter 7, I can talk about it more easily. This is sort of connected to the previous question too. There's an interesting dynamic that happens when you come to know a person well for a long time. Let's say in a marriage, my wife and I have been married 34 years this August. On one hand, we are really mapped territory for each other. So there's the suchness. On the other hand, we both continue to surprise each other. We both have a lot of things that we don't know. We both have a lot of things that surprise each other. That's a remarkable thing. Because after being married for 34 years, this is another oddity of marriage. You know each other very well. And there are even places in your spouse's life that you don't want to look. Think about that. Now, part of what growing in the Christian life means is that the further you go into Christ, the more you will know come to know Christ's spirit. But it's almost like the kind of knowledge that you have in a marriage. That on one hand, you would think the territory is increasingly mapped. On the other hand, they continue to surprise you. And so that's one thought. The second thought is this. And the second thought might be more germane to the passage. The spirit of God will have both more moreness and more suchness than what is common. When we were talking about saints, not so much in the video I made this week but previously, there's this interesting fact about saints and I'm using the term more in the orthodox and catholic setting. You would think all saints look alike. If there is a weakness to Greek heroes, it's because they look too much alike. Hercules, Achilles, they're all good at killing. And Peugeot is right in his video where killing is sort of an an act of self-reliance. Killing is sort of an expansion of being. In some ways, you gotta be really careful with what I'm about to say but there's a way in which it's true. In some ways, to live is to kill. What do I mean by that? All of the food that you eat it dies so that you can live. And so, well I don't want to kill anything. Well then you can't eat and then you can't go on living. You say, well I'm not gonna kill animals. Okay. But you're gonna kill plants. So, to live is to kill. And so heroes can be a little bit one-dimensional because a lot of these Greek heroes are really good at killing. But the saints, they're a diverse bunch. Saints can be saintly in so many different ways. And I think that's partly what this verse is talking about with respect to the spirit. Because our God is the God of creation. We had a question about that before. Why so many species of beetles, of snakes, of spiders, of why is this this beautiful planet replete with diversity? Why would God want so much diversity? Why wouldn't he? And he does the same thing with his saints. If you get to know the spirit of God, you're not surprised by diversity and its beauty. Now, this is something churches don't always do well. Churches, especially modern churches, try to instill uniformity. And they all fail miserably. Because people are not that way. And so, again, in that great video by Vervecky recently on Plato and Matrix, Plato's Cave, if you look at a church and you look at all the incredible diversity within it, you can look at living stones. Living stones, 15, 20 years ago was partly more diverse because it was bigger. And you had millionaires and people living off Social Security or disability. You had PhDs and people who couldn't read. You had African-Americans, you had Dutchmen, you had Pacific Islanders, you had Japanese, you had just this astoundingly diverse tiny little group of people. And we were all together as one church. So, what is the thing that we have in common? Well, we have Christ. And this is why you get these visions in the book of Revelation of every people, tribe, nation, tongue, I'd say creed. That's how America tries to do it. But it's the work of the Spirit of God. And that's the work of the Spirit of God. And that's the work of the Spirit of God. And that's part of what makes the church so delightful. Because we have to work on this. And, you know, coming into the CRC Senate where we're going to be talking about the Human Sexuality Report and the side, let's say the affirming side, wants to use the argument of diversity. But part of what we've seen is that certain approaches to liberation and diversity are not going to be that effective. And that's not going to be a good thing. And that's going to be a bad thing. And so, you know, I think that the groups that are doing this are actually destroying it. And other groups you know, you might find that you have more sexual diversity in a congregation than you have in a church. And that's the problem. And so, I think if you listen to Karen Wong and her channel and that video that I pointed out, they talk about the fact that constraint facilitates creativity. And so, part of Karen's artistic process which led her to Jordan Peterson was she begins with a canvas and she looks for the anomaly. A space flat surface that can absorb the paint and it's a space in which the artist can create what the artist wants. But Karen began looking for the anomalies in the canvas or the anomalies in whatever medium she was using. And she would allow those anomalies to constrain her creativity which actually made her more creative. And the spirit of God is that way. So, and it takes us by surprise just like someone who's been in a 35 year marriage. It's like I my wife has surprised me after 35 years. How can that be? And if that's true after 35 imagine what it will be after 50. Even though much of the time she's mapped territory. I think that's what that verse is trying to get at. Alright, Brad L. If specifically Jesus' resurrection changed the course of everything, which it did why weren't the resurrections of Lazarus and the soldiers daughter bigger deals at the time? Great point. Number one, we don't know how big a deal they were at the time. Number two, Jesus' resurrection Jesus' resurrection is categorically different from that of Lazarus and the soldiers daughter. Part of what we're stumbling over is that we're using the same word for both. If I said Jesus' resurrection was the beginning of paligenesia then you'd say well I don't know that word. Jesus' resurrection is the beginning of a new creation. That's what the book of Colossians says. The book of Colossians basically says Jesus was the seed that's the logos. Jesus was the seed of creation 1.0 and his resurrected body is the seed of creation 2.0 and out of the seed which is his resurrected body that new creation is sown in each of us and it will come to fruition and manifestation and instantiation. Let's imagine how common or uncommon is recessive and how common is the resurrection and how common or uncommon is resuscitation today. You can very much argue that because Lazarus was in the tomb that long he wasn't resuscitated in the same way that let's say someone who is as we say dead on the operating table is resuscitated today. When I was a boy or a teenager we had a neighbor two doors down who I used to babysit for occasionally. She had little children and I was a neighbor so I'd go over there and watch her kids while she run an errand yada yada yada. I don't remember how it came up but she told me once about today we call these NDE's, we always like putting initials on things what a crazy habit. She told me about her experiences which really isn't a apt label either but she told me about how she had a lot of health problems and she told me about how she died on the operating table as they say and she told me about the tunnel and the light at the end of the tunnel and I don't remember a lot of details from what she told me but it was I remember watching TV where they had had these kinds of stories because I always liked those kinds of crazy programs and of course I was all ears listening to this because it's one thing to hear it on TV, it's another thing to have your neighbor two doors down. Now if I were what I am today I would have gone over and I would have been far more nosy and asked far more questions and would remember far more about it but there's tons of these near death experiences out there and again Lazarus is not that but it's closer to that than Jesus' resurrection and so again you have the problem of category and there's some ways in which Lazarus' resurrection and Jesus' resurrection there are commonalities between them, they were dead and then they're alive, okay but Jesus' resurrection was the beginning of a new creation and Lazarus resurrected from creation 1.0 into creation 1.0 and died because he was creation 1.0 Jesus was raised in the flesh of creation 2.0 he's part of the new creation already and that new creation is reigning on high and that new creation is permeating the world right now as we speak and if you're a Christian that new creation is getting into you and remaking you in ways that you might not even be aware of or maybe are beginning to dawn on you and well why do we baptize people we take them and well sometimes we sprinkle water sometimes we dunk them and that's a ceremonial drowning and that means that you're going to die under the water and you're going to die under the water and you're going to come up a new creation you're going to come up with flesh that is ready to not decay well not yet because you're still going to decay and so it's all this now and not yet that we're talking about so I also want to make the point that I often try to make in sermons that people think that certain events will change the world in a particular way they imagine that I like how John McWhorter said they imagine a soundtrack but he's using that with respect to racism and he was at this big conference in Vail or someplace and all these high status people were talking about racism and people would say well if only we would come to terms with racism and John McWhorter says what exactly do you mean by come to terms with I can imagine a soundtrack but how would the world be different let's think about the the UFO phenomenon well if only we could track a UFO on military radar military says they have if only I'd see a picture we've got those little tick-tack pictures if only I would if only you would what what do you imagine is going to happen if a flying saucer came down in your backyard little green men walked out and said take me to your leader and you cocked your shotgun and said get off my lawn and they went back in their spaceship and they were all zipped up into the air how do you think your world would change well you tell your neighbors yeah I was sitting by the TV last night watching the news and saw lights in the backyard I went in the backyard and I saw this flying saucer came right down landed in my backyard and this little green man got out of the spaceship and he said to me and something so I could understand and said take me to your leader and I said ma get the shotgun she handed me the shotgun I put a shell in the chamber and I said now you get off my lawn that little ship of yours is going to damage this grass that my wife had me put in and I'm not having it and the guy went back up in there and he went up into space your neighbor tells you that what do you think maybe you'll believe your neighbor oh yeah spacemen visited my neighbor oh okay tell someone else as that flows through the world all of everything that we know and expect happens and all of this soundtrack level stuff doesn't it's kind of the point I've been making in some of my rough drafts for Sunday with respect to Jesus resurrection we don't change the way we think we do we don't respond to life in any way like we think we do I remember talking to someone in the Dominican Republic who told me that his grandma told him the first time she saw a locomotive she ran away screaming saying it was the devil you can imagine that you grow up in the Haitian Hills and all you know is the Haitian Hills for generations and then you see this monstrous iron thing belching smoke making noise it's the devil that's the category she had we have all these categories and you know we have all these ways of thinking about it let's talk about virginity let's say you were fortunate enough to grow up in a family where let's say traditional Christian modesty is practiced nobody sexually abused you you know maybe your parents were circumspect with respect to talking about their physical intimacy and then of course you become a teenager and your home horns start going and you just think maybe you start feeling some feels and it's all strange and new and you just think wow once I have sex the whole world will change well that's kind of true and you see that in relationships and you all know it that maybe you're young and you have a crush on someone and then you realize that she likes you too and then you get up and you're walking to class together you're carrying books and then boy a first kiss bang yeah you know you got kisses from your mom and kisses from your sister and kisses from your auntie but this? that was nothing like this and then suddenly your do funny starts doing funny and you know all this kind of stuff just starts happening and and you start crossing these new boundaries and new frontiers and you think the world is going to change and in some ways it doesn't in some ways it doesn't that should tell us something about well I don't believe in miracles I love that CS Lewis started out his book miracles with the story of the only person I know who ever claims to have seen a ghost doesn't believe in ghosts that is so true of human beings I'm sure there are people who have been abducted by aliens who claim they don't believe in aliens that is the way we are and so when really dramatic things I mean look at lords I mean this strange phenomenon that happens in France early in the 20th century you know they have pictures and stories you know this stuff is documented say well I don't believe it if it's not documented here's the documentation well I don't believe the documentation I point this out with say Tami Peterson's miracles I don't think there's any reason to call Tami Peterson a liar or that she fabricated the idea that she told her daughter I think I'm going to be healed on our anniversary she tells Michaela that Michaela is like what tells Jordan that Jordan is like what and then on our anniversary she's healed before doctors said you're going to die after doctors said you're fine if you press a doctor well what happened well they'll make up some story of course they will that's what we do we know that from split brain experience the head of the brain will make up a story to explain the other half but okay so Tami Peterson is not dying of cancer is that or is that not a miracle well I think miracles are breaks and you can't demonstrate that this was a break in the laws of physics of course you can't and even if something happened right in front of your face whether it's a locomotive or or someone coming back from the dead you're going to need all sorts of ways to try to integrate it into your map of the world because that's what you have to do and you may come out saying that you believe in ghosts and you may come out denying but the world is nothing like we imagine it would be and we see this with UFOs we see this with miracles we see this with near death experiences we see this with trains we see this with almost everything we have no our grasp on what life is is really tangential and the world does not work like we imagine we're just really good at fixing the story as we go along so it's a great question alright oh boy okay end of questions you guys keep adding them oh alright stop that do you have any thoughts on the story of Samson it's an amazing story it's an amazing story it's an amazing story I love the story of Samson it's great the bible bible stories there's nothing like them in the world they're astounding they're just astounding and the more you study them you know I was listening to Jordan Peterson at that what was the difference at the catholic university and where he's talking about Moses and the bronze serpent again made me get excited for Jordan's book and hopefully a new biblical series or however he does it but I mean I love that story and I preached on that story but you know he brought new things out of that story again because of the frame you know this is the thing about the frame where I started talking about it someone might let's say I'll pick on someone that maybe annoys me I might look at LDS or Islamic interpretation of of a bible story that I like and I say you're just seeing it through that frame yeah but those frames are wonderful Jordan Peterson saw that story of the bronze serpent through the frame of psychology which is not a frame I have and it showed me all new things about the story and that's really cool so there's so much in the story of Samson read it enjoy it read it again and again and again read commentaries on it study it it's astounding whole book of judges one of my favorite books in the bible amazing stories I don't get tired preaching out of the book of judges I'll probably have to do it again it's just awesome can you give a brief overview of the benedict and other options being discussed and your thoughts on these items big question benedict option is just basically asserting a degree of religious community and sticking with it in some ways every single local church is a benedict option part of what I think drear is trying to say is that with the rise of the cathedral or the blue church or the machine these are such tyrannical world views and they're so they're so intrusive that what you sort of need is a small community with high walls go and find if you haven't watched them go and find my conversation with someone from the chicago estuary and I talked about the benedict option I clipped that one up it's one from not too long ago it's a woman who moved to a sort of a catholic benedict option community where they were going to hold community bounds focus on each other I had a wonderful and they'll know I'm talking about them now because I was using an illustration I thought I was talking about them and I wasn't but now I am a wonderful couple who's part of a a deeply conservative christian community in the US or are they in Canada? I think they're in Canada Canada is an interesting country because Canada is sort of like the new frontier you know if you can stand the cold there's just a lot of land in Canada where you can kind of go up and make your own enclave I mean that used to be the US but still a lot of space in Canada not a lot of people so it's basically the idea of creating your own little community and there's some huge advantages to that but in another way you're never really going to disconnect from the network or the machine or the blue church or the world, the world is really the older version of that and if by virtue of the selection that you use you've probably skewed temperament and how many other things and that's going to impact your community and then there's always the dynamics of inside and outside and if in fact your community is reactive let's say you are deeply distressed by oh I don't know same sex marriage or COVID vaccinations or the introduction of income tax by Woodrow Wilson or Social Security by FDR or Roe v Wade or its abolition or you know whatever if you create a community in reaction to any of these things in the world just by the fact that you are opposite what's in the world, the world is already within your walls and so that's what makes this really difficult and so throughout history it's one of the options on the menu you can see it in the Judean culture war the aristocracy accommodates to Rome the Pharisees culturally resist Rome the the zealots try to kill Romans and in that way keep them out the Essenes flee the world and go into caves and communities in the desert to avoid the contamination of Rome and all of those washy people who risk cultural contamination by rubbing shoulders with them those are the main options that we see and there's not many more options it's just variations on all of those options and so in that way in some ways the Benedict option is a is sort of an Essenes monastic option of course Benedictine vows come out of the monastic movement so it's one very legitimate option and the beauty of Christianity is that most of these options are tried so yeah and what we're doing with estuary is kind of the opposite whereas the Benedict option is putting up high walls estuary is lowering walls so Sam brought up my recent beef with a plaque keeper on your discussion with Esther how do you balance playing playing the dozens engaging in verbal combat especially through insults with love and grace that is so hard I think you probably have seen some of my attempts to mitigate that by let's have a conversation with the black Hebrews let's find out who they are let's gain their respect to the degree that I can let's find a degree of community and let's that be a platform upon which we talk about what we disagree now that practice that I just described which is sort of my practice is sometimes heralded as the only way or a better way and I like it but it's not the only way I'm sure sometimes it's a better way and sometimes it's not there is a time Paul the problem here is to gain respect like this guy I'm beefing with he gains respect by spending hours like just insulting people and the way to engage in that game is to insult him back yeah that can work I would imagine in some ways because there's some cultures like that my channel has grown by leaps and bounds but at the same time I'm sitting there for half an hour calling the man stupid well Jordan Peter I remember somebody in our local discord watching Jordan Peterson he's a very smart guy said what Jordan Peterson needs to do if he wants to keep rising is to keep getting into more fights I remember hearing him say that I was thinking I gotta think about that but he was right and so that is a path part of the problem that we have is and so Andrea I did a conversation with Andrea this week which Andrea said will be coming out soon I thought it was a really good conversation we talk about a lot of these dynamics part of what we're also dealing with is if we're like trying to do this on YouTube or even worse Twitter that platform is not a neutral space it has affordances it has biases it has liabilities and so a lot of it depends on what you want so I I very seldom do the back and forth thing on Twitter why because it's not how I want to spend my time and I don't think it's a generative game I every now and then I'll put something a little bit provocative on Twitter and Adam Frenden had this little clip of a hearing where you had a you had a congressman ask this activist tell me what a woman is something like that and of course and you know whoever identifies as one it's like that's a bad answer if that's your answer you're in deep deep trouble if you don't realize you're in deep deep trouble you're in deeper trouble still so then of course someone on Twitter asked me well you define a woman I said a female human being and then they tried to go into a little bit more nuance and then I gave one more answer but for me that's as far as the conversation I'll go now I've only got I've only got maybe 7500 Twitter followers which is more than 200 which is the average but it's a lot less than Jordan Peterson's 2 or 3 million so the weather is different at different elevations and so even those platforms are different so each of us has to decide what game we're playing and if this game is blessing the world and pursuing the goals maybe arguing and insulting this guy works for both of you I don't know so just a tiny bit of context his video with my picture on it Jacob Fadarechi Racist has 12000 views and he charges $300 to teach Hebrew and he knows less Hebrew than I taught to T on the server in 20 hours there are a lot of suckers in the world there are a lot of suckers in the world well Jacob I know you I don't think you're a racist and I don't care how many people think you are God knows that's the beauty about God he knows Jacob you can underbid him you can underbid him do lessons for like 275 I do lessons for zero I do lessons for zero there's your problem there's your problem the more you pay the more it's worth it's true and you know so Peterson this is something that we've noted about Peterson Peterson makes the point and he's not wrong that things that have you know he could give away his things that have you know he could give away his his big five personality test and his self-authoring he could give that away stuff for free or almost free or cheaper but he understands that actually putting a price on it makes people take it more seriously so yeah if you charged for Hebrew lessons you might well get more students and I'm sure you could do a much better job teaching Hebrew than probably this other guy I completely believe what you're saying so in the world a funny place Dasein does God want us to be rational depends what you mean by rational again I'll point to CS Lewis's book Miracles reason in that book is a very interesting thing it's sort of the it's the thing that breaks the whole show it's the it's the signal to the noise of the universe and so it depends what we mean by rational and I think you know part of John Vervecki's project is to redefine that word and I think he's right I think John Vervecki is trying to get at a definition of rational which is actually closer to Lewis's and Miracles than to let's say Sam Harris's given the illustration you've just given about the spaceman isn't it strange the story of Christ has captured the hearts the way it has sounds like one might say a miracle and it's faith beyond and it's faith beyond the four P's so I've been reading Bart Ehrman's I know some people go like nice pastor shouldn't read Bart Ehrman or if he reads Bart Ehrman he should only say bad things about it I've been reading Bart Ehrman's book on the victory of Christianity I've been enjoying the book I disagree with a lot of stuff I'm not a fan of Bart Ehrman but I don't disagree with everything and I've been learning stuff from him and it's helpful for us to remember just how slow this thing grew because it's again you might say back to the other question look at the resurrection of Lazarus let's assume for a minute it happened we'll say that colloquially that Lazarus at Jesus dilly-dallied so Lazarus would die and he spends days in the tomb and Jesus gets there and says move the stone and they move the stone and Jesus says Lazarus come out and Lazarus walks out of the tomb and everybody in Jerusalem and its environs hears about it and okay what happens then? people have to in some ways incorporate that event into their map and they will all do so in different ways let's talk about this this story let's use another story that isn't in the bible so at least protestants can be rationalists for a minute this story about was it in Ephesus? there's this story about these Christian men that get walled up in a cave basically and they're in there for centuries and then they come out or they're discovered and they come out it's almost rip and winkle I should remember the story better Peugeot tells it it's a fairly well known story out there it's a fascinating story where it would be as if someone is digging around in a cave somewhere in the American Southwest and a Navajo from the 17th century comes out alive you might think well suddenly atheism would disappear and Sam Harris would get on the internet and say I was wrong, miracles happen that is nothing like what would happen oh no, that's a trick it's a fool, someone's done something there would be all sorts of conspiracy theories about the people that discovered him and there would be genetic testing all this stuff would happen and the world would not change hardly at all and you'd get these little TV programs about this guy the world is full of that kind of thing and sure, is a lot of it bunk? I'm sure a bunch of it is bunk there's a lot of it real what do you mean by real? the world is full of weird stuff it's all over the place Saint Cuthbert's body not decomposing is that true? what do you mean is that true? centuries later decades later did people realize decades later did people touch his flesh and there's documented reports on it and it was miraculous enough to have people continue to write about it no, it didn't happen that's awfully closed minded of you what does it mean? that is a much harder question so this idea that if the amazing Randy ever has to shell out a million dollars that suddenly atheism will go bye bye no, first of all the amazing Randy is probably always going to have a way around having to shell out a million dollars just like CS Lewis's woman who the only one he knew who saw a ghost claims ghosts aren't real that's the way we are alright, Tom Bombadil Tom Bombadil oh good, we're almost right there to the landing point Tom Bombadil how real is Tom Bombadil? sorry, you too efficient in answering questions in this Q&A so I had to ask a question with one of your favorite words in it I was thinking this morning so again, I was listening to Karen Wong's interview with Wolfgang Smith and he talks about the corporeal level which I'm still going to have to I'm tempted to buy one of his books but I bought so many books that I haven't read that I don't want to get all excited about that's my that's my enthusiasm score and my big five, it means it's like wow, that's really awesome, I'm going to buy the book and then tomorrow wow, that's really awesome, I'm going to buy the book and everyday I buy a book and I don't have time to read it and I'm buying a new book because I'm excited about the next thing I'm like, squirrel there's a lot of that in me so he talks about appearances and I sort of thought I haven't actually quite finished the conversation I sort of thought Karen, I think she probably would have brought in Barfield, but you just don't know if someone like Wolfgang Smith knows anything of Owen Barfield and so mentioning Barfield's name might not be helpful in the context of the conversation they always got to make those guesses but you know Barfield uses the example of a rainbow okay, so let me ask you this question is a rainbow real? well you say, well the particles the water particles in the air and the sunlight you can measure the sunlight you can measure the water yeah, but water and sunlight is not rainbow well the certain angles and Barfield makes the point that rainbow is an appearance is the rainbow real? and I really was I'm really interested in some of these ideas that this guy had because of this vertical causality he makes the point that you know there's none of us are skeptical about the mist in the air or the sunlight and the refractory qualities and that appearing as a rainbow but Tom Bombadil part of what makes Peterson interesting and again I didn't even though something about Peterson fascinated me right away it would take me a long time to learn enough to sort of begin to understand at least some of what fascinated me about Peterson and his project and the stuff that he's done there's something behind Tom Bombadil and Bombadil is one of these characters he's kind of a local lord as it were has tremendous powers and of course in the context of the story of the Lord of the Rings there's lots of speculation what would happen if maybe Frodo would take the ring to Tom Bombadil and Tom Bombadil could keep the ring because maybe even Sauron coming into Tom Bombadil's kingdom Tom Bombadil could cast out Sauron just like he cast out that barrel white Tom Bombadil within his little realm seems to have enormous power but Tom Bombadil and his realm there's an agent arena relationship going on with respect to Tom Bombadil and one so Tolkien nerds debate this kind of thing but one might have been the Tolkien professor he speculated that maybe he got this from a letter from Tolkien who knows that if you went to Tom Bombadil with the ring he might look at it and just completely forget it because it's dealing in a realm that Tom Bombadil doesn't intersect with really what he doesn't intersect with evil? No I didn't say that he certainly understood to save Frodo from the barrel white and I want to get into this if I make a video this afternoon I hope to be able to articulate it I was going to do one yesterday but it hadn't fully gestated think about the consciousness of a family Peugeot always uses this illustration I've heard him use it so many times but it takes a while to sort of really be able to get into these ideas to a sufficient degree that you can actually manipulate them and talk about them and articulate them and make them clear to you all does your family have a consciousness? well you know the culture of your family and people are the culture it's not unlike school spirit the culture has in some ways emerged from within your family but your family is also the product of a great deal of emanation so your family has a culture your family actually has a consciousness because when you're a kid if someone brought something into your house that you know your mother wouldn't like let's use the cat in the hat so the cat in the hat is in the mother's house and I should order that book and get it here because I could do a lot of fun stuff with the cat in the hat see I'm going to buy another book gosh I spent a lot of money on Amazon look at my office it's actually vomiting books I've got to start giving them away to young seminarians your family has a consciousness your city has a consciousness your church has a consciousness they also have agency but they're not really geographical and this is where it sort of intersects with this Wolfgang Smith and some of his ideas they're intermediary beings and let's say you're all sitting around watching television and let's say you know maybe you're watching a PG13 or an R rated movie that sort of slipped in and maybe that's not part of the culture of your family and suddenly there's a boob there's a boob on the TV what happens in the family consciousness because there's a boob on the TV oh boy and then suddenly there's a ripple in the family consciousness because there's a boob on the TV and what are the kids saying the whole Janet Jackson Super Bowl wardrobe malfunction there was an experiment in collective consciousness you know her revealed boob all over the world and if mom and the family had breastfed children and everyone was used to boobs and babies somehow a boob on the Super Bowl and a boob with a baby is a totally different thing that's because of consciousness and agency and all of those things happen and sort of like a rainbow where is that located where is that located you say well I know what a boob is I know what the Super Bowl is I know what a baby is but it's the conjunction of all of those things within that realm in consciousness that creates the manifestations and the agency and the actions and the future so Tom Bombadil is very real in Tolkien's story but he's sort of limited and it's just absolutely shows the astounding learning of Tolkien to have a character like that and I think it makes it not surprising that Peter Jackson didn't know what to do with Tom Bombadil you know Peter Jackson if you look if you read the early parts of the Fellowship of the Ring you know how Frodo gets out of Hobbiton and that whole thing is quite a bit different in the book than it is in the movie but Tom Bombadil is missed entirely and the other pieces are missed too but part of the reason Tom Bombadil doesn't fit into the movie is because of what the movie is and how it is and what Tom Bombadil is so it's a great question anyway we're five minutes over that means boys and girls for today it's time to stop and once again I'll put comments and links to all of the upcoming live appearances first one in Chicago it's gonna be a hoot if you want to get a taste of it you know myself and Bethel and Sam and Hank we're gonna disagree on stuff I'm gonna keep defending Tim Keller dog on it and I might be wrong I have no problem you telling me why I'm wrong my phone just keeps ringing this morning I don't know who wants to talk to me hope it's nothing serious but anyway next week so I'm trying to set up something with Manuel he was in the he was in a little while ago he's out again and I I'd like to you know we're always playing around with this I mean this is fun for me to do but I think sometimes I'd also like to continue to play around to see how I can expand the use of this platform I haven't done any thief in the night live streams partly because I've just been crazy busy and again because of all these the commitments I have and vacation I have coming I have no idea what the channel is gonna look like during the summer so if you don't see a lot of videos coming out from me don't worry about me I'm probably not under something heavy but it also seems like every time I promise this I always find a way to put out more material so who knows what will happen Rick smiles Rick smiles like yeah you'll you're you're an addict hopefully it's reciprocal broadening not narrowing so next week I'd kind of like to do and I'll talk to Rick about this I could always sort of do a V mix thing and have Manuel and I together and we could then be in the same room and then maybe have people ask questions about the conversation that we have next week something like that maybe maybe so who knows I'll get to see Saint Manuel when I get to the Netherlands he's got to show up Rick why don't you come to Europe with us too Rick how about that Rick's like no no no no motorcycle trip to Thunder Bay he says no we got to get Rick to Thunder Bay anyway that's enough for this week go away now