https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=HHP9VwhHT_E

 Welcome to the Freddie and Paul show. Hi Paul, how was your week? I had a good week Fred. I enjoyed lunch. Well thank you. God bless you, I thought that was awesome. Call out to Nina and Cheryl for that. I had a pomegranate drink. Okay. It was very good and it didn't have no caffeine so it tastes really fine. Good. And mom should drink that too because it's very good for her kidneys. Does your kidneys need help? My bladder does. That's what I'm saying, her bladder. Anyways let's not go there. TMI, too much information. Call new love. Anyways basically what I'm trying to say is I had a good week and my buddy Justin is back so that makes me feel good and I've been doing really good and with God's help I've been praying and just doing what's right and I'm going to get into my music like I've been doing and hello T Grizzly. I've been watching your videos. You're a tight rapper. Just know that enough to chat. All right mom's gonna talk about T Grizz. Wait wait wait one more thing. 49ers won. Today? 49ers win today. They play the Rams. They play the Rams. They start at one o'clock. So they start at one. They're four and one. Who did they lose to? No. Four and oh. If they win they'll be five and oh. That'd be remarkable. That'd be remarkable. Okay one more thing and then we'll go to mom. Okay. The last time they were four and oh was in 1991. They had Bryce, Joe Montana, John Taylor, and Clark. Remember when Clark won the uh. Don't remember. Super Bowl. I do. Because I have a good mind. You do. Not saying you do. Don't. You have a great mind. Well thank you. And consumers might want to come to you and look for wisdom and gratitude. I'll give the consumers what they want. They already do. Okay now go with the sermon but anyways one more thing. Okay. The Raiders. Did the Raiders win or lose? I don't remember. I don't remember. Okay mom you beat. Wait a minute. You beat Leon. You beat Leon. Yes I did. So I don't know how Paul did. I'm two and three in the fantasy league. That's not bad. It's not good either. Okay all right go ahead. Go ahead with the sermon. What? Mom. Didn't you have a prayer request about cigarettes? No I don't want to do that. I'm sorry. That was too hard. Anyways go ahead do the sermon. Okay. There you go. Talk to Paul. He's the preacher. Okay. He asked us. Talk to the audience. Okay. He asked us why do we wash our hands? Okay. Somebody said germs up here. That was Nina. That was me. You said germs? Yes because you said. That was a little bit later in the sermon. Oh. Well anyhow. Okay the main consensus was in the congregation that I saw was germs hurt. Okay that's why we wash our hands. Now if you're spitting a glass then do you drink it after that? No. No. You don't. That's self-explanatory. Okay. Yeah. Okay. You learned that in kindergarten. Now these were questions. These were the questions and now in the end I can tell you why. Okay. Because if you ask for forgiveness God will grant you wisdom. Well that's pretty close. I mean he'll forgive you. Go ahead. All right. Now they had blessings for obeying but evil things defile a person. That's true. They make their heart dirty. Yeah. Okay. Yeah and our hearts dirty too. I mean that might have been way back in the day but today too our hearts can be dirty. So we ask God. How would be a good missionary? What are you saying? So anyhow we ask God to create in us a clean heart. There you go. So that's what I ask God that too. Okay. Lord but I ask it also whether people create in them a clean heart because I am get frustrated with people. Oh. But I get frustrated with myself. Okay. No we get frustrated with you too Nancy. So it's all fair. That's it. That's it. Well. That's a whole sermon. I gotta say that Mark 7. Where's Jesus? Jesus didn't even show up in your little report. Yeah. Yeah. He was in the sermon. Yeah. Yeah. Mark 7, 17 to 23. Oh. He there were all kinds of bad sins that were listed. What they didn't have any good sins. No. Sin is in good. That's true Paul. No. That's true. So I did forget that but I know Mark 7, 17 through 23 but that's all negative sins. Right. But if you ask for forgiveness. I can't list them all. If you ask for forgiveness. But Jesus. He will grant you. Yeah. Yeah. He'll take away your sins. Right. But I mean those were bad ones. Okay. Okay. I mean I have a murder. Oh the list that they had that's what you're talking about. Yeah the list. Oh. Oh. In Mark 7, 17 to 23 you had it up there. Freddie what did you think of the sermon? I thought it was very good. Yeah. I thought you will tell me if I'm right wrong or right. I thought basically the sermon was about if you ask for forgiveness God will forgive you and if you sin you should learn from it and try not to do the sin again and capitalize and do right. That sounds good. I think it's good. Okay. What else we got? You can do a song or we're gonna. One more thing. All right. We gotta talk to Coca Cola or Pepsi. We're a sponsor. Sponsor. And I Dan. Endorsement. Hi Dan. Now Freddie drinks a lot of soda. Oh Dan. Dan. What about Dan? Dan. Dan. That's right. Dan might be able to help us. There you go Dan. You know. You know who I'm talking about. He's gonna come out here one of these weeks. Can I meet him? If Dan comes to church on Sunday you can meet him. Okay. That's fine. I might be gone. Where's Dan lives in Chicagoland I think. Where's Adam from? Adam. Oh yeah. Adam who gave you the beat. Canada? No he's not from Canada. I'm trying to think where Adam lives. Sorry Adam. I can't remember where you're from. That's okay. We'll find out later. We will find out later. Okay. I guess I'm ready to do my rap. All right. Go for it. I know I need the beat. Are you gonna do the rap with the beat? Yeah. Did you turn off everything already Rick? Rick? Rick turned everything off. Can you play the beat? I can't walk up. He had the beat ready in the back. Yeah. Go ahead Freddie. You can jump right in. All right. What's up y'all? What's happening? Well I've been kicking it on third street and I'm having a lot of good times with my buddy CJ. You're not here. With my buddy CJ and my buddy Gordon and we'll be doing our thing and like a chicken wing on a string. They can't see you. Yes they can because that's not in the way. What's up y'all? Kicking it live. Okay. Tee Grizzly. Now let's do this right. Let that beat kick. Yeah. In the morning when I rise, in the morning when I rise, in the morning when I rise, give Jesus my faith, give Jesus, give Jesus. You may have all this world. Give me Jesus, give me world. Don't forget about Pepsi. As you see I'm from the 916 for Shiggy D. Coming up like this, coming up like that. Rolling so funky like a Benz rolling fat. Kicking like this all the time. Dark midnight was my cry. Dark midnight was my cry. Dark midnight was my cry. Give Jesus my faith. Give Jesus, give Jesus. You have all this world. Give Jesus. Just about the break of day. Just about the break of day. Just about the break of day. Give me Jesus. Give me Jesus. You may have all the world. Give me Jesus. Give me Jesus. Oh when I come to die, oh Jesus come to me. I won't cry. When I come to you, I love you. Because when I come to you, give me Jesus. Give me Jesus. Buckle my shoe. So what you got to do? I'm from the 916 and the dun. It's like this yo. Really though. Good to go without a word to say. When I speak you will listen because I am given. Jesus is the man and I am forgiven. He forgives all my sins in a major way. Don't forget about Paul because he likes to pray. He asked the consistory to do good. Don't forget about CJ. He's my buddy too. And yo don't forget about Gordon on the way. This is YouTube and we need sponsors okay? Just like that don't you know. Good to go without a word to say. My name is Freddie D from the USA. Peace out. One love. Yeah.