https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=FXFEihnnFiY

 The Freddie and Paul show. How y'all doing? The episode 31. What's happening? Freddie and I are out on the town today. Yep, we're all in town. We're gonna go to lunch with Gordon. Going to Golden Corral. We're gonna go to Golden Corral, have a good lunch. Eat up. We're here. Chicken, mashed potato, gravy, ham, chili, clam chowder, nachos. You have a lot to eat. Egg rolls and fish. All right. Fishers are men, that's why. We are fishers of men. So we're sitting at the Arden Fair Mall right now. We're waiting for Gordon. Gordon's gonna take a lift up here and then we're gonna meet him here and then we're gonna go to we're gonna go to Golden Corral and we're gonna have a good time. Fantasy football. We got the NFL draft coming. What happened? Did the You're gonna still be a Raiders fan even after they move? Yeah? Yeah? Yeah. Okay. And what's his name coming back? Number four for the quarterback, Carr. Carr's coming back? Yeah. I thought they... Who got the Bears quarterback? That was the 49ers. Oh the 49ers got the Bears quarterback. Okay. Anyways, and what's gonna happen is Carr's coming... That's his name right? Carr? Yeah. What's his first name again? It's Derek, right? Derek Carr. Okay. Anyways, they're gonna have him come back and... Oh and the 49ers got a linebacker and they got a running back. Okay. Okay. But I forgot who they were. People out there. So I'm sorry. Okay. That's all right. Anyways, um... Well, you want me to pause now and if we have that stuff talked about, we'll talk about that later. Let's have something on your mind? Yes, please. Okay. We'll check in a little bit later. Maybe Gordon will be on. Gordon's kind of shy. He doesn't like being on. Yeah, he is. But Gordon's a real good guy. I really like Gordon. So we'll check in later. He got mad at me because... No, he didn't get mad at me, but he was wondering why I was putting my money in my envelope. But that's what I do because I'm decent in order and I'm a productive man in Jesus Christ's clan. Freddie's got a storage locker in his sock. No, I don't. Leave me alone. And we were in Walgreens and he hiked his pants up and I said, Freddie, if I ever rip you off, I'm going straight for the sock. I'll forget the pockets. No, that's not over there. But we had a good time. We had a good time. We had a good lunch. We had a good lunch at Golden Crown. The man gave me my money back for the socks. And he put them on the counter. And we're gonna have a good day. And everything is lovely. And we are trustworthy, pure, grateful, loyal, industrious, and cheerful citizens of the United States of America. And I plead the Fifth Amendment if you need to understand that we got it going on. What do you plead the Fifth Amendment to? You haven't done anything wrong? No, I'm just saying if somebody doesn't like what I'm doing, they can go fly a kite. Oh, not you. I'm talking about other people that try to give me a hard time. Not you, Paul. Not you. Because you don't give me a hard time. People try to give you a hard time? Sometimes they don't understand. I think I'm giving you a hard time by your side. No, you're not. No, it's fine. I walk in love, Paul. I know you're just playing with me. Okay, well what we're gonna talk about today. You have any topics for us, Gordon? Oh, none I can think of. None you can think of. Gordon's a good guy. We had a great lunch today with Gordon and Freddie. And just had a lot of fun. This is Gordon right here. That's Gordon. Say hi, Gordon. Yay! He was actually in the spotlight. I might be able to have this guy on my show. We got nobody wants to be on our show. Not nine and not Gordon. Oh, good. Alright. He's trying to be famous. Gordon's trying to avoid fame. We're not gonna be famous. We're just doing our own thing. What do you mean we're not gonna be famous? Don't you think we're famous because of this show? Yeah, that's true. We are celebrities. And Freddie's got his Canada shirt on. So happy to see him representing Canada. Canada! Hello! I think that's all for now. We gotta have the... Anything else you want to say, Fred? Did you have a rap or anything? You got a returning socks rap? Uh, no. No returning socks rap? Okay, I'll do a rap. John the Baptist this time, and it's gonna be really about... Okay, tell me what John the Baptist did and I'll put it in a rhyme. John the Baptist baptized Jesus. Got his head chopped off by Herod. Okay. What else you want to know about him? Did he follow Jesus? He did follow Jesus. Before he was... Before he got his head chopped off? Before he died? Before he died. Oh, okay. Okay, I'll do one. John the Baptist got his head cut off? I don't really know. I think the man went off. I think he didn't rely on Jesus. Rocking on the mic every day and every weekend. Why'd he do that? Because John the Baptist wasn't fat. He was disrespecting Jesus and that ain't cool. So maybe that's why he got his head cut off. Oh, no, he got his head cut off not by Jesus, but by Herod. Jesus didn't just cut off anybody's head. All right, we'll leave it alone. Okay. All right, that's enough for today. I missed what I was doing. You didn't explain yourself. Also a Nelson piece, Aaron Moran, of Happy Days. Oh, who's that? Joni from Happy Days. Joni. Joni and Potsy. Aaron Moran. Joni and Potsy. I really love watching Happy Days as a kid. It was a great show. Okay, one more thing. Do you think that guy did a good job with me? That guy did an excellent job with you. He didn't have to give them back to me? No, he didn't have to take the return. But I was afraid you weren't going to give them that. I was afraid you weren't going to let him keep the socks. So that was afraid of. Why would I do that? I want him to have the socks because I don't want the socks. But you have a hard time giving anybody anything. No, I will. So, but you did very good. He did very good. He'll put them out. He'll put them up. Each change went right. You returned the socks fine. And they were overpriced. We're productive. Yes, they were. And I got some money back. Socks are cheaper at Marshalls. No, they're cheaper. Matter of fact, I need one more stop. I got to go to Beacon. No, we're not going to do another stop. So I got to run you home and then I got to see what we get. See where we can bring Gordon. Beacon's on the way. No, no, no, no more stops. All right, sign off. I only got one hand because I got one love. All right.