https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=mCzZiPsy7mc

 Welcome to the Freddie and Paul show this is episode 51. There we go 51 almost Brad Miller's number 52. Almost right next week we're almost there. Next week will be Brad Miller's number. Hi Brad Miller how you doing? Anyway. And this week's special guest with us Forest Barnes. Forest Barnes. Hello everyone. The magic man. The magic man. Forest Barnes is here. What are we going to talk about today Fred? Let's talk about his magic a little bit. Oh talk about Forest magic. Tell us how did you get into magic Forest? 30 years ago I used to work at Nordstrom's and met some guys that were into magic and they were doing some magic. Asked them if they would show me a couple tricks and they thought I'd be a good magician. Started working with me and 30 years later here I am. Wow that's awesome. Forest is actually a really terrific magician and so if you're in the Sacramento area and you need someone to do What kind of events do you do Forest? You name it I've probably done that type of event from birthday parties, anniversaries. I even did a funeral once. Really? And you did and one of my favorite shows was that when we were doing a homeless sanctuary here. You did a show for the homeless. That was an incredible event. That was a lot of fun. You did Paul? Yeah. The people were very appreciative. Had a great time. Nice. They're very engaged. Very engaged. Awesome. I see. Okay so can you do a magic trick real quick? Can you like make that disappear? Your bracelet? Let me borrow one of your rings there. No. Okay. I can't get it on. Oh yes I can. Got it? Almost. Alright here we go. Keep your eye on the ring. Keep your eye on the finger the ring is on. What I'll do is I'll make that ring jump from one finger so you can see it there to the next. That's some finger. Finger. And then sometimes you can actually take that ring. Place that ring right there. Make it disappear and then jump back on that hand. Oh Ty got it back. Yeah I knew I'd get it back. I think he was a little worried. No. I trust magic. I saw Fred take that ring off. I trust magic. I trust magic. Fred's thinking his head. I'm going to get my ring back. I'm doing it. You should be proud of me. I'm very proud of you. You should buy me a Shasta tomorrow. I'm very proud of you Fred. Dollar 18. There you go. You got a commercial. Dollar 18 at Dollar Tree. There you go. Alright. I just want to talk about the Kings played Utah. They played Utah and they lost by 10. But they were doing good at first. Fox was doing good. What's the other guy's name? Paul Stein was doing good. And Walmart guy. You know any other guys? I didn't watch the games. No some of the other guys. Name just a few. How about you've been watching the Kings lately for us? Not very much. I've gone to a couple games. I've gone to a couple games but I've not been able to watch them too much. I haven't been to the new arena yet. You got to get there one of those days. Okay. Well what about those Warriors? They beat the Cavaliers. Warriors are good. Warriors are good. Who's going to win it all this year in the NBA? I got to go for Golden State Warriors. Not the Kings? No. Not this year. But we'll give them credit where credit is due. Alright. What else you got Fred? Well I was going to do a song. I was going to rap a song. You're going to rap that song. That should be interesting. But I just wanted to know like okay like let me just tell you what's going on with me Paul. Nothing too personal. Just saying YouTube. Oh that's okay. I'll be walking somewhere right and someone will say there goes Freddie D and I'll be like okay and then they come up to me and start talking to me like I'm I don't know like I'm a radio personality or something. And it's very it's very funny because I don't really know the person but sometimes I see people that I know and then it's even better when you see someone you know. And not to mention my friend came today Gordon Smith. Gordon. Gordon Smith has been on a show before. Yeah he was gone today but he said he'll do it another day. Okay. But he told me he tried to make it to the sermon but he was running late. But I said God will forgive you because you came as you are. So it's okay. He's fine. He's good. Maybe I'll spend some time with him today. Okay that'd be good. And then maybe you can see my place and we won't talk about that at all. Okay. Anyway. So one more thing. Okay. Who do you think will win the whole NBA? Who would you like to see the whole NBA? I'd be fun to see the Warriors win it again. Okay. I'd like to see the Warriors win it. Okay. Yeah we got Curry. I can name them. Curry. Steph Curry. Draymond Green. And what's the other guy's name? Clay Thompson. I thought you said you could name them. You've only named one. I know I named them before. I'm having a blank right now. That's okay. Kevin Durant. They know who they are. Kevin Durant is awesome. Yeah they're a great team. Okay now I'm going to wrap this. Okay that'll be cool. Then we'll land the plane. Then we'll land the plane. After I'm done. Okay bear with me. May the peace of Christ be with you. May the love of Christ dwell deep in your heart. May the Spirit enlighten your way. May you walk in the comfort of God's care. May the peace of Christ be with you. May the love of Christ dwell deep in your heart. May the Spirit enlighten your way. May you walk in the comfort of God's care. Thank you for being in the Freddie and Paul show. We greatly appreciate it. This is my buddy right here. We kick it sometimes. He's been my friend for I don't know maybe 12, 13 years. But he's awesome and we'll probably hang out sometime. Anyways if you ever see me out there and you want to say hi maybe I'll give you an autograph if you're lucky. Maybe I'll do a rap or something. If you want to hear me do a rap just tell me what you want to hear. Yeah it's been a good show. Let's land the plane. Let's get our one love. One love. Amen. Hallelujah. Number 51.