https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=Q1q6fLGv8BI

 Paul how you doing buddy? I lean in Fred I'm doing good. Welcome to the Freddie and Paul show this episode 52 52 Brad Miller, what's up Brad Miller? And I was just saying, you know, we give the Kings all this free advertising and never said yeah tickets Not once have they sent the Freddie and Paul show tickets. What about that Kings now? Now to the commenter who mentioned the one the 118 Shasta. Yeah, we didn't just get a Shasta today What'd we get Fred? We got a Big Mac meal. We got we got we not gonna just get a Big Mac meal What'd we get Fred? Grand Mac meal. Grand Mac meal. So we're living large today, baby Living life living large and Freddie was just eating all those French fries All right, so we want to talk about Fred. Oh, let's talk about the game last night You played the Knicks they played the Knicks and they beat the Knicks and they beat the Knicks How many years have the Knicks been bad? Pretty pretty bad pretty bad for a lot of years They got rid of Carmelo Anthony now Carmelo Anthony plays for the Cavaliers, does he really? Yeah, and in Iguodaga. Yeah went to Golden State Warriors, did he really? Yeah Or is a good team. So, you know, because I was gonna is a small place World is a small place who you know what not what you know, but it's somewhat what you know Because if you know something then you can get things done and accomplished. That's true. That's true. It's who you know Right Paul, that's right. That's right standard standard or Standing operation. Okay, here we go. Where we go. We got it. We got it. We're doing good But yeah, maybe the Knicks had 24 points college-stein had 13 points, okay, and All the guy I told you about Koufis that's his name. Oh, he's the center. Yeah, he's awesome. All right. He's good All right, and they got a few other guys. I can't take it right now. Yeah But we're doing all right Finally, but they won two games away, but they only lost two times before that So they're okay. They're gonna be our losses one win ain't gonna get you in the play. I know they have 19 wins 20 wins out of the season now now coach oh I went to the Sac State game with my friend Justin just Saturday night my friend Greg gave me a ride I had tickets and we enjoyed ourselves Justin strings goes to Sac State and he is a Basketball player and he's a senior and there's a possibility He might go pro and I took a picture of him and I talked to him and he's a very nice gentleman Hi, Justin strings if you're talking I like no if he's watching we're talking if you're watching Justin strings I appreciate you a lot our fan base grows every every every show Fred and then I took a picture of Darren another guy by the name of Darren number 50 and He was good too, and I took some pictures and I had a lovely time and it was fun and they beat Northern Colorado Good for now now. They're they're going to Reno. They're the Sac State Hornets Right, they're the Hornets sexy hornets. Yeah, they go to Reno next week All right, and if they beat Reno in the finals They might make it to the playoffs or farther. I don't know Are they in the playoffs now or do you think I have not followed the Sac State Hornets? I have to look that up. Okay. All right. I'm gonna do a rap and then we're done. Okay. Here we go I'll do Betty insists. I do Betty insists I'm gonna tell you a little story about me and my friends about something we did all way back when I was eating spaghetti They're getting kind of sweaty when all of a sudden in walk Betty Betty was my girl in these old days and she had a lot of friends that were walking my way said first I was Helen then there was Ellen but the best of them all she had the name of Lou Ellen She had the gleamiest eyes and the prettiest pose but get this Paul She has some bony elbows, but back to the point the point was this Betty was jealous of my friend sis sis at seven Liz at eight I thought that kind of work, but it didn't work great But take Fred's advice and never try that it probably won't work and you might get slapped slapped Yeah, that's my favorite of your wraps Fred. Here it is. So they gotta have it one love baby Fred Freddy's drug All right. Here we go ready one love 52 in the can all right