https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=Lu9BfuXKjhg

 Hit it. Hey Paul, welcome to the Freddie and Paul show. How you doing Paul? I'm doing well. And guest star Nancy, Nancy Fancy Nancy in his house for the Christmas. Merry Christmas everybody. Christmas it's Christmas Eve. Wow we had a good time man. That was a good service. I really enjoyed it. It was enlightening. The music was nice. It was enlightening alright. Let the candle at the end. Yeah it was light. Like this little light of mine. He's ready to sing. I'm gonna let it shine. This little light of mine. I'm gonna let it shine. Let it shine. Let it shine. Shine all over Sacramento. I'm gonna let it shine. Did you have the wine part of the communion Fred? I sure did. Okay I thought so. I don't think they drink alcohol though. We didn't have alcohol. We don't have alcohol. We don't do alcohol people. No no no there was real wine. Oh yeah. There was wine. City Life has one half. We had a service at City Life. No not you. You did mom. No I did. There's not wine in the little cups. I went up there with Paul because he's my buddy and my mentor and he showed me how to dip it in and then I ate it and it was a little bit bitter but it was a little bit you know frank and all that stuff and half the Harold Angel. And the reason we have wine or yeah whatever. Not beer. No we don't have beer. You don't drink no beer. But okay. Communion with beer. We do great juice too. We just do great juice. All right what are we going to talk about tonight? We're going to talk about Christmas at all? Let her talk first. Let her talk first. I didn't. I gotta give her the spotlight. She hasn't been on for about four or five weeks. All right Nancy you got the spotlight and you gotta start coming to church more often mom. Okay okay. You can do it all right. Okay yeah. Yeah I hope everybody has a good Christmas and the reason for the season is Christ. Jesus Christ yeah. Yeah and Jesus. Jesus is awesome and he's a forgivable God and a meaningful God. Yeah yeah. And he's there for you if he just asks for his help. That's right. If you seek you will find like seek ye first divine. Divine. Yeah. Okay yeah and what else should I talk about? See you don't have a sermon to give a report on so. You gotta talk about your book. I don't know. Do you watch it online when you're not here on Sunday morning? Yes I do. Do you? Okay just check it. Oh yeah I sure do. I watch Sunday school too. Do you really? I watched it too. Really? I really do. I mean you don't understand Paul coming to this church is so enlightening because it's like I don't know just everything goes in twine. It's not long like some of those Baptist churches. I'm not saying they're bad but it's those churches go long and I mean I'd be out there I can't even have no water or nothing man. I gotta get that amen juice or something. Anyways hi Paul. I mean Paul. Hi Charles. Merry Christmas. Say hi to Reggie. Reggie. We're at the state offices. We're open today for some reason. Yeah. That surprised me. I thought today was the official holiday. Yeah. You know winds on a weekend so. Anyways so poor Reggie was at work. And poor Reggie didn't get the championship this year. CJ had a poor Paul too yeah. No he didn't. No you did good Paul. I mean Paul had a fantastic team. He had a good team that's sure. Reggie didn't get it mainly I think because of all the injuries. Did he trade people though? No it was the injuries. Robert Woods and I go on and on. Did you have Durupalo? No we didn't. No? No. Hey is Drew Grease still playing or is he retired? No he's retired. What about uh some guys said they're coming out of retirement for the Seattle Seahawks but I forgot who it was. Oh Tampa lost the other day. I know that's why my game was so bad. I had Tom Brady. Oh wow. I was. And I had Kamara. I had both of them. Neither did anything in the same game. It was a disaster for me so. Wow. The end of my season like that. I had a question. What does the book of Jonah talk about? Talks about Jonah. He was a prophet. God wanted him to go and um announce judgment on the nindobytes. He didn't want to go so he went the other way. And he got in a whale didn't he? He got he got a big great fish. Oh is that where Kahuna come from? No. No Kahuna is a wave. Yeah an Arctic wave. Kahuna. The big Kahuna. The big Kahuna. That's a. In Hawaii? Yeah it's a Hawaii thing. Oh okay. We got variety today. All right so. I'm gonna do a trap and a song. You two are gonna wrap together. But I had one question Paul. Okay. I thought it was this is the second question so you have more than one. Okay when I get my stimulus what do you feel like you get? Should I get a motorbike? Not not a moped but a motorbike where you don't have to pedal. You just sit there. Is there only like 200 dollars? I think I can get one and then I put a helmet on and I can get my groove. Well anyhow stimulus is. There's a California stimulus because California keeps doing stimulus. It's about 600 that's it. Okay okay we're gonna. Okay that Paul announced it say this is the song that we're singing. This is the song that they're singing. Oh and you need to tell them again about. Go tell them. Hold on and tell them about the audition I did. Do I need to do another audition if I want to audition for America's Got Talent? I have no idea. Think I should audition? Yes you're awesome. Thank you. All right. Let's do it. Go tell it on the mountain over the hills and everywhere. Go tell it on the mountain that Jesus Christ is born. While shepherds keep their watching or time clocks by night behold throughout the heavens there shone a holy light. The shepherds feared and trembled when low above the earth rang below out the angel chorus that hailed our Savior's birth. The shepherds down in a lowly stable the humble Christ was born and God was sent to salvation. That blessed Christmas morn. Go tell it on the mountain over the hills and everywhere. Go tell it on the mountain on the 916's can. Amen. Get down. Everybody have a Merry Christmas and a Happy New Year. And tune in to the Freddie and Paul show every Sunday or whenever you darn want because we're what's happening and I ain't snapping like a snap from a plum. Let's land the plane here. Let's land the plane. One love. One love. Amen. Merry Christmas.