https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=g85HACpVGcU

 Okay, welcome to the Freddie and Paul show. This is episode 59. 59. 59. 59. Doing fine. 59. Doing fine. Again, we have a special guest, Gigi and Tommy. Gonna have a little bit of music. We want a little chit chat first. Yeah, I just wanted to say thank you Gigi and Tommy for doing this. I think it's an answer to prayer and I think it's awesome and I think the camaraderie is awesome because I flow with them and we got the same lingo kind of and it sounds really good. We're getting a lot of good viewers. A lot of good viewers. I'm really loving the comments you guys have been giving us. Yes, we appreciate it. Your comments are very nice. And I got my do done now so y'all can look at my don'ts. And special thank you to Alan who did the bathroom for us. Thank you Alan. I appreciate it. Comment, call on, and I'm just saying thank you. What's his name? Alan. Thank you Alan. Where's he from? Is it Alan or Adam? Uh oh. I better check. Where's he from? He's from, I don't know where he's from. I'll have to look him up. Okay, so what do you guys want to talk about today? Anything you want to talk about? You guys talk about your music. Oh yeah, well Tommy and I just made a Facebook page this week and a YouTube channel. There's nothing on the YouTube channel yet. But you could subscribe to those. Yeah, subscribe anyway. Adam Scheller. Adam Scheller. Thank you very much for the beat Adam Scheller. My mom heard it too and she really liked it. And it was tight. And I recite to a true delight. Anyways, so it's like this and like that. And basically what I was going to say, I enjoyed your sermon. You talked about Peter and how he followed Jesus at first. But then he kind of betrayed him in one way. Because Jesus, you're supposed to follow Jesus because Jesus is the reason for the season. And you know, he's just really good. So okay, well I think we should do who's that guy who's Fred D. I'm going to do it with Gigi and Tommy. Okay. We stand up and sit down. It's up to you. What do you guys want to do? Stand. Stand. Okay. This is a treat for you. You want me to be in the middle? So you can hear me? Please rise as we sing Jesus. Okay. Alright. Let me know when you guys are ready. One, two, three. Busted! Who's that guy? He's Fred D. He loves Jesus Christ. Who's that guy? He's Fred D. He loves Jesus Christ. I love Jesus Christ. You know, I'm good to go with the CRC church really though. The kids' history is good on the microphone. Like that, you know, good to go without a word to say. The ladies all know me by the way I walk, by the way I talk, by the way I slide, and by the way I ride. Who's that guy? He's Fred D. He loves Jesus Christ. Who's that guy? He's Fred D. He loves Jesus Christ. Lord of creation of water, earth and sky, the heavens are your tabernacle, glory to the Lord on high. God of wonders, be on a galaxy, you are holy, holy you see. I'm from the 916, for Chigadee, coming up just like that G. We got Paul, he's good to go. We got my mom, really though. Don't forget about 9-Nut, coming up just like that from China. Coming just like every way, you know it's me, the white Freddy D. The white boy with the dome hat, looking like that and that's a fact. I love the kings, who are you? I'm coming up to you every day and every soon. When I come up every way, on the microphone like kid in play. Don't you know it's me, now it's time for Gigi to bust a rhyme G. There's not much more I can say. I love Jesus every day. He's my rock, my Lord, my Savior's soul. You best be on your best be, Savior. Who's that guy? He's Freddy, he loves Jesus Christ G. Who's that guy? He's Freddy, he loves Jesus Christ G. Who's that guy? He's Freddy D. Coming up in the industry from the 9-1-6, for Chigadee. Early in the morning, I celebrate the light. When I stumble in darkness, I will call it night. Because I'm good to go, I'm using these words, really though. I love Jesus, he's the man. If he can't do it, no one can. Don't you see? You know it's me, the white boy they call Freddy D. Who's that guy? He's Freddy, he loves Jesus Christ G. Who's that guy? He's Freddy, he loves Jesus Christ G. God of wonders beyond our galaxy. You are holy, you are holy. Precious Lord, reveal your heart to me. Father, hold me. Who's that guy? He's Freddy D. And this is the end of my rap, G. One love. Woohoo! Is that it or you two got a song? You guys got one. We got a song, we got a song. We guys are okay with that. Alright, so hello again, we're Tommy and Gigi of Planet Pedestrian. Like I said, follow us on Facebook, Twitter, Instagram. All the content we make is really great. Super. You'll find yourself laughing a lot at the jokes that aren't funny. Only the ones that are funny you won't laugh at. You won't, you'll roll your eyes. But the ones that are not funny, it's hilarious. So this is a song called If You Want It In December. I love it. Let's go. If you want it in December, you're gonna need it by July. And if you wanna be remembered, all you have to do is lie. There is no greater truth than silence. To all forgotten friends. Out in the world just violence. There is no love we can't defend. Can you feel me? There inside of your heart. Are you too dead to reach afar? We had some special shoes, no one could ignore. But your soul is out standard just like all the ones before. You need me at all. Try to build a new life. To give you one last final call. We can take back the things we said last. We'll keep you stuck in it all. But in my mind I see your face eyes. You make me feel such disdain. So much poison I need a high tide. Before your hate affects my brain. Can you feel me? There inside of your heart. Are you too dead to reach afar? We had some special shoes, no one could ignore. But your soul is out standard just like all the ones before. You need me at all. Inside my head I think the seasons are confused. It's hard to believe that I've always been with you. Summer berries are lying in between the white water daisies and the golden leaves of spring. Do you believe it? Or do you know it? They are two very different things. Do you believe it? Or do you know it? They are two very different things. You feel me? There inside of your heart. Are you too dead to reach that far? We had some special shoes, no one could ignore. But your soul is out standard just like all the ones before. You need me at all. Who's that guy? He's Freddie. He loved Jesus Christ. Who's that guy? He's Freddie. He loved Jesus Christ. Alright, let's land the plane here. Alright, so it's been a pleasure. We'll be back with you next week for another song. One of these days we're going to have to practice. We've been practicing. No, I'm just saying one time we've got to practice again sometime. So, Play Hat Pedestrian, when you have your YouTube channel send me the link and I'll put it on the show. We have a YouTube channel. I mean, if you want to subscribe to it. Do you have any content up yet? Not yet. But I mean, it's a really cool homepage. Are you going to make wine, Paul? Me and CJ? I'll make wine sometime too. Alright CJ, I forgot to say hi to CJ. I'll see you next week because me and CJ got a treat for you next week. The magic is back. We're going to be doing a rap. One song for six minutes. He's going to sing, dance, and it's going to be on and cracking like popcorn. Anyways, so what I'm saying is, thank you very much and let's land the show. And remember, what did I say? Episode 59. 59. Feel so fine. Feel so fine. Episode 59. Feel so fine. Make a joyful noise to the Lord. Hallelujah, hallelujah. And I can hear your sermon. Fisher's the man. Fisher's the man. Make us Fisher's the man and we'll reel him in. Amen. Hallelujah. Alright, 59. Ready? One love. Amen. Who's that guy, Fred Deak?