https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=hEp8gU7fFlE

 Welcome to the Freddie and Paul show this is episode 58 57 driving in a Chevy. That's what we're in a Subaru, right and today we've got special guest on Gordon How's it going Gordon? Yeah, we we just had a big lunch at Golden Crown. Yeah, we had a big lunch at Golden Crown What do we want to talk about today Gordon's are Gordon is our specialist on pop culture. Gordon knows Who's started movies who's on TV shows Gordon? What's the best stuff on TV right now? Timeless, okay The new Roseanne revival, okay, I had a question Gordon do you think Avengers is gonna be good? Oh You like the Avengers movies Really gonna close your window just for the road noise. Oh, I heard what you call it's gonna be in that Gordon Black Panther black did you see that movie Gordon? It was a good movie I saw it on I saw it at the theater. How was it? Are you okay? Yeah, it's how I try to see Yeah Well, I like Black Panther. I thought it was good. I liked Wonder Woman. I thought that was good. So are you did see Black Panther? I did see Black Panther. I really like it The movies like a little over two hours and who played black pan? I don't know the guy's name He knows everything Oh Also, that's right he played he played Jackie Robinson 42 Yeah, hey CJ what have you come with us next time if you're watching say hi to CJ I see Jay All right. So that's pop culture Freddie want to do a rap and we're getting high-tech now cuz rap Freddie now has accompaniment with his raps Yep, so are you ready to go Fred? I'm ready. Okay. Let's see if this works. I'll play it loud play loud real loud like 12 13 14 push play It's playing you got turned up Got Paul and Gordon doing big things G up in the 916 Don't you know and we got the prefix to come loose to come ready? Like this and my name is Freddy One two three, you know, it's me the white boy. They call Freddy D Coming up in the 916 truck doing big things. Good luck When I come up for the night is through because the CRC churches for good we are good Don't you see we do big things in the kids history? We got for us. We got Reggie. We got nina. She's going steady Doing big things and I'm Freddy and we got DG playing the piano And we got Tommy on the guitar Stream do you know what I mean like a disco fee gotta come up for the night is through Don't you know it's me Freddy D Time I rock the rhyme Jesus Christ wrote this rhyme for me and you Don't you know good to go without a word to say? I Every day I go to church on Sunday So make a second look and go to church read your Bible and pray every day And God will tell you thanks for the prayer and I'm not even kidding when I'm on the microphone I'm not even Like this coming up like that enough to the chat my stuff is bad That's pretty good Fred I like that one that's good rap thanks, man. All right anything else where we're about five minutes So we're about we gotta hope the Warriors do good and I think it's gonna be the Warriors in the Rockets. I really do Where's the rock well that's in the West that's in the West. Oh, yeah, they're both in the Western It's gonna be the Warriors Where's in the calves? It's either gonna be the calves or the thunder Might be the thunder if they're good Not the thunder in the West Lou Wow, oh yeah, the West always has all the best. Okay. Okay warriors in that in in the calves All right. All right, maybe all right. All right, this is Sacramento. We do a big to go Go to our church if you want to see more of our stuff and we're coming so dang tough Enough is enough Anyway, check it out. But anyway, we're doing good things and tune in to our show Because this is number 58 really though anyways, thank you for tuning in and check out Gigi and Tommy and I will be doing a guest appearance on one of their tracks and you can check me out because my rap ain't no bull beep Anyways, one love ready one Love amen