https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=ZAlJLIvHxJw

 audience. All right, we this is the Freddie and Paul show special Easter 2018 edition. We've got a live studio audience today. Wait a minute, I know what number it is. What number? Number 54, correct? I don't know. Yeah, cause the last one was 53. Okay, number 54. So we've been doing this for two years. We've been doing this for about two years. We need to have an anniversary and have a party at the church. Okay. Anyhow, happy and blessed Easter to everybody. Well, this is, I'm Paul and this is Freddie and this is Freddie's mother, Nancy. And so today's Easter, what should we talk about today? Well, God died, God died for our sins and he rose again and asked in the door, she'll be open on to you. Allelu, allelu. Okay. All right. Okay. And he arose again, so we should be very happy Christians and follow him as good as we could possibly do. That's good. That's good, Fred. That's very good. And we're looking forward to seeing what? Our other family. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Resurrection. We named, we named loved ones today in the service like we usually do on our Easter service. It's kind of tough, but I understand it has to be done. Well, you did well. You mentioned your father. Right. That was good. I know. I know. That was good. I know it's hard, but it's good. Well, I was wondering, so have you heard from anybody from Canada and Michigan? Like you said, they've been tuning in. I was just curious. Every now and then they say something. So yeah, I know they follow faithfully. Oh, what was the other guys in the church in Michigan? Or do you? Or Derek? Derek's in Massachusetts. How's Derek doing in Massachusetts? He's doing well. Hi, Derek. How you doing? Derek's doing well. All right. So what else do you want to talk about today? You want to talk about the sermon? What do you think of the sermon? I want my mom to ad-lib the sermon. You want mom to ad-lib the sermon? I'd like to see that. Well, I'm going to say one thing. This man likes Jordan Peterson. He's cool. And he mentioned him. Better to, if you're talking about Jordan Peterson, better get the pronoun straight. Yeah, yeah. He's a man. And he's a psychologist, believe it or not. And yeah, yeah, he's a psychologist. And Pastor Paul's going to talk to him next Wednesday. That he was saying. But basically, he's going to ask him why he doesn't go to church. I don't know if I'll ask him that directly, but we're going to talk about a bunch of things. Who knows what? Who knows where the conversation will go. But basically, why do we come to church? Why do we come to church? That's what he's saying. To praise God. Well, why should you praise God? Because we're jointed as one in the Spirit, in the flesh, in the abundancy, and the total velocity of the second hand. Okay, all right. And also, for all aspects of our life, Jesus should be in our eyes. And how do we find that out? We come to church and we glorify God. Right. And we act it out. What we do at church is we act out our relationship with God. He is our King. We're his subjects. And we come to worship. And we confess our sins. Oh, like that one song goes, come worship and bow down. Yeah, that's right. That's what that... Let us let the Lord our God our maker. Something like that. No, but this is what we do in church. We act out our relationship with God. And now I am very thankful to say, I am very thankful for you to be my pastor because I've learned a lot and I've grown in the church and with the consistory. And I think I make a lot of sense. And I love Jesus Christ. Good, Freddie. All right. What else are we going to do? Four and a half minutes or time is flying. We got to do the song. You're going to rap now? Actually, we're going to rap and then sing the chorus. Okay. You got to put some jive to it, Mother. Oh, okay. Yeah, like that. No, no. You got to come like this. You got on this first one. You got to go, I know he rescued my soul. Like that. Okay. Do it. Do it. I know he rescued my soul. There you go. Okay. You ready? I know he rescued my soul. Okay, we got to sing this. My Redeemer lives. My blood has covered my sin. I believe, I believe. My shame has taken away. My pain is healed in his name. I believe, I believe. My Redeemer lives. My Redeemer lives. My Redeemer lives. You lift my burdens away, I'll rise with you. I'm dancing on this mountain top to see your kingdom come. Amen, hallelujah. Amen, hallelujah. Alright, number 54. Number 54. And we're doing good. We're trucking like Philip would say. We're trucking down the street like in his RV. There we go. So we're good. We did six minutes. And we've got to do the One Love, Mama. It's a tradition. It's a tradition. One Love. One Love. Happy Easter. We love you all.