https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=9XbMJgO50LU

 Welcome to the Freddie and Paul Show. This is episode 65. Is it 65? Maybe 66. 66. 66. 2 years. Don't worry. It's good. It's good. It's good. God is good. We're all good. Hey y'all, how you doing out there? I'm Freddie B from the 916. Freddie B? Where B come from? It's better. Cause it means better. Anyways, we're gonna do big things. You know what I'm saying? It's my pastor. And guess what people? I'm gonna be on the mainstream soon because we have an MP3 now. And we got the beat in the back and we got beats. So we're doing big things, Paul. And I come and practice once a month. And I'm gonna lay down some tracks and you guys can purchase my beats on CD Baby. And don't forget about CJ because he ain't lazy. Cause CJ will be coming in and making a beat too for me. And I believe we're gonna perform together and put it on top because Jesus Christ is the reason for the season. So anyways, what about those warriors? Oh, the Giants. They haven't done anything. They already won it all. I know, that's great. That's all I'm saying. I'm giving them my props. How are the Giants doing? Giants won and the A's won. Wow. And believe it or not, I went to a Rivercast game and I really enjoyed myself. It was very amusing. They lost but they had fireworks and everything was casual and everything was cool. I had one refill and one soda. Oh, look who's here. Justin Tyler. Welcome to the Fred E. & Paul Show. Hey, so hi everybody. I'm just here to give her a letter. A letter? Oh, she left it right there. Okay. Bye. So anyways. Guest appearance by Reggie on the Fred E. & Paul Show. Look at Paul. Jesus Man came in. And here comes Jesus Man. We got it all locked into the room. So what are you going to do today Fred? What about the talk? Bless will be your name and I'm going to be saying I went to the game with Phillip. He paid $10 for a cup of soda because they called for the cup and I don't know why they charged so much. It's okay though. They've got to make their money from the venue. But it was only a dollar to fill it back up so God is good. I had a good time. Yeah, I paid my dollar. Anyways, back to what I was saying Paul. Yeah, the Giants are doing good. The A's are doing good. And I'm not sure about the Republic like I'd be talking about. The Republic, the soccer team. Oh hi David Lindner. You're there too. Oh yeah, my cousin Mark. Props out to my cousin Mark and everybody that's listening. Okay, I guess I'm not doing a cappella. So let's do this. Alright Paul. You can be in. No, I can dance. You can be in Paul. It's fine. Just stand right in your way while I rap. Because your presence is awesome. Alright, ready? Yeah, there you go. Okay. Bless it be your name Lord. Bless it be your glorious name. Bless it be your name when the sun shines on me. When worlds of all it should be. Bless it be your name in the 916. All over the place like 209. Stocking is the mix. On the road marked with suffering. Through all their offering. Bless it be your name. You will give take away. My boy Gordon, he came to play. You give take it away. You give and take away. My heart will choose to say. Bless it be your name. Jesus loves you and so does Freddie B. One love. One love. One love. Alright, 66.