https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=FgFcsWlkvFQ

 Welcome to the Freddie and Paul show. I think this is episode 40. 40? 40. Oh what you got? I got it like that. Enough to the chat. My stuff is fat. I bust platinum tracks. Out you speaker. Nine months later they announce me as a teacher. One, two, three. You know what's a white boy they call Freddie D. From the SAC. 916 baby. Coming up like this. Coming up like that. I think we got another track. The way you turn it around. I can't do what Brenda does. We already jumped right in. The Kings beat the Pelicans Paul. Congratulations. You told them they needed it. They had Collie Stein. Then they had Fox. Fox had 31 points. Wow. I haven't even watched the Kings this year. I have. I'm sure you have. I love them. They're a loyal fan. Peace out. Okay so Freddie. So how's football going with Mom now? Mom and her team have a bye. The good bye. My team have the bad bye. Raiders play the Broncos right? Raiders play the Broncos today. I'm so depressed because my fantasy team has done so poorly. I'm not even following things. I just want to not have to host the party next year. That's where I'm at right now. Okay Paul. Your mom and Reggie are on the top of the world. I have an idea. What? Why don't we tell the fans out there that they're watching in Michigan, watching in Sacramento, all over the colony. Don't forget the ones in Ontario, Canada. Ontario, Canada. Some of our favorite fans are out there. We love Canada. Canada. Oh Canada. The stars are greatly smiling. Jesus loves you Canada. Anyways Paul. That was bits of two songs and then an original. Yeah I know because I'm original. You're very original Fred. I'm original white boy. Anyways what I'm trying to say is one of these times on Instagram I need you to put your number on there. I'm not on Instagram. I know but we need, one of these weeks we need to give them our number so they can call and tell us what they think of our show. Because we're big time now. We're boss ballers man. I wish I had Nancy out there. She just sucked her head off. Alright Fred. We're two and a half minutes now. Okay the Broncos play the Raiders today. That could be. The Raiders are doing good. The Chiefs are doing good. The Rams are doing good. The Rams are doing good. Philadelphia where I performed. Hi Kid Chris. They are in first place. The Philadelphia Eagles. The Eagles have a good team this year. Oh hi CJ. Hi Dion. I hope you guys are doing good. Oh I went to the show last night. Hey RJ. I liked your show man. Your show was tight. I thought it was cool. Your rhythm was kicking and you know we got it finger licking. Anyways I hope you get back to me because I love to open up for you when you come back from LA and do what you gotta do over the holiday time. Because I bust rhymes like every rhyme. Alright now I'm going to do a little dance. This is the first we've known how to dance. I think you got lifted up. You think so? I think we see it pretty well. We don't have any music though. We don't have any music. I don't know what you're going to do now. I'm just going to bust one. You're sure you want me to put this up on YouTube? Yep. We gotta do it together. Alright here we go. Thank you. Peace out. Alright CJ.