https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=j8cwc5DLMCo

 Okay, where you gonna sit right here? What? Yeah, I'm gonna sit right here. You wanna sit right there? Huh? Yep. What's happening there, buddy? This is the Bulletin, Living Stone Church. This is the church he told me to go to. I'm gonna do Jesus is the Rock in the Weird Land. Living Stone Church. Jesus is the Rock in the Weird Land. Jesus is the Rock in the Weird Land. A weird land, a weird land. Jesus is the Rock in the Weird Land. A shelter in the time of storm. No one can do it like Jesus. Not bumbling word he says. He was walking down the last great way. And he prayed him from the dead. Jesus is the Rock in the Weird Land. A weird land, a weird land. Jesus is the Rock in the Weird Land. A shelter in the time of storm. When Jesus came on earth, the flesh was very weak. He took his towel to spread him. Himself he was lost to his disciples. Weak. Jesus is the Rock in the Weird Land. A weird land, a weird land. Jesus is the Rock in the Weird Land. A shelter in the time of storm. Yonder comes my Savior. He can't move high so well. He has fought a victory. And a key subject of hell. We don't like hell. It smells. It ain't good. But I'm the Who. Rocking like this, rocking like that. Enough to chat. My stuff is fat. Peace out. Thanks, brother. Mom. Welcome to the Freddie and Paul show. Nancy wants to be in? Okay, hang on, I'll pause it. Oh boy, this is funny. Get her, or do you want me to get her? Alright. Alright. Welcome to the Freddie and Paul show. Freddie did the music because I was busy. Yeah, it worked out good, Paul. Looks like we're doing pretty good. It seems to be that Tommy knows what he's doing. Tommy does know what he's doing. He's computer savvy. He's computer savvy. What you got, Nancy? Well, are we in there? Yes. Are we in there? Okay. Usually I can see that. Well, they set it up this way and so you can't see the screen. That's why I had to adjust it so that we'd be on it. You look like Jane Conn. Oh, okay. My question is going to be how well that picks up her voices. Okay. Because there's a lot of background. Let's just talk a lot. Okay, she wants to talk about it. So what do you want to talk about, sir, Nancy? Well... Would you like the sermon or do you think I'm all wet and the elders should discipline me? No, you were right. You're coming on camera. Oh, no. No, he was good. What I got out of him is if we...if we were born, we should have him reborn. Okay. That's right. Now, if we are good... Why can't I get my allowance every week? Why can't I get my allowance every week if I'm good? So I'd be afraid and I'd be afraid to get home for a week. Right. But now... And if I am trustworthy and grateful for what I was doing, so I'm careful, then I will be greatly afraid to be out of the point of no return. Well, yeah. And if you need to be punished because you're bad, this is like when the little kid, okay? And when he was a little kid, I thought of the tough love out of my heart, I would have to punish him. Not really physically, but in a...I take things away. Okay? Right. Yeah. Now, that was part of it. Now, if we are good in Jesus, then he will reward us. However, he's already rewarded us by if we believe in him, we will go to heaven. Right. That's right. Thank you. Thank you. I'm going to go back to the ranch. Right. I'm going to get my stuff together. All right. All right. Okay, so basically what I'm going to have to do is to follow God. He will reward you by saying you're doing the right thing. Like I said, fast in the doors of the open. When, basically this certainly made the point of the Hyde of ecstasy. Okay. How well can you fulfill God's love? I think you know who I work for. Well, I can be in music, okay? And I can have a problem. Well, I can also be delivered from that problem. That's right. And how do I become? By believing in Jesus Christ. And then on the ground of truth, once we believe in Jesus Christ, we are blessed. Yes. Yes. And part of that misery will definitely be gone. Yeah, okay. Well, I think we've pretty much got the... That's right. We've got the nip in the bud. In other words, I could be very depressed. But know that Jesus is there. And that will keep me up instead of bring me all the way down. All right. All right, well let's finish this thing. Well, let Paul talk for a minute so I know... Well, I think we've done enough to chat. Okay, well thank you. Bread and stuff is fat. Okay, bread and stuff is fat. I already did the music, swine. What? Love. Amen, hallelujah, all right. We'll see how this turned out.