https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=Ey1vruH_gWU

 Welcome to the Freddie and Paul show. This is episode 71. 71. Freddie and I are here on a Monday. No, today's not Monday. Today's Wednesday. Wednesday. Today's a Wednesday. We're here on a- Oh, it's OK, man. It's OK to make a mistake once in a while. So Freddie and I are here on a Wednesday. We're running errands today. Freddie and I are. We went recycling. We went recycling. Because recycling is a good thing. Recycling is a good thing. We stopped at some other stores to get some things done. I paid for a soda, of course. Freddie paid for a soda at McDonald's at the drive-thru. Cheapest soda around at McDonald's. We got it. And so we just- That's probably where we'll go for lunch. That's probably where we'll go for lunch. We're just running errands today, having a good day. And one of the things- When's your birthday again? My birthday was yesterday. Oh, happy birthday. Well, thanks. You already- Happy birthday to you. I know, but just again. Thank you, Freddie. Decent in order. Yep. So part of the reason I do the Freddie and Paul show is that the kind of things Freddie and I do, sometimes they're so surreal. I don't think anyone would believe them. Yeah. That's why we're a hit. We don't do it for the fame. We do it for God. Just like your topics you come up with. Treat others the way you want to be treated. Follow the yellow brick road. Stuff like that, you know? Follow the yellow brick road. There we go. So- And seek ye first the kingdom of God. Allelu, allelu. And yeah, so anyways, yeah, so you guys, I want to let you know, I'm going to make my job, my music. So your comments are greatly appreciated. If you have any beats or whatever that you would like to donate to the Freddie Fred Foundation, it'd be greatly appreciated. And you can email Paul and we'll get back to you. High Michigan, high Canada, high Grand Rapids. England, Germany. England, Germany. Yeah. Lots of places. Give props out to you. Yep. We're in the West Coast, but we're good people too. But you guys are awesome. So yeah, basically what's going on is I'm just doing my thing, trying to get my music going. I enjoy you guys' comments. It's very nice. Props out to Gigi, props out to CJ, and props out to Gordon, my buddies. And props out to Paul, of course, because he's the man in command. So yeah. All right. So we'll just do one song. I told Freddie from the most part, just one song per show is enough. And then we might do some additional songs. And that's why I gave Freddie his own channel. So Freddie could put it into that. Freddie can put it. It's the 916 Freddie Show. CJ looked that up and he said it was under Freddie Schuler. It's under Freddie Schuler. So anyway, I'll have it. R-E-D-D-I-E-S-C-H-U-L-L-E-R. That's right, because we're cruising in a car. All right. And so I'll leave a link in the show notes so you can find Freddie's channel. Right on. If you want more Freddie music, you can subscribe to Freddie's channel. OK, so I'm going to pause the video now. And then Freddie's going to do his. No, we do One Love at the end. Oh, OK. Freddie's going to do his song. All right, thank you, Paul. What are you going to call this, Fred? Betty and Six. Betty and Six. All right, go for it, Fred. What's up, you all in the place to be? It's Freddie G doing big things in the SAC. You know, wait. I walk and I talk. I will slide and I will ride with my swag on. With my groove on. Got it going on like Donkey Kong. Got to come up like this. Got to come up like that. Enough to the chat. My stuffy is fat. Don't you know? Let me tell you a little story. It goes like this and it isn't even glory. It's coming up like one, two, three. You know it's the boy, white boy, Freddie G. I'm going to tell you a little story about me and my friends, about something we did a way back when. I was eating spaghetti and getting kind of sweaty when all of a sudden, in walked Betty. Betty was my girl in these old days and she had a lot of friends that would walk in my way. I said first there was Helen. Then there was Ellen. But the festival mall, she had the name of Lou Ellen. She had the gleamiest eyes and the prettiest pose. But get this, Paul. She had some bony elbows. But back to the point. The point was this. Betty was jealous of my friend since I said since then, seven. Please, that eight. I thought that plan didn't work, but it didn't work great. So take Freddie's advice and never try that. It probably won't work and you might get slapped. Yeah, swag, baby. That it? All right. All right, welcome back, Paul. That was old 71. That's how we do it. Jesus looking at one love. Amen.