https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=bjVfDtqkyvg

 All right my name is Paul VanderKlay I'm Freddy's pastor. That's right. I want to introduce Freddy Shuler III. He's going to audition for America's Got Talent and this is the audition for America's Got Talent. The audition for America's Got Talent. Are we ready Roger? I got what it takes. All right so you take a second look because I got what's going on and that's what's got the hook. Here we go. What's up y'all? 916 style. Doing it really big up in the Sacramento tip. So let that be king. Who's that guy? He's Freddy. He loves Jesus Christ. Who's that guy? He's Freddy. He loves Jesus Christ. I love Jesus Christ every way. I love to pray to him because he's A-OK. Number one head honcho like a poncho but when I'm stepping up to the industry all the ladies know me. By the way I walk by the way I talk I pop my collar make that bottom dollar make you holler and scream for Freddy D do you know what I mean? Who's that guy? He's Freddy. He loves Jesus Christ. Who's that guy? He's Freddy. He loves Jesus Christ. One love to the brothers on 3rd Street but they gotta open up the book and pray cuz you know I'm gonna make your day every time every way when I'm on the mic like kids play stepping hard to the top never gonna stop full of that hip hop rocking non-stop people living to give and staying on top but they're alive to deliver on Freddy B and I'm down for the Soviets and Paul knows this G. One love. We do this really hard. YouTube our show tune in. Tell us your comments. YouTube Freddy and Paul show. I hope this audition was good really though. Go 49ers Super Bowl. What's up JLo. What's up T Grizzly. We doing it really big up in this. You know how we do this. What's up Reggie. What's up Rick. What's up Paul. What's up Gordon. What's up CJ. Alright. Peace out okay. One love.