https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=FJwo6uBst08

 Alright, welcome to the Freddie and Paul show. What's up y'all? Hey, I'm Freddie and Paul. What's up? I'm Miss Claus. Where's he showing Miss Claus? Yeah, my people? Alright. And of course, Phillip. Santa Claus. We just had lunch. We had all kinds of people over lunch. Talked about Elvis, OJ, Michael Jackson, Hartman. All those folks. That's our people. So, Gordon. Gordon's our movie expert. Gordon, what kind of film should folks be watching? What's coming out? How about The Lion King? Yeah, Lion King, cool. If you're a fan of Robert Williams, you should definitely watch Popeye. Oh yeah, that's a classic though. I like Popeye. I think Popeye is his best performance. Yeah. More committed. I love more committed. Yeah, I love more committed. Well, for those who are fans of Robert Downey Jr. and The Avengers, check out his role as Charlie Sheff and the Chav. Oh yeah, I can see that. Nice. What about Lion King, Freddie? I heard it's gonna be Why did they say it's gonna be number one? Do they do that for publicity? Partly. I know, but do you think it's really gonna be number one? I don't know. I think... When's it coming out? Is it coming out? Beyonce's was a diss some of the soundtrack or something. Really? Yeah, or something's going over Beyonce's on this show a lot. There's something about her and that. They did a big thing on that. Her video is about... So she's doing a voice or something's going on with that. I heard it was number one. Yeah, Beyonce's playing a part in that too. Oh really? Wow. Yeah. It's gonna be very good. So that's what Freddie wants to do. I can't believe they see Lion King. The Lion King, cool. The Avengers is good too. I liked that too. I liked Infinity Wars and then the last one. What was it called? Yeah, that was so sad though, to be game. Endgame. I really liked it. Yeah, my characters... Who's your favorite characters? They got rid of my favorite but they got rid of my next favorite one. But I can't tell them who I got rid of. They can't see the movie. I ruined it. Everybody's had plenty of chances to see the movie. I don't know. Captain America, my people. Iron Man. They get rid of my people. But one is still here, technically. I'm gonna leave that alone now. But let's just say that I'm glad Logan, my boy X-Men came back though. Yeah, Logan. Yeah, Logan. Yeah, that hurt my feelings too though. That was killing my characters. They take my favorite characters. They're getting old. They can't get those actors. They killed Captain Picard. They can't be killing my people though. They didn't bring him back though. That's my people though. Charles. Charles and Charles like me. Alright Logan. So am I busting first or you busting first, CJ? We'll be busting. We're busting a rhyme. Well then buster first then. Go get busy like Bobby Brown then. Alright, let me get situated. There you go. Get it. I'm busting rhymes every time and I'm cut up like this in the GMC cause you got it like this. One, two, three. The big MC. They call me Freddie D for a me reason, G. Not for the F. Not for the R. But the E-D-D-Y-N. I'm not retarded cause when I'm on the mic you best not start it. Cause when I'm on the mic I'm coming solid gold rocking on my mic like I was in a Rolls Royce that is. Don't you know? Good to go without a word to say. Go ahead CJ. Let them know, okay? I don't know what I'm rapping but the C-H-A-R-L-E-S but you know what? Kicking like a Dean all the way live. Making all ladies scream this is no time. Time is of the essence like a twilight zone. Women flock to my presence. I'm out like a poem. I sit back and relax. Kick my feet up watching Carl Favre but I take a sip of my cup watching cable movies like Sisgoon Eber. Women cooking in the kitchen like June Cleaver. I met this girl her name was Jen. She danced so hard she kicked the fan such got in the way. I yelled hey. Chills of dip hit the floor people leap with the door to fan flying in the air like cats with their friendly coats. Someone knocked over a chair. They stepped their big toe. One smack, two smack, three bangs them locks. As they fan hit the wall everyone hit the floor. Alright. Alright. Alright. Alright. We love everybody out there. The Freddie and Paul show let us know. Tee Grizzly is good to go without a word to say. Don't you know we're so funky and we're good to go. Alright. That's a new friend the Paul and Fred nursery rhyme right there. And if y'all want to check out some more live entertainment the Charles Jennings channel on YouTube come say hi. I'm waiting for y'all. I'll put a link in the notes. Perfect. Mine too. Alright. You already have some. Oh Tee Grizzly what's happening? Peace out to Tee Grizzly. Tee Grizzly. I opened up for you in Sacramento at hot one oh three five. I don't know if you knew that for sure. But I did two songs before you came on for your interview. And you're doing very good on the ratings and I just wanted to put props out to you because I think I'm a fan of you and check me out on the Freddy and Paul show. There you go. And we're all doing it big. So yeah. Alright. We got it. Alright. Go ahead CJ. One love. Alright. Amen.