https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=DIe5kZFVMv8

 Hey, how y'all doing? Welcome to the Freddie and Paul show. We're gonna do music first and then I guess we're gonna have more chitter chat. So go for it. Cause my stuff is in the bag. Alright, busted time. I need to see it too though, Fred. Oh, shoot. Um, from A to Z. We're gonna have the steady power. On the church this day, this hour. Praise we knew a life we'd lost. Say we're gonna advance in cause. Wind who makes all winds blow. Guts and beans, saplings low. Gales and have the seat in the way. In the caves, aim your breath. With steady power. On the church this day, this hour. Don't you know cause it's never sour. Coming up like this and I will devour. Every MC that wants to challenge me. Step on up cause I'm Freddie D. The man they call all the time. Will it debuss or hardcore rhyme? Don't forget about Paul cause he stands tall. And Tommy knows it all. Don't you know, my friend. We got Jesus doing these things and she'll come in. On the church this day, this hour. Praise we knew a life we'd lost. Say we're gonna advance in cause. Yeah, boy. One more verse. One more verse. Okay. I got to do one more verse. Holy Spirit, wind and flame. Move us with them our mortal frame. Make our hearts in altar to pride. Kinder with them in your own fire. Breathe and blow up upon the blaze. Till our lives and our deeds and our ways. Meet that time with every land. By graceful show you understand. Like me the boy Freddie D. Peace out. Now we gotta talk. Now we gotta talk? Yeah. We gotta talk about the game and stuff. Okay. You want me to pause it? Okay. We did the music first cause that was good for Tommy and Gigi. And now Freddie, you want to talk about the sermon a little bit? Yes, sir. And then we're going to talk about the Warriors. Warriors, yeah. Okay. So the sermon was about... I got it. Oh, boy. Well, it was about God in relationships. In relationships and how friends... Things can be replaced but people can't. That's true. And people in God, you can grace their mercy. When someone stands against you, you can pray for them. And then you can understand them better. And relive their pain. And relive a better plantation. Okay. Well, it was about relationships. And it was about how you would like... What celebrities would you like to have a relationship with? Will Smith. Will Smith. LL Cool J. LL Cool J. And Clay Thompson. Okay. So Will Smith, LL Cool J, and Clay Thompson. Here's the thing. Why don't you have a relationship with those guys? I don't know them. Why don't you know them? Because they're famous. Because they're famous. Everybody wants to have a relationship with those guys. But who's bigger, them or God? God. Do you have to wait in line to have a relationship with God? No, you should pray to God anytime you want. And he can bring you farther in the world. And do better things for you if you ask. And the door shall be opened unto you. There you go. Allelu, allelu. There's the sermon. There's the sermon right there. Wow, I knew it. Why am I so knowledgeable on this stuff? I don't want to be conceited, but why do I know these things, man? What is going on? What is going on? I mean, things are going good with me. I mean, I got everything going on, man. I mean, I got all my friends. I got my family. I got you. I got, you know, Reggie. And I don't know, man. Just life is good, man. Life is good. I love it. And I don't do it for the fame. I do it for Jesus Christ. Okay, that's good. That's good. So, yeah. So, okay, so we talked about sermon. You want to talk about the Warriors? The Warriors champions. Go, Klay Thompson. So who's the MVP? Did they decide who the MVP was? I don't remember. Was it? Stephon Curry. Oh, was it Curry? Yeah, it was either Curry or Durant. Yeah. I'm not sure. But we'll find out next week and we'll talk about it more. Okay. I would like to do one verse acapella. Okay. All right. Should I sing it? It's up to you. Sing it or rap. No, mom says rap it. Mom says rap. Okay. I'll do it sitting down. Okay. Wind who makes all winds blow. Gusts have been the saplings low. Gales have the sea in waves. Sterlings in the mines with deep caves. Aim your breath with steady power. On your church this day, this very hour. Don't you know it's me, Freddie D. Raise, renew the life we lost. Spirit of God, a pen of cost. We come to church, it don't cost. Read the Bible, pray every day. That's the only way you're gonna make it, man. I'm Freddie D. Who's that guy? He's Freddie. He loves Jesus Christ, G. Who's that guy? He's Freddie. He loves Jesus Christ, G. Amen, hallelujah. Number 64. Is that really what it was? 64? Yeah, it was 63 last week. It was either 62. It was 63 last week. 64 this week. Wow, we've really been doing it big, man. We enjoy all your views. Oh, you wanna read it? Well, I didn't see Freddie D. in the song. I know, I made it up. I added it. It's okay. It's merciful. It's great. All right, I'm gonna lead prayer, Paul. Oh, we're gonna have a prayer? Yeah, I'm gonna pray for the people out there. Okay, dude, that's a good idea. All you people out there, I pray for you. Jesus Christ will come to you. All you have to do is ask, and the door will be opened onto you. Allelu, allelu. Jesus, thank you for this day. Thank you for everything, because this is the holy way. We are in command because you made us in command, and we wanna be like you. Fisher them in, and we'll reel them in. Because, God, you really got it going on then. Thank you very much. Amen, hallelujah. 64? 64. 64 done. Amen. Amen. One more thing. What else do you think? I was told Jerry Mongrin might go to Portland. Oh, but I have good news. What? My teams are getting a second draft pick. That's good. Coming up. Good. So they're looking at a European guy, people out there, a European guy. No joke. Some of our people. Some people. Yeah, Europeans. Europeans. I have one question, Paul. Yes. Do they really tune in in Canada and Michigan? Yes, I'm from Europe, too. Are you for real? Hi, Europe. Anyway, okay, Paul. Well, thank you. Let's do the one love. Okay. One love. Amen. Amen. 64.