https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=Iis3Wut2bQ4

 Welcome to the Freddie and Paul show this is episode 37. I checked it yesterday Yesterday was 36 days 37. We're at Golden Corral. We had our we had our lunch today. It was quaint It was good. We talked about a good subjects. We talked about Old TV programs such as three company ages enough Starsky and Hutch Talked about his mother's favorite soap operas General Hospital mom remember General Hospital Luke and Laura Laura. That's a legend. I Hope you liked it And mom you're doing very well on your fantasy football Paul's not too happy about it, but he'll be okay with it. It's just a game. You know church is more important Heidelberg cat chism Asking you shall be your name Ask and ye shall be added on to you seek ye first the kingdom of God And all that good stuff and hallelujah hallelujah And amen and um, so I was gonna think of some shows So what was your favorite old time tv show Fred leave it to beaver leave it to beaver Why leave it to beaver? What'd you like about leave it to beaver? I like the way Wally Conversed with his brother. Oh, they were good friends. They were good brothers together They were and I like their parents they I think they talked very uh, trustworthy pure grateful loyal industrious and cheerful They talked well to each other. Yes. They did they they were very respectful And very quaint Quaint quaint your word for today, isn't it? Yeah, that's my good word What other what do you when you think of quaint? What do you think of positive things positive things positive outreach? What's about reach Well, Starskin hutch you mentioned you remember anything about starskin hutch what'd you like about them Well, you got to refresh me a little bit paul starskin hutch. It was a police show I was like I was like this car. I thought I had a cool car Okay, and I liked I liked this car and stars. Hey, um, did you like that one movie paul? Yeah everybody which everybody way but which With everybody, but every which way but loose. Yeah, every which way but loose clint eastwood clint eastwood. Did you like it? Boy, that's a long time. I remember the title Okay, and I remember they had a song that went with the title But I don't remember much about the movie except that there was a there was a orangutan in it. I remember that yeah Yeah, you're right. But that's all I remember in the bandit smoky in the band Duca hazard duca hazard. There's a car going to duke. Yeah car shows jump jump over cars He's to be outraged what about knight rider knight rider remember oh, yeah, david has some fall off david He was on um That one show with the beach baywatch baywatch. Yeah, I don't know if they're gonna redo that or not or what They did a movie about baywatch. They did with the rock. I didn't see it. I didn't Maybe I'll have to catch it out later. Yeah, I didn't see that so okay. So um, yeah Um, so who had julio jones because he did really good A lot of points that ryan didn't have no who had rogers. Oh rossenberger Rob wait, wait, wait, you got rothless burger rothless burger Okay, how many how many yards did he throw for uh, he had a pretty good game Okay, they won like 45 to nothing. Yeah Yeah raiders raiders boy. Yeah, boy We raiders did good 45 to 6, I think niners looked bad. Yeah, but that's okay They'll be good next week. They're gonna practice up and and and patch it up right mom They're gonna patch it up as you would say. Yeah, we'll see All right, anything else? That's it for today. No, I just wanted to know um how uh Um Give me the definition of abundant Abundant. Yeah, that's a good question fred Abundant means it's kind of like a picture It's kind of like lunch at golden corral. We had abundant food. There was all you could eat Oh, it's like plenty full plenty full. That's right. That's right Several yeah more than more than you need a bond right? We did good. Yeah, that's that's Vision of a lot. I got it. Yeah. All right. I'm not gonna do a rap today people just look out for a rap at another time Okay I hope everybody's doing good out there And I hope everybody keeps up with their fantasy football players who plays tonight by the way one more time Um the giants and somebody I think the giants and the lions. Oh, that's right You got it. So I need a big big game out of golden tate golden tate now now What what colors did he come out of I have no idea. Oh is nother dame doing good this year I have no idea. Hey, michigan one. Yeah, I got the michigan right here Anyways, you know i'm saying michigan did good. All right. All right, so we all sat in. Yeah. Thank you Thanks for watching one Love amen. Hallelujah. Amen. Hallelujah