https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=7kJ5yVx-sdo

 Hey, welcome to the Freddie and Paul show and we have again our our semi regular special guest Nancy She's quite fancy today with her purple. Nice purple. And so what are we gonna talk about today? So, what are we gonna talk about today Olympics Olympics, okay Do the sermon first, okay, what did you think of the sermon? I'm what do I think I thought that Paul did a wonderful job of talking about Abram and You didn't really trust God and when he said that he was going to give him a son or Sarah a son and so anyhow he laughed and What's wrong with laughing? Laughing is the best man. I don't think we should laugh at God. We're not laughing at God. No, can we laugh at God? I suppose it could be a sin in some certain situations God Created laughter, but yeah in the sermon Abraham laughing was an expression of his doubt What but you know? The first you started out with we have so much suffering and When you're depressed you go to the Lord and ask for help You know guidance and praise right so you're loyal and death is cheerful Sometimes don't you say God why? Yeah, but you shouldn't doubt God because God's always there if you ask for forgiveness, right God bears our He is always there and he bears is on our side always Okay and God is good. Yes. He's always good all the time and we don't always see the good that God's doing Good that God's doing but we sure we should be thankful and treat others the way we want to be treated. Yeah That's the golden rule Glad you know it too when we're stuffing and we don't think God's on our side We still have him and Jesus Christ Jesus are two different. No, no, they're Two people in the Little little catechism quiz for Nancy on the show All right, so so like the sermon that's good. How about the Olympics what's happening the Olympics? Okay, the women's hockey team Okay, let me tell you how to talk to the camera a little oh the women's hockey team play the USA Women's hockey team play but get this ball They played and it was two to two for the longest. Uh-huh. So they went overtime Uh-huh. So now what they do in overtime is one player with their hockey puck goes up the ice and Goes against the goalie one person Wow and they missed it the first time But then Canada missed it, uh-huh. I know we have fans in Canada too, so we can't be too Anyways, anyways, let me say this for I forget what I'm gonna say. Anyways the second time one of the ladies went down the ice and put it past the Canada's Goalie and they won the gold Wow, so the US beat Canada you were Wow, so the women are mighty you should be thankful But I'm not gonna be biased but anyways and Let's see what else Oh Bob said the women's will be the US women. Yeah, you're a golden man See I think the women a lot more gold medals than the men well, they both do but Anyway, I think American women's sports is is more developed than in a lot of other countries Oh and since we talked what about those Philadelphia Eagles? Yeah. Yeah those Eagles Didn't even play or Lynch or what's this thing? No, no, it's starting quarterback. Yeah Falls play to be played great it was winch right? No way when Winch or something. Yeah, but they didn't play. It was a great Super Bowl. It was a great Super Bowl It was foals. I think foals. Yeah, he would be a very good. It was a great Super Bowl It was it was a it was a exciting game from start to finish in Jacksonville before they played that game when they played New England they almost beat him. Yeah Jacksonville. They were good too with oh, yeah I mean he's starts winning that the quarterback for Carson Wentz is the quarterback. No, I'm talking about for the Jacksonville when the Jaguars played was the Bartles or Bartles? There you go. He is awesome. Yeah, what about the Kings right now? Well, yeah, they're doing too hot, but they're doing all right They did beat the Warriors in Oakland Really that's a plus beat the Warriors in Oakland. Yes. I couldn't believe it. Wow, that's impressive Fox had 25 What's that one guy's name Just know they had a good game and give them faith they might make the playoffs, but we'll see and I know I heard it Anyways, okay. So next week so you'll be tuned in I'll have a song ready Well, I'm gonna I'm gonna sing a song real quick. I'm not gonna rap Okay, just let me sing a song you don't I'll do I'll do two verses I don't need the piano Alright we three Kings of Boreen are Traveling gifts we travel afar field and Mountain Lord and Mountain Following yonder star Star of wonder star of right star with brutal royal right Westward leading still proceeding Guide us through this fur Fig life Amen, hallelujah. We love you Lord. We are here for you and I hope you listen you fans will tune in because your Opinion means a lot and we will finish the show and land the plane land the plane ready? Okay One love hallelujah, what number is this? We got say it say it 40 48 48 we'll be back with you next week