https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=c6XoKFuSTtc

 Hey Paul, what's happening man? How you doing Fred? I'm doing good. So basically what I want to tell you is the A's are going to be in the playoffs if they win one more. Wow! And the 49ers had four wins. 49ers have had a great season. They've had three in a row. Oh, three in a row. Berkeley won their first game but they lost their last. Berkeley? Cal Berkeley. Oh, okay. The college team. Yeah, Cal football. Okay. And I'm very impressed with the A's. That's very good. Davis, Chris Davis. And then there's another Davis. And then there's another Simeon. There's a Simeon. He's the right fielder for the A's. And the other players are good. Oh, don't forget about Boshi. He is resigning. Yep, that's true. For the Giants. The coach. Oh really? Yeah. For the San Francisco Giants? The San Francisco Giants, correct. Yes. Okay. Chris Boshi. Or I can't remember his first name but it's Boshi, his last name. Okay. Anyways, and I just wanted to say the 49ers are doing good and who else? The Raiders are doing okay but they lost one game. And the sermon I got, I'm trying to, help me out Paul and then I'll add a little bit with you. What was it basically saying? It's basically saying, tell me if I'm wrong or right, it's basically saying if you follow Jesus, Jesus will guide you through the way. Yeah, that's, well most sermons are kind of like that. Ask and you shall receive. Let's see what mom thought. Okay, that's fine. So we got the sermon report. She got notes and everything. Well not very many but anyhow, the sermon was those and fishes. Alright. And the part that I was interested in and Jesus is a very smart man, I mean, he really was. He had his disciples do the work. He did. Oh, that's right. Sort of. I mean, he did the pride and the stone. He did the pride and the stone. All they had was. David and Jacob. No, no. Jacob. What about Jacob? He did what Jesus asked. Yeah. Maybe it's in the Old Testament. Oh, okay. We're in the miracles. We're in the miracles. He had, these disciples had five loaves of bread and two little king fish I think. He didn't say anything about the size of the fish. Well, at the end you made him this big. A lot of the fish were kind of like this big to see. I don't know. Well, whatever. We don't know about the size of the fish. And anyhow. It wasn't Jonah's fish. Then the disciples said, well, how are we going to, it's going to cost a lot of money to do this. And that's Daenerys, okay. And anyhow, then they. Oh boy. They just didn't know what they were going to do with 5,000 people. I mean, that would take a whole year's wages. So anyhow, but Jesus says, calm down. You can do it. Come as you are. No, I will help you. I will help you. And believe it or not. But Paul said come as you are. Jesus helped. You know, there's times when we say there's no way. There's just no way I can do this. But then Jesus' little voice, maybe the Spirit, says, yes, you can, Nancy. You can do it. And with God's strength. Like in Philippians 4 13, I can do all things to Christ. That's strength. Gives me strength. So come to Jesus. Come as you are. Right. Yeah. So anyhow, that's what I got out of sin. Oh, that's good. That's a repeat game. I'm about to do this. I'm going to sing. Freddie sang today for praise time. Thank you, sir. I appreciate it. Yeah, I did. I'm going to sing come now is the time to worship. And now I'm going to sing. Do it as a rap. This little item. I know. I just want to sing it. Here we go. Okay, I'll rap it. Come now is the time to worship. Come now time to worship. To give your heart. Come just as you are to worship. Come just as you are before God. Come one day every tongue will confess. You are God. One day one knee will bow. Still the greatest treasure will remain for those who gladly choose you now. Willingly we surrender to her. All our lives. Willingly our knees will bow. With all our hearts. With all our hearts and our souls. The strength we gladly choose you now. Come just as you are. Come just as you are. And yo, you ain't too far. One more. This little light of mine. I'm going to let it shine. This little light of mine. I'm going to let it shine. This little light of mine. I'm going to let it shine. Let it shine. Let it shine. Let it shine. Everywhere I go. I'm going to let it shine. Everywhere I go. I'm going to let it shine. Everywhere I go. I'm going to let it shine. Let it shine. From Sacramento to L.A. Jesus gave it to me. I'm going to let it shine. Jesus gave it to me. I'm going to let it shine. Jesus gave it to me. I'm going to let it shine. From the 916 to the 209. All around. Get down to the funky sound that profounds. Because Freddy D is on the mic and yo, man. Jesus Christ is number one for now. How was that, Sheriff? That was, that was, that was a treat. That was a treat. That was a treat. Peace out to CJ, one love. Peace out to Gordon, one love. And it's in the show. Alright. One love. Amen. Holy. That was awesome, man.