https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=CkVQQahvrqs

 Hello everybody out there. Happy Easter. I hope you're doing well. I hope you're doing fine. I'm Fred D. This is my mom Nancy. We got called G. And that's for Shiggy D. Where's the G? What G do I got Fred? Goodness. Goodness. Goodness. Alright. Gentle. Gentle. Generous. Giant. Giant. Tall. Tall. Oh that's with a T. That's with a T. Welcome to the Fred and Paul show. What? Guess what? What? The 49ers got the second round draft pick. Did they? Yeah. So they get the second round team on the 49ers. Alright. And the first was the Arizona Cardinals. Alright. And it looks like a guy named Murray from Oklahoma is going to be the quarterback. And we will see who gets him. Okay. Because I'm not for sure who. Okay. So happy Easter everybody. Okay. And I hope you guys are doing well. And I hope you ate up your ham and your turkey and all that gravy stuff. Because mashed potatoes are good. Mashed potatoes are good. And hush puppies are good food too. Hush puppies are good food. And um. Well what do you think? So let's get down to Sacramento news here Fred. What do you think of the Kings vladi firing the coach of the Kings? What do you think? I thought Yeager was a good coach. He made him coach of the playoffs. Last year they almost didn't make the playoffs. But this year they almost made the playoffs. They won a considerable amount of games. That's true. And they had a good team. They had Fox. Yep. And Collie Stein. Yep. Yep. And helped me out with a couple of things. I don't know. I didn't follow the Kings much this year. But I heard they were good. Fox, Collie Stein. But I think vladi wanted to get the other guy out of the way so he could get Luke Walton in. He wanted Luke Walton. Why would he want Luke Walton? But he's from the Lakers. But vladi was on the Lakers too remember? Oh. Vladi was on the Lakers. Did vladi play with Luke Walton? I don't think so. No? No because he played with Shaquille O'Neal. Against Shaquille O'Neal. Yeah. Yeah. And they didn't play together. Vladi didn't play. Vladi played against Madden. Okay. Okay. I think so. It was way back. So that was the big news. And today is Easter. What is Easter Sunday about? God has risen. Today. In a generous way. And the total velocity of the second hand motion of the earth's thrust is the good stuff. Okay. Now we're going to sing this song. Wait a minute. You talk. Let her explain. I'm going to do some ministry that Paul did today. Okay. Okay. If you believe in the resurrection, how does it affect you? Think about that. Okay? Think about it. Now. Well words can't describe what Jesus did. He died for our sins. So every time we ask for forgiveness, He shall forgive us. Seek ye first the kingdom of God. Seek ye first the kingdom of God. Oh, Allelu, Allelu. Okay. All right. And. So think about it. I can say what I think. Go ahead. It's your turn. It might be wrong. You got the floor. Go ahead. I know He is at the right hand of God. Yes. I know He's not in that tomb no more. He's out. And He is alive. He's alive. Get down. Five is alive. All right. All right. Now I'm going to wrap this. Oh, yeah. Wrap it. Okay. You guys ready? Yep. I'm ready. Here we go. Christ the Lord is risen today. Alleluia, Alleluia. All creation join to sing. Alleluia, Alleluia. Raise your joys and triumphs high. Alleluia, Alleluia. Sing the heavens, earth reply. Alleluia, Alleluia. Love's redeeming. Work is done. Alleluia, Alleluia. Fight the fight. The battle won. Alleluia, Alleluia. Death is vain. Forbids is rise. Alleluia, Alleluia. Soar. We now. We're Christ led. Alleluia, Alleluia. Once He died our souls to save. Alleluia, Alleluia. Christ is open paradise. Alleluia, Alleluia. Praise the Lord. All right, Fred. I like it when you rap hymns. That's cool. I like that. We'll keep it up. We'll be doing this when I come to church. We'll do this. All right. I think this is episode two. Episode two. No, three. It's three. Is it three of the new season? Yeah, because it's the fall. That's right. We did it. We did the switch. And then so episode three of Since You've Been Back. So two of the new season. I'll worry about that. It'll be awesome. We'll get to it. And it'll probably be up tonight, right? If I have time this afternoon, otherwise tomorrow or so. Look out for the, like I said, look out for the 49ers. They're going to be good this year. Look out for the 49ers. And how are the Kings going to do with Luke Walton? They're going to do awesome. They're going to do awesome. They're going to get used to them and they're going to work as a team. Because teamwork is the real reason I have self-esteem. Because teamwork with you and teamwork with my mom gives me therapy and the total velocity of the second hand motion. I still don't know what that means. It means a positive vision. Okay. Any last words, Nancy? No, just have a happy Easter. Alright. Enjoy your family. Thank you. And all the blessings that you have. That's right. There you go. Alright, ready? We got to do the one love. One love. Amen. Hallelujah. Alright, that was good.