https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=61aJXKgq_vw

 All right we're back again this is our second show. What's happening y'all? And I asked Fred what we should talk about and first topic is coffee in restaurants. So Fred I don't drink coffee. I do. Okay so tell me about coffee in restaurants. Well I like coffee in restaurants where it's iced coffee and it has mocha and chocolate in it because it tastes good that way and you put whipped cream on it and chocolate, chocolate flavor, syrup and it keeps you awake and keeps you alert and it makes your day go through. A matter of fact when I do my performances I have coffee before I perform because it gives me so much energy that the energy is energy. Okay Freddy let me ask you a question. Yes. How much so do you drink a day? I have about a half a two liter. Half a two liter a day? Yeah that's 32 ounces. How much so did you just drink at Golden Corral? Five cups. Not five cups five glasses. Right. Five cups of 16 ounce cups so 16 times five is what? A lot. It's okay. I'm cool. But I'm cool, I'm cool, I'm cool like cool water. He's all hucked up on caffeine. Yeah buddy. So Freddy what's the deal with tipping the lady at Golden Corral? Oh I just wanted to see the numbers because Pastor Paul wanted to get a tip and I wasn't sure he was supposed to give a tip. Every time we go to Golden Corral and I want to give a tip you always fight me. Why don't you let me, why don't you want me to tip the ladies there at Golden Corral? I don't know because you work hard for your money. You work hard for the money. So hard for the money. You think that's gonna help your musical career? Yep. Okay we have anything else so we talked about the tip, we talked about the numbers, we talked about now you ever drink at Starbucks? Yeah. Is Starbucks that kind of coffee you like? Yeah. Any other place you drink coffee? No just at home sometimes. Just regular instant coffee. Okay. Okay. Anything else? That's about it, we'll see you on the next program. Okay well you gotta send off there Freddy, what'd you say last time? We'll catch you on the flip side. Sacramento talking. One love.