https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=CAVEHewYhko

 Wait a minute welcome to the Freddie and Paul show. Hello. How are you Paul? How was your vacation? I had a good vacation Thank you. You know, it's okay. You can't take me out tomorrow to lunch But when it's all good, you know, cuz things work in mysterious ways and if you're busy, I understand I'm a very understanding person. I am networking Yeah, I did I forgot to tell you a while back. I did a Introduction uh-huh to a major rapper really out of Detroit really? Yeah and The radio station had me go up there and I did three songs really before he did his interview It was just a meet-and-greet and he did an interview. Hi T Grizzly. You're the one I met Anyways, you've got it going on. I have an email out to you Anyways, I would he told me There's a possibility he might be coming in the wintertime and he might want me to open up under balance the house be awesome Say hi to T Grizzly. I T Grizzly. Hi T Grizzly He came to this if you have Fred open up for you Even I would go to Thunder Valley and watch your show just to have just to hear Freddie open So that would be that'd be good. I'm gonna do a song real quick and then we're done. Okay. All right Are you out there T Grizzly? Hear me out. This is gonna be acapella because we don't have time. Okay. Okay, here we go Come now time to worship come now time to give your heart Come now come to worship come now to give God to come one day come Every tongue will confess you are God you were every need you shall bow Still treasure made for those I'm from the ninth floor six really though Who got to choose now? Willing we surrender our lives will in our knees we bow With all the heart and strength we gladly choose you now Who's that guy? He's ready He loves Jesus Christ G who's that guy? He's ready He loves Jesus Christ G peace out and Tommy we enjoyed you in in Praise time and you will be greatly missed But I'll remember all the good times and like I said peace out to all my homeboys Gordon CJ which is Captain Morgan. I'm sure he'll be coming soon and I got to give it up to T Grizzly I'll be talking to you to grizzly Thank you for the comments and everything you said and I'm glad I had did three songs before you came on for an interview At one hot 103 five Peace out hot 103 five and I can't forget it from 102 because they cool too Anyway, hang us are these paying no no no I know why don't we have endorsements of the Freddie and Paul show? Tell them tell them that's what we need Endorsements we need we need We need up Endorsements right? Yeah, we need we need Comments we got comments Anyway, it's just we need structure structure All right, we're gonna count for the Kings. Oh, by the way the Giants. Oh, you know who's doing good. Hold on the A's The A's are doing good Davis. I can't remember his first name, but he has 45 home runs are really Wow any place for the A's I'm not born yet. All right. All right. Well, here we go Peace out one love. Amen. Hallelujah. What number? Yeah 7071 so I don't know 71 no 74. I believe it's a high number We're we're well into senior citizenhood. All right, peace out everybody. Peace out