https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=XfsGicXQBq0

 Hey Paul, how you doing now? I'm doing good Fred, how are you? I got good news. What's your good news? The Kings got the second draft pick for next year. Who you talking to? I'm talking to, I was just looking at my mom. Oh. Cause she was looking at me like, oh yeah, go Kings, get it going on like Donkey Kong, you know. Anyways, uh, but she likes the Warriors now. You know, you remember that one thing I said? Warriors come out and play! That's what they say sometimes after the game. That's from a movie. Oh, I know, but that's what they say with basketball. Yeah. Yeah. I really enjoyed your sermon, you did a good job. Thanks Fred. I learned a lot from your sermon. You know what church is to me? What? My therapy. Is it? Yeah. Because all the stuff I gotta go through, and there's people out there hating on me, telling me you this and that, but I don't worry about that. If I hear something like that, I ignore them because I would give credit where credit is due and I walk in love, Paul. Anyways, let me do this real quick and then we'll send it out. Okay. Open the eyes of my heart, Lord. Open the eyes of my heart. I want to see you. I want to see you. To see you high and lifted up. Shining in the light of your glory. Pour out your power and love as we sing holy, holy, holy. Holy, holy, holy. Holy, holy, holy. Holy, holy, holy. I want to see you. Well, we don't even need a choir. I'm afraid he got the whole church filled. Right on. So let's talk about the Warriors. Yeah. Anyways, the Warriors gotta play Houston. Okay. Yeah, they're playing Houston. Anybody know what the series is at? 2-2. Oh, big game today. Paul, yesterday Boston lost to Cleveland. Cleveland won. Cleveland won. Cavs are in the fight. Or it's 2-2. Okay. I haven't been following. Cleveland and then they go back to Boston. But yeah. Okay. So the Kings got the second draft pick. That might help them. Let's hope so. Thing big on the Kings. What else we got? Oh yeah, remember this. Fissures them in. Let's reel them in. Anyways, my boy Gordon sitting down. What's up, Gordon? One love to you, brother. All right. I'm gonna wrap this and we're gonna close the plane. Open your eyes of my heart, Lord. Open the eyes of my heart. I want to see you. I want to see you. To see you high and lifted up. Shining in the light of your glory. Pour out your power and love as we sing. Holy, holy, holy, holy, holy, holy, holy, holy, holy. I want to see you. Thanks, Paul. And you okay? You're serving. Like give me a grasp of it. Like serve me off. We got to land the plane here because we got this other. All right, we're done. Thank you very much. Amen. Hallelujah. Thank you, Tommy, for helping me with the guitar. He's awesome. He's awesome. And we are cool and we'll see you next week and tune in and tune into our program because your comments are greatly appreciated. All you people that are listening. One love. Amen. Hallelujah. All right, we're done. There we go. All right. Ready? Let's just do, let's just do seven. Yeah. Okay, ready? Okay. Okay, ready? We'll do it twice. Sacramento with your boyfriend and my homeboy, Tommy. What's really going on in the night? What's the CRC doing? A really big, we're going to sing to check it out. Here we go. One, two, three, hit it. To proclaim and to heal. With your power and your authority. To overcome and heal the world. One more time. The world. Go warriors. Yeah, go warriors. All right, I love you bro. Turn it off real quick. I'll tell, I'll tell Paul.