https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=7SVtTqEwlqg

 Welcome to the Freddie and Paul show. I think this is episode 38. 38 coming up. And we're here at Living Stones. Yeah. And we've got Nancy on today again. Nancy Nancy. And what are we gonna talk about today Fred? Well first we're gonna talk about the sermon and then we'll talk about football. Okay first we'll talk about sermon then we'll talk about football. Okay what I got out of the sermon is Bathsheba was a lady right? Bathsheba was a lady. Okay and and Jezebel. Jezebel. Not Jezebel but Jezebel. No Jezebel. Jezebel. Jezebel. Okay okay. She was another lady right? Bathsheba and Jezebel. Now were they good friends or something? No they lived at different times. I was making the comparison between David and Ahab and the situation with Nabath was kind of like David and Bathsheba. Okay. Ahab and Nabath and David and Bathsheba. Okay David because David liked Bathsheba right? David liked Bathsheba. That's right but she was married to Uriah. What? Yeah. So David liked another woman that was already married. That's right. What kind of joke is that? That's player hatin'. That's adultery. That's stupid. Why would someone do that? Well you know the story so then. There's other fish in the sea. That's why we're fishers of men. Okay. Unfortunately this is still going on. Well anyway what I wanted to know is was Bathsheba, what happened to Bathsheba after? Was she still with David or was she with. Well so David had Uriah her husband killed to cover up the pregnancy. And then they got married after that? I know it's like Jerry Springer and they got married after that. That's stupid. And she was the mother. God don't like ugly Paul. She was the mother of Solomon. Oh okay I get it. So what else went on with this? Like you were saying in the sermon basically you were saying well I don't know if you said treat others the way you want to be treated. But they weren't treating others the way you want them to be treated. No they sure weren't. Because they weren't living the Christian holy life. No they sure weren't. They sure weren't. Any thoughts you had on the sermon Nancy? Well basically I'm going to take it from where you were. Ahab wanted Naboth's land. Okay I get that. Because the land was worth so much. Jezebel. Yeah because it was right next to his palace. Wealthy. Jezebel said well we're going to get that land. And so she invited everybody to come into the city. And then they said. She be talking. He said. Jezebel said that Naaman was corrupt and did not like God. And so in that time you didn't like God I guess you were maybe stoned or something. I don't know why. Jezebel found two false witnesses to say that Naboth cursed God and the king. And so then they had him stoned. And then they were jealous. Well they had him stoned and then Ahab took the land. Okay I got it. Pastor Paul was talking the word corruption. Corruption okay. Corruption and so Ahab, Jezebel got the land for Ahab. So he had the land and then he repented. He repented in sackcloth because he knew he had been corrupted. It was a vineyard. You know how vineyards look like. Grapes. And they made wine out of that. You coming on the show too Carmen? Oh wow. Come on. Come on. I don't know. You don't have to say anything. You just show up on camera. You can just say hi. Okay this is Carmen Cole, one of my friends for almost 50 years. Oh boy. My Aunt Carmen. My Aunt Carmen. Yeah. In God's way. Uh huh. Because we're all plentiful. I don't know what that means. So anyhow, yeah. You want to say anything? She don't know what we're talking about. Well I don't know who I'm talking to. Well you're talking to, Freddie often talks to kings and everybody watches our show right Fred? Right. Canada, Michigan, Sacramento. Freddie and Paul's show is almost famous. We are celebrities. It's nice to be on your show. Nice. Yeah. This is like the late night show on David Letterman. No joke. Okay. So who's going to do good on basketball this year, Aunt Carmen? I don't know. I haven't watched it too many sports lately. Curry right Paul? Steph Curry. He'll do well. Steph Curry. And Thompson. That's right. Naina never shows up on our show. She's a player hater. She's a player hater. Anyways, I'm his plan. Oh okay. Talk to Marshall. Ask Marshall if she's got one. Marshall's not here. But I don't know where she keeps them. I think the Warriors are going to do really good this year Mom. They got Curry, they got Thompson, and they got Durant. They did Real World last year. They did the whole thing against Cleveland Cavaliers. Do you know that the Cleveland Cavaliers got Isaiah Thomas from the Celtics? No joke. Really? Yes. The point guard. They used to be in Sacramento. Yeah and they got rid of him for some ungodly way. I don't know why they did that. Is that politics or what? Anyways, all I know is they should have kept him and they should have kept cousins too. But you know, maybe they couldn't grasp the wealth because they couldn't afford him. Anyways, basically what I wanted to say is, who do you have today Mom? I know Reggie said you had Fitzgerald, you had Rossenberger, and you'll be playing your son today I found out. I'm playing Jared today. Jared was talking to me. He's a very nice individual. And I like to talk on this show because it makes me feel good. And when I perform, when I perform Paul, I usually have a cup of coffee so I can perform at my total velocity of the secondhand motion. That sounds like a performance enhancing drug. Caffeine is a performance enhancing drug. Is that what you're saying Fred? No, no, no. It just keeps me going because I love to feel the crowd. When I went to Philadelphia and I performed, I had one soda and man, man, I was just working it man. My stuff was on hit man. I couldn't quit man. I had the crowd going, go Freddy, go Freddy. And I was busting rhymes Paul and that's when you came pick me and CJ up at the airport. Yeah, I remember that. But I didn't like the flight because it was a long flight. And then like you were saying in the Bible study today, they changed our flight because I didn't know which flight to go to but I thought it was wrong. And CJ got mad at me because we had to change flights and what happened is, but everything worked out to be good. Everything worked out fine. Okay, well this was a good show and I hope you guys tune in because we are comedians of Sacramento and Michigan and what else? Canada. And not to mention, I am having a good day and I hope my day goes good. And I think I'm going to go to Costco and have a Polish dog and a soda for lunch. Now, you guys understand that everything's fine and my mom is doing good. She's a good American citizen. And I think, and I think football do good today. So let's close the show. This was a very nice show. We'll do the show again next week or the week following. And thank you for tuning in. Do you have anything to add? No, I think it was a good show. All right, well we love everybody out there and we treasure your comments. So go ahead and comment to Paul what you would like us to talk about. And we can do that because this is the Freddie D and Paul show and we got it going on in the 916. We're going to land the plane here, Fred. And I'm going to land the plane right now. We all put one love up. Ready? All right, here we go. One, two, three. No, the other hand, Mom, because that's not the L. You got to put the L up. One love. Amen. Hallelujah. Christian informed church up in this. Yeah, boy.