https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=JQrTY0nQhfo

 All right welcome to the Freddie and Paul show. How you doing Paul? I'm doing good. How are you doing Fred? I'm okay. We have Nancy and with us today too. I'm doing better. And we last week recorded a show and it didn't record for some reason. It was a good show too. I thought it went really well. I know it went good. That's okay we'll make it, we'll capitalize and do better. We'll capitalize and do better. What should we talk about this week? Well these days, no not that. The A's are doing really good. They're in third place. They were in second to last place. So there's a possibility they might make the playoffs. Okay. And I'm not sure who Leonard went to. I was wondering if you knew who the guy on Toronto. Did he go to another team? I don't know. That's what I wanted to ask. Wow I don't know. I tried to follow it and I couldn't follow it because it took so long. It took them so long to make this decision that it was like you just didn't know who you were going to go to. They said Clippers maybe and then they said maybe the Lakers or whatever. Oh I think my son said he went to the Clippers. Oh he did? Yeah. Oh see that's why we gotta leave room for the Deacons to come in and use the cotton. Yeah. So Cynthia gets to be on the Freddie Paul show. If they wouldn't have had Leonard we would have won. We have Boogie Cousins and we still had Iggy Dogga and we had Clay Thompson. We didn't have a Durant but if we would have had Durant we would have won. Because Durant was injured and they don't know who he's going to go to. He's free agent too. So we don't know who Durant's going to. That made me upset that they got rid of Durant. Not get rid of him but he's going somewhere else and the total velocity of the second-hand motion and reaching the third-hand thrust is not always. I know what you mean by that Freddie. I know but it's my talk. Freddie talk. It's Freddie talk. Okay what are we going to do today? So we have the basketball. Okay the sermon. Uh oh. Okay Paul stormed up his sermon. The sermon report. With the strange persistence of guilt. No it wasn't strange. Guilt. And then he said can guilt be made right? And I had to think about that a little bit. Okay what about that? Well we kind of came through with the story of Jesus. God we go through Jesus. That's true. And Jesus gives us his gift. With going on the cross. Basically it's grace also. Grace and mercy. Yep grace and mercy. You're right. So then I got it. It hit me when we sang the song at communion. So anyhow. Grace and mercy. I'm trying to help you. The song I sang of course is what got it to me. Lying down your burdens. Lay down your shame. And guilt can be shame. So this show is like a chance for you to preach huh Nancy? That's kind of. Guilt is like shame isn't it Paul? Guilt and shame are a lot alike yeah. Yeah. So what? Get me. Anyhow all who are broke and lift up your face. Or wander or come home. You're not too far if you are thinking about Jesus. So lay down the hurt of guilt. Okay. Lay down your heart and come as you are. Okay so you feel guilty and oh no I'm not good enough for God. Yes you are. Oh that was good. Nancy's sermon. The sermon report. All right what do you got Fred? That was too legit to quit. Too legit to quit. All right we got some extraneous noise coming in. I'm going to close the door. Okay. So what are we going to do? You're going to wrap something? Yeah. You're going to do a wrap? Okay. I wish you'd do a cordon. You wrapped with me one time before. Why did you want to practice? Yeah that didn't go well. No you sounded good. Did I? Did I? Yeah you were exceptionally well. I saw a rapper the other day and I thought Freddy's better than him. Where was he? He was on TV. Which one was that? I don't know some guy rapping I thought Freddy's better than him. Oh do you think I've gotten better? I don't know he already is better. No I mean pretty well. Why did that be? I don't know maybe the battery's running out. Let it go fast. Okay I'll do it. Here we go. Taste and see taste and see the goodness of the Lord. Oh taste and see taste and see taste and see the Lord the Lord I will bless all times to praise shall always be on my lips my togetherness let us all praise God's name taste and see taste and see the Lord oh God taste and see goodness of the Lord of the Lord glorify the Lord with me they call me Freddy D from the 916 for she could be together let us all praise God's name amen. All right that was good. Well you know you keep trying to cut down her sermon report she keeps trying to cut down your rap. I know what the deal with that is. Can I finish it? Yeah you go right ahead. Taste and see taste and see goodness of the Lord oh taste and see worship the Lord all your people you'll want nothing if you ask for Jesus he's the one in command they call me Freddy D from the 916 man that's right I'm good out of sight running and doing it every single night gotta come up before the night is through because I was teached from Jesus straight from the goods dude. There you go. All right and before you ask about yourself I'm gonna have to do it ahead sometime. You're in a new house now though. No I don't want to talk about that. But it's a better place. No I'm just doing better and that's all we need to do. Okay I'm doing what's right. I'm not in another house I'm just doing what's right and people if they still want to talk and comment about our show. You read the comments don't you? Yes. Freddy I always read the comments. I want to hear good things and if anybody knows of any music where I could do some music and do some uh benefit concerts and get back into my music because I think I still have it and I think I can get my music going. All I need is like beats and stuff like that and just email Paul and he'll get in contact with me and then I can get my music going again and that would be awesome. Okay and that's good. Let's do the one love. All right here we go. Amen. One love. All right one love Cynthia. All right one love.