https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=EdkvGHMaSTU

 Freddie and Paul show special guest this afternoon, Gigi! Oh no, Gigi! Hi Gigi! You're the special guest, it's your birthday. Yeah, it's your birthday. My birthday is this week. It's your day. It's my day, well that's wonderful. What do we want to talk about today? How are those Giants doing? Okay. Giants are doing okay? We're okay. What kind of things do you like, Gigi? Oh no. I like things. You like things, you like music. I like music, I love music, yeah I listen to music all the time. What's going on? I love movies. Who doesn't love a good movie? That's right, who doesn't love a good movie? Fred's talking on the phone in the middle of our show. I'm sorry, my buddy called. Your buddy called you? I'm inside, bye. Alright, anyway, so. Are we talking about what kind of things Gigi likes? I can't help it, I network. I got friends, I can't help it, I have a friend. I got friends, I can't help it, man. Everybody, everybody. Come over and check, come here and see me, get a chair. Oh here's Gigi, here's CJ. Come here CJ! It's a, it just relax, relax. We'll finish up the chit chat part of the show and if CJ wants in, that's fine. Okay. So, Gigi likes to, she likes music, you like. I went to the State Fair this weekend. Oh, how was the State Fair? It was really great. I went on a Saturday, I went on Wednesday too actually. What did you do out there? I went to the exhibitions, there was a lot of really good exhibitions, a lot of great photography. They had everything in court. Really? Actually my friend Ali, do you remember Ali Lam? Yeah. She has a painting for the San Joaquin exhibit in the county. Where did she go by? She's like my height and she's got a house. Oh I don't know if I've seen her or not. I don't think she's ever been to church here. Oh okay. But I know her from school. So there's, so the World's Fair. The State Fair is pretty good this year huh? Yeah, yeah pretty good. Do you go every year? No I usually don't go because I usually hate it. But it's actually pretty good this year. Okay. Did you go to a concert? No I didn't go to the video concert. Oh no concert, okay. I heard some of the music and I was good. Alright well let's see. What else do you want to talk about Fred? Well. You liked the sermon today. The Warriors did good. You told me after the sermon that you liked it. The Warriors did good. Oh the Warriors did good? Of course you know. I told you who got the image. Yep, yep, yep. Now the Warriors, they're old news. Now we're into, we're into Hendricks football season. No, no, no, I'm just happy about them. Did you hear that DeMarcus Cousins is going to the Warriors? As if they needed him. But it helps. It helps his, it helps his games. It doesn't help the Kings. But it helps his games. It helps him get a ring. That's what it helps him. Okay Paul, we got to be deliriant, okay? Anyways, the word, what were my words we were talking about earlier? I don't remember. Oh I said Gigi Drops Science because she really does. Gigi Drops Science. It has to be the name of the episode. And I drop science. Gigi Drops Science. You're going to make it sound like I'm going to give like a sermon on this. That's right. Gigi, because Gigi Drops Science. I got one for you. Sermon on the Mount. Sermon on the Mount. There we go. Sermon on the Mount. No, I think it's Gigi Drops Science. That's the, that's the. Okay. Okay, so what are you guys going to do? No, I'm just saying it. We're going to stand up. We don't have no beat so we're just going to go acapella. Okay. But it don't matter because Gigi's got to give voice. She's going to do a chorus. Okay. And I'm going to do a rap for you. Okay. A rap for, a birthday rap for me? Yes. Okay. So we're going to sit right here and do it or are you guys going to stand up? Well we got to get CJ in. Pause it. Pause it. Okay, we're going to pause. CJ? Okay. And CJ's in. We got to get another school. How you been CJ? I've been okay. Good, good. Oh brother man got a nice shirt on. I got to give that to him. He looked like a GQ soldier. GQ? Cool. I'll take that. Well how have you been? I've been good. We're still looking for work. Oh that's right. Behind the scenes. Oh yeah, there's always something going on. So we got a job for CJ, let me know. And his next song is going to be called, I'll Be Hopping Around. No it's not. It's okay though. And we got you on that, so we have a separate channel that Freddie does just for music. And we got a bunch of subscribers on that channel already. Oh don't tell him about the channel. Oh about the Charles Eddy channel. Two of them. Oh really? Yeah. And that guy featured in Guy Show. And he's got that one or two on there. He's got everything. Passed out. He's got Gigi. He feels like a third wheel. Sorry, sorry Gigi. So now we're going to go to the musical portion of our show. I don't know if Freddie and Gigi have planned. Can you bring the bus to Rob Byrd's birthday? Yeah. What's up y'all? We got a special guest, Captain Morgan. For Mr. Paul, his birthday. And we're going to do a big, I got my homegirl Gigi. You know how we do this, parking lot. Slippin'. I said slippin'. We be doing it right. Anyways, here we go. Alright, you guys drop that chorus and I'll do a rap. There you go, do it. Ho, ho, let's go. Go ahead you guys. Happy birthday to Paul. Happy birthday to Paul. Happy birthday dear birthday. Happy birthday to Paul. Happy birthday Paul. You stand tall. You know it all. Don't say that's all. I get down with the sound. With the funky sound that I profound. He ain't got a lot of hair but he don't care. He's the man and he's always in the space. Always in despair. Doing big things. Don't you know he's good but he's got a beard like Santa Claus. Really though dude. Kicking hard. Like El DeVarge. When I'm stepping tall. You know I've got it all. Gigi doing big things. Hit that chorus Gigi one for me y'all. Happy birthday to Paul. Happy birthday to Paul. Happy birthday dear birthday. Happy birthday dear Paul. Happy birthday Paul. That's not all. You like basketball like a dribble to the hibble. Coming like this. Coming like that. Enough chit chat I hope your birthday's fat. Coming like that. All the time. Willing to bust. All hardcore rhymes. Rolling like this. Rolling like that. Going head CJ. What's on your mind my friend? Nothing but happy birthday to Paul. Happy birthday to Paul. Happy birthday to Paul. Happy birthday to Paul. That's all. Happy birthday. Get in here buddy. Get in here. Give me some of that sugar. Alright. Happy birthday to Paul. Happy birthday to Paul. We need comments from everybody. Hold on. You're too tall. We need comments. We need comments. And don't forget about Charles J channel. Don't forget about my channel. What's my channel again? The 916 Freddy Show. Say it to them. The 916 Freddy Show. I'll have it in the comments. CJ you text me your channel. I'll put that in the comments. You text me your channel. I'll put that in the comments. I don't do that. I don't do this for the fame. I do it for Jesus Christ God. He's my savior of all. And you're my number one pastor. You know how we do this. You stand tall. Alright. Good job, CJ. Good job, CJ. Get down. And that's all. One love. One love. Amen. Hallelujah. What number is this? That might be 70. 70. Yeah, we're senior citizens.