https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=JXXRftFitUs

 What's happening Paul? The Freddie and Paul show is going mobile today. We're gonna go to Starbucks but here's something you should know when you make a trip with Freddie you start out going one place and usually go a bunch of different places so instead of going to multi-talented multi-talented so instead of going to Starbucks today we're going to McDonald's right there it's on there McDonald's, word up. And so Freddie didn't have any lunch so he's gonna have a Big Mac but then we're gonna get a coffee because in episode two we talked about coffee and restaurants right so that's our mission today we're getting coffee and restaurants we're not going to Starbucks we're going to McDonald's and Freddie who is a coffee connoisseur will do a review of the coffee at McDonald's so we're looking forward to that. Fred this machine's kind of fancy. I know I gotta go all drinks. Oh that's our soda that's our go ahead Fred you get that. Thanks. All right did you get that can you get mine too? No no no. Here's our tray. No no no no you get your soda. All right I'll get my soda. Cause I don't want to spill it. You don't want to spill it? Okay I got mine but I don't know how to work this Fred. You want me to do it? Sure. What kind do you want? I want Diet Coke. Diet Coke? Yep. Okay. Diet Coke. You want a flavor? Oh I'll get vanilla. Let's try vanilla. All right I'll get vanilla. Okay. Vanilla. Get a pour of that. All right. Push that. You push it for me. Go on. I got ice in there. Oh okay. All right. Okay good. It's very important that we say our prayer before we have our lunch together so okay. Freddy wants me to pray. Lord we thank you for the chance we get to have lunch together and we ask that you'd be with us and we ask Lord that you bless Freddy and bless our endeavors together so hear our prayer in the name of Jesus amen. Amen. Amen. Amen. What do you think of the fries? These fries are awesome. Okay why do you like the McDonald's fries? Because they're special. They make them with special salt. Make them with special salt? Yeah and they deep fry them. Oh okay. I thought they were good because bird kings are different. Bird kings are good but McDonald's is you know Ronald McDonald used to man with the mask of the plant. All right and what else we got here? We got a Big Mac. Big Mac. I'll get you that last. Okay okay. So you'll enjoy the fries first? Yeah. All right. Think about this McDonald's. Why is this McDonald's so special? We got the special uh. Oh we got the special machines which we already got. We got this little purple dinosaur in the middle. And uh we got the shark over there. We got the old timey theme. So um. Christmas tree. Got the Christmas tree up there. Got the stocking. Got the stocking up there. So we got different um over there Paul. They got the uh. Special pictures. What are the pictures of? I'm not sure. I'm not sure either. Probably old time McDonald's you know. Yeah yeah. Back in the day. Back in the day. Yeah. Enjoy the Big Mac. Tell me Fred what do you like about Big Mac? Big Mac's got that special sauce and it tastes good and has two patties on it. Two patties. It's got lettuce, cheese and uh Big Mac sauce. So I'm gonna enjoy this and do the funky chicken. Okay. All right. Fred wants to talk about the Raiders. Hey Paul. Remember when I told you when we went to Goldcrab and um you told me. Well I was at church and you told me that um they have um oh you told me the Raiders were gonna lose to the Broncos and I told you they're gonna win. Fred how many times are you gonna bring this up? How many times? How many times are you gonna rub it in? Okay. You were right and I was wrong. The Raiders won. Okay so we have a good chance to win because the Patriots beat the Broncos okay? And the Raiders have a good squad. They got Crappie, Cooper and Carr for a quarterback. The Raiders may win. They might have a good chance. But they're playing they're playing the Broncos at home. We're kind of in the shadow on this on this way friend. Sorry for the silhouette thing but no there's no do-overs. It's always it's all first take so okay. So after this Freddie and I are gonna go to the tanning salon so get ready for that. Okay. We the Freddie wanted one more take before we left here McDonald's and wanted to do about Christmas songs. So Freddie what are your favorite Christmas songs? Emmanuel, God is with us, Art Therod, Angel sings, we three kings of warrior and are. We wish you a merry Christmas and a happy new year of course this new year. It's a new year. Yeah. And it's kind of going on. Yeah it's gonna be a new year. And then um. You know what year it's gonna be? 2017. I know and like I said let's hope the Raiders make it to the playoffs. Which I think Raiders are in the playoffs. Raiders have made it to the playoffs. How far they'll go we don't know. That's awesome. We'll find out. We'll find out. Oh who's gonna be in the Pro Bowl? Oh I found out in the Pro Bowl uh which coach is gonna be in the Pro Bowl? You know the guy from the Giants? What's his name? 13th? You know who I'm talking about. No I don't need to talk about. With Manny. Eli Manning? Eli Manning and um oh what's his name? I can't think of his name. So we went from Christmas songs to Raiders to Pro Bowl. The king's lost to the Raiders. The king's lost again. That's a that's the king's lose a lot. That's just no good but that's my team. I know I know but they lose all the time. They gotta be doing good. All right anything else? Uh we'll catch you on the flip side. Okay ready? Oh one love. Get your take on this particular McDonald's. How was this McDonald's experience? This McDonald's was awesome. I had a good time with my pastor pastor Paul. He is so awesome and I'm not just buttering him up like a buttermilk biscuit. I'm doing my thing and look. So what'd you like about this McDonald's? They gave him a cup holder. I love the Big Mac. They gave me a cup holder. I got my iced coffee. Got my cherry vanilla soda and the Big Mac was awesome and the large fries was awesome and I thank you very much for Paul for helping me out on the Freddy Foundation. It's greatly appreciated. The Freddy Foundation? Yeah and I hope everybody has a good holiday and we will be right with you in a few minutes at a tanning salon. Let us know how we're doing because we got it going on. We got it going on. Well here's the thing. We saw the tanning place up here. There's no place to park so Freddy and I can't get a tan today. I thought that'd be really a bonding experience. Oh boy really? To get to go to the tanning. Hawaii Five-O. We're both pretty pasty white here Fred. Pasty white. See now I'm doing something. I'm driving while I'm doing the Freddy and Paul show and people say I hope you're not driving when you're taking that. Multi-talented. I hope you're not driving when you're doing the show there in the car. Oh well. We did what we had to do. So I guess we're not getting a tan. Freddy has all of his drinks in his lap there. Yeah I gotta be careful because there's liquid on the lid. There's liquid on the lid. Can you slurp that up there Fred? Yeah let's do that. Let's do that. Okay we don't need to do that on camera. So yeah we're going to where are we going next Fred? Oh we gotta go to the dog tree because I gotta get some more soda for tonight. So I don't have to go to an expensive place and pay three dollars just for a two liter bottle of 64 ounce soda. I can get three liters for a dollar twenty. There you go at Dollar Tree there's a free ad for you. Now here's the thing again as I mentioned when you go out with Freddy prepare to make a lot of stops. Oops. Uh oh. This is the last take of today's Freddy and Paul extravaganza. This is our Christmas special and we wanted to do some special shout outs to some of our fans. I have to mention my sisters Ruth and Lori who are faithful fans. Amen. And they made a fan video for us earlier this year so. Thank you very much. Merry Christmas to Ruth and Lori. Merry Christmas to Ruth and Lori. I hope you have a happy new year and a merry Christmas. And who else should we do we have shout outs for Fred? I have a shout out for Forrest for being a good friend. I have a shout out for my mom because she's a good mom. Hello Philip I hope you have a good merry Christmas and I have a shout out to you Paul for being my pastor being my good friend and having fun. All right and a couple of end of year notables one of the things I wanted to mention. Freddy was a little upset by this but uh Freddy we have a friend named Mark Van Pelt who passed away this year. Yes. And that's and that's pretty sad. Mark used to go to lunch with us sometimes. Right. He's a little bit older. I didn't want to talk about it but that's okay we talked about it. It's good to talk about. It's good I mean that's how we grieve Fred that's how we grieve together. Well what I want to know is I know my mom's gonna get mad at me right now but mom when if you're gonna tune into this I think we should at least go out to hometown buffet. I'm not hometown buffet but uh what's it yeah yeah well we won't we won't get into the personal issues right now. We won't get into the personal issues right now. I know but I'm upset. So highlights for highlights for 2016. Raiders are gonna make the playoffs. Yay! That's a highlight. And the raiders are gonna be playing the broncos this week and they're gonna beat the broncos because the broncos don't have no quarterback all they got is wide receivers and running backs. That's true okay so what are the what are there were some other highlights of 2016 Fred? What things happened this year that you really liked? Well we got a new president so we gotta get rid of his flaws. Okay we gotta accept his flaws but we've had good times at church and a lot of good people are here for us at church and uh let's see my health is good even though I smoke cigarettes uh I need to cut down on soda but I will do that uh okay now we're getting into new year's resolution thing so cut down on cigarettes cut down on soda right but it's okay though because it's just moderation okay okay all right no we're not done we're done i'm gonna do a christmas rap okay christmas rap here we go here we go heart the herald angels sing glory to the newborn king peace on earth all good men and rocking on the mic because we gotta going in one two three ho ho ho merry christmas my foot let me tell you what santa really put he put merry christmas on the map and yo this is somewhat a fact we know this because I I wish my pastor pastor paul a merry christmas because he stands tall he's the man in command if he can't do it no one can we three kings of orient are travel gifts we travel afar fields of fountains lords of mountains following yonder star oh star of wonder star of right star with moon to the boss is right westward leading still proceeding guide us to the perfect life here we go one love happy new year merry christmas everyone one more time one more time let's get the one love down okay one love merry christmas merry christmas everyone have a good one yep