https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=AVFMQTaGohQ

 Okay welcome we are on the air Nancy so welcome back to the to the Freddie and Paul show. I'm Paul. I'm Freddie, Freddie D out of Sacramento 916. I'm Philip, fast, I'm the Jesus man. Philip is the man with the Jesus signs so you got a friend Philip and get his Jesus signs and we have Nancy Nancy Nancy Nancy Lynn. Okay what are we gonna talk about today? Good talk about the sermon. Let's talk about David. Let's talk about David okay so what would you learn about David in the sermon today? David was a good man he cared about others he treated others the way he would want to be treated and he didn't stereotype people. Okay David was very magnanimous and that's very good. He treated others the way he would want to be treated and he got along with others the way the others would want to be treated. Okay so David did well. Well Philip wasn't here for the sermon. Nancy what did you think of the sermon? Well I found out he sure had a lot of wives. Yes indeed David had a lot of wives and a lot of sons with him and that's going to be interesting for Christmas. Okay wait wait wait what this son what David had a lot of what's going to be. Jesus came from David. Yes he did that's true Jesus came from David so that's that was the connection to Christmas. Okay okay now we've had we've had some viewer requests for topics one of the topics was Bigfoot. Oh do you know anything about Bigfoot? Well I know he liked me. What do you mean Bigfoot liked me? Well he liked deer meat. Oh that makes sense that makes sense. And cow meat so he probably made a camp he probably made a campfire and just roasted it on a stick and he probably ate it that way. That's probably true. Okay Bigfoot that's right. Thoughts you had about Bigfoot Phil? I would say uh late just lately they had killed a bear that walked on his two feet and the reason it did because it had an injury and somebody was proud that he shot the bear. So maybe Bigfoot is a bear that's in disguise. Right or he can't walk on four. All right Nancy thoughts on Bigfoot. I don't know anything about him just they on TV they have this guy with Bigfeet and how they know this is beyond me. Okay so that's so that one that question came from who asked about Bigfoot. Carl right. Carl kind of asked about Bigfoot shout out to you there Carl. Okay let's uh we try to keep these shows short. One more topic. We'll do a second show with a second topic and then we'll get Reggie in there. All right. So okay Fred you want to send us away? Sacramento California One Love 916 and Christian Reformed Church thank you very much. Thank you. One Love. One Love thank you very much.