https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=QHs5f3oRzxw

 Welcome to the Freddie and Paul show. It's Mother's Day. How you doing, Freddie? Happy Mother's Day. We don't have a lot of light. That's alright. I can see it. There's plenty of light. See all that? Oh yeah. There's plenty of light. Okay. How about those Warriors, huh? Getting past the Rockets. That's probably their biggest challenge. So who do they play now, Toronto? I don't know who they play next. Where's the Pacers? I don't know. Is it Indiana, Mom? I don't really know. No, they're going to play someone else from the West, right? Weren't the Trail Blazers playing someone? Trail Blazers, yeah. They were playing. I forgot who they were playing. But anyways, today's Mother's Day. And I wish my mom a happy Mother's Day. I wish things were better for me because I want to find some good housing. So if anybody knows of any housing in Sacramento that Paul, you could contact Paul. You know how to contact Paul because this is our show. So can I give them your number? They can send a comment. They can email you. They can email me. They can email you, Paul. They can email me. They can find me a good place, like a Christian home, and I can afford $760. I'd like to have a private room. I need someone to hold on to my medicine and give me my medicine. My medicine is coming to church because it soothes me. It soothes my nerve and it makes me a better person. And I'd give him in Sacramento, as well as you guys know, I'll be no problem. And I will do what's right. And you can email Paul if anybody in Sacramento has a place. And then they can contact my mom, which you could give them a contact number. I could do that, yeah. So now we're going to talk about the sermon, Mom. It's your turn. Oh, it's my turn. Okay. So what did you think? Sermonance? Well, Christians should be like Jesus. Right. Now, that's kind of scary. Yeah. Okay? But my sin, not in part, but the whole, is nailed to the cross. Oh, okay. And because the lamb was slain. Right. And I will learn how to trust and have faith in him. That's right. So there are people that say, well, I can't be a Christian because it's just way too hard. No. All you have to do is come to Jesus. And you can. By his nails in the cross for him who paid for those sins. Amen. That's his preaching today. Trust and believe for there's no other way. To be happy in Jesus, but to trust and obey. Very good. There you go. Trust. Yeah, I thought of that song. You did think of that song. When she was talking about it. Trust and think. Yes. And I will trust and obey. And I will trust. I will have trust that someone will find me a place to live. And that's all there is to it because I'm what's happening. And yes, I am going to do a rap. I'm going to rap, we three kings. No, no. Okay, which one? Oh, boy. We would have done it. Living for Jesus. How about that? All right, go ahead. Living for Jesus. You don't know those. Living for Jesus all the way. Like? Jesus is the one in the original way. Trust and obey, good to go. Rocking on the mic like Romeo. But when I'm on the mic, I recite to a true delight like crisp and clean with no caffeine. Never had it, never will because God's on top. He's number one and he's one of the hip hop, rocking nonstop. People living and giving stand on top of their life that they live in. I'm Freddie D and I'm down for the show biz. Happy Mother's Day, Mommy. All right. When's Nancy going to rap? I don't know. When am I going to rap? I don't know. Tell me about it first and I have to make one. I'm not like him. You're not going to rap on me back in the day all the time. I know, but I'm not the best rhymer like you are. Oh, all right. Mother's Day, Mother's Day. Love your mom in every way. Mother's Day, Mother's Day. Love your mom in every way. Love your mom because she brought you on this earth and this is the truth. Don't you dare spurt a rhythm because he's the one, but God's the really one that does it for fun. But he's the one in command. I love my mom. Really, man. Don't you know I'm good to go. My pastor Paul is good, you know. We go to lunch. We have fun. We do our shows all the time. And we'd love to get down and have fun. And don't you know I'm back in this earth. I'm doing it for God and that's what's happening on this earth. All right. All right. So now we're all done. We close the show. Yeah, we're ready to go. But like I said, email Paul if you have anywhere I could go because I would love it because I am right now. I'm going through a hard time at home and it's hard on me. The area is just not the greatest and I just really want a place to be. So please email. Where's the email? They email me. They got my email. They have your email? Yeah. Okay, Paul, tell them what would be good for me because you know me as a person. You've known me for years. Tell them. Freddy's looking for a better place to live. No, but explain to them what I need. You need a room and board. Someone to help with your meds. Right. But tell the people. I just said there's a room and board, someone to help with your meds. No, but there's more to it. Someone that will understand me with God. You can email me and I can fill you in if you have any housing ideas for Fred. How's that? All right, fine. All right. Ready to close the show? One love. Amen. Hallelujah. Mother's Day. All right. Okay.