https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=2GTxsCmEBoU

 Welcome to the Freddie and Paul show. What episode is this Fred? Wow 54 I believe. Episode? No 63. 63 then. 63. And we're senior citizens. No I'm just kidding I don't want to be a senior citizen right now. I want to be in the spotlight and put 916 till we drop. You know what I'm saying? Anyways what about those warriors over time? Beat them because the Cavs blew it. And I loved it. And you LeBron James were crying. You little baby. Aww you're so mean to LeBron. No I'm just kidding. King James is cool though. King James is cool. Corey LeBron I'd be upset too. Man that's hard to deal with. You've been working all year. That's true. You've been working all year trying to win it. And then your teammate isn't paying attention to what's going on in the game and he blows it. Yeah. So that's pretty sad. Anything else going on in your life that you want to talk about Freddie? I just do a lot of music. A lot of music. I love my music. But I don't do it for the fame. I do it for Jesus Christ. And that's all because he's my Lord and Savior and every day you do like me the boy they call Freddie D. Who's that guy? He's Freddie. Yeah. Alright so what's on the show today? Well me, Gigi and Tommy are going to do Who's That Guy? He's Freddie. And I have my lyrics memorized so this should be a treat for everybody out there. Alright Paul let's do this. I'll flow it first I guess. You've got to keep an eye on the camera there. I know. We've got a live studio audience here. We've got Gordon and Nancy and Sherry. Go ahead Tommy. Drop it Tommy. Who's that guy? He's Freddie. He loves Jesus Christ. I love Jesus Christ in every way. I love to do this. I love to pray. I love my pastor Paul. I love my mom too. Don't forget Sherry cause she's a cool girl. Rock the world every single day. The River Cats will come to play. Republic of Soccer you see. Yeah it's me Freddie D. Who's that guy? He's Freddie. He loves Jesus Christ. Who's that guy? He's Freddie. He loves Jesus Christ. Who's that guy? He's Freddie. He's from the SAC as you can see me. By the way I walk. By the way I talk. By the way I slide. By the way I ride. All the women love me. By the way I walk. By the way I talk. By the way I roll. And by the way I stroll. Now it's time for you to do a buster ride. Go ahead GD it's your time. Who's that guy? He's Freddie. He loves Jesus. The people know the God so he will not let them please us. He's got his methods, got his ways, he's got his reasons. All his love and his compassion he's going to teach us. He's got a beat. He won't hurt the people. Forgive your brothers, sisters and fear no evil. I'm a passive mind bag so ready cause he's ready. Yeah he's ready cause he's like he's ready. Who's that guy? He's Freddie. He loves Jesus Christ. Rhyming, boviding, a new state of rap. It's me Freddie, I'm here all over the map. I'll make you clap your hands and talk your feet cause your body is moving to a hip hop beat. But you can't compete or try to compare. Sucker you best not stare. No I'm not a thug but I walk down a red carpet in case you must not start it. Who's that guy? He's Freddie. I love Jesus Christ. One love. Give me a smile.