https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=96BXyo-U5Sw

 We hoof A the Yeah, who's that? Who not? Tell me who got cool stuff on your story You tell me who's that? Who got the good job? Who just dropped out? You want me? Don't you get it? I'm gonna do the rap, you just ain't on my plan Bitch, you know you better change my mind Can't stop the clock, see my name on the plan Can't take no time, call me up, I'm out You call me in my mind, we're in the get, double up We don't care about this, it's a bet, lay it down, nigga, did Know me, 91, bet you know me now, I'm the young one, ain't you gonna call me? You ain't gonna beat me, nigga, screw me down, cooler Screw me to the game, I know the duty Staying home is big, don't blow like booty Shoot, pinch, and spin the door on your cheek Don't tell her, don't waste big on your duty I don't know why they want from me It's like they want from me, we have to watch it You want from me? Yeah, yeah, yeah I don't know why they want from me It's like they want from me, it's like they want from me You ain't gonna beat me, nigga, screw me down You ain't gonna beat me, nigga, screw me down I call all the shots, whip all the spots I call the props, I call the props I'm gonna take you down, you know I'm gonna go on top Nigga, never gonna back up on any act Ten years from now, we'll still be on top Yo, I thought I told you that we won't stop You know, we just call it a game, we ain't coming back I'm not much longer than y'all, the team ain't much stronger than y'all The valley weed is a B-O-D, we don't play, you're messing with the D-O-A D-O-A, we ain't much longer than y'all, the team ain't much stronger than y'all The valley weed is a B-O-D, we don't play, you're messing with the D-O-A The truth is I swear, man, I'm bigger than the city lights, gotta talk to it Yeah, yeah, yeah I don't know why they want from me It's like they want from me, we have to watch it You want from me? Yeah, yeah, yeah I don't know why they want from me It's like they want from me, we have to watch it You want from me? Yeah, yeah, yeah Who got G-P-O-P-E-A? No info, what's up? D-E-A, I got the real G's, I got the fake, attack yourself, I'm a boy with the big fan My teeths, the prims, they clean, triple ring, I'm in a dream I be that, that you see that on the bed, bed, that's in holsters I'm on shoulders, I'm ready to work, I change up, bring a mic to me Lose too much, I lose too much, that boy says he doesn't move too much I guess it's time to move away, move too much You lose my touch, never that, if I did, ain't no problem, you get the gap Where the truth, where you at? Throw your worries in the sky Wave it side to side, you can't time, I'll give it to you on the eye Where you at? Leave, never leave, where you see? D-I-G, profit, jig on the cover of fortune Five number loaded, my poor number is a man I go low, I got the dough, I can throw down the step Black and black, like the best, game's rough, or trizze I be the best, I love you I'm on shoulders, I'm ready to work, I change up, bring a mic to me Lose too much, I lose too much, that boy says he doesn't move too much I guess it's time to move away, move too much You lose my touch, never that, if I did, ain't no problem, you get the gap Where the truth, where you at? Throw your worries in the sky Wave it side to side, you can't time, I'll give it to you on the eye Where you at? Leave, never leave, where you see? D-I-G, profit, jig on the cover of fortune Five number loaded, my poor number is a man I go low, I got the dough, I can throw down the step Black and black, like the best, game's rough, or trizze I be the best, I love you I'm on shoulders, I'm ready to work, I change up, bring a mic to me Lose too much, I lose too much, that boy says he doesn't move too much I guess it's time to move away, move too much You lose my touch, never that, if I did, ain't no problem, you get the gap Where the truth, where you at? Throw your worries in the sky Wave it side to side, you can't time, I'll give it to you on the eye Where you at? Leave, never leave, where you see? Brady and Charles, good to be back