https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=DZBM-AqIhlg

 Welcome back to the Freddie and Paul show. It's been a while Paul. I've just been really busy. I haven't been able to get no rides out here, nothing. You know how it is, you know, TV people out there. You know how it is, Julio Jones. You know, you've been kicking him with the homies on the ground and all that. Anyway, how do you feel about your draft picks? Is he kill Elliot? Do you think he's going to be able to get through and come out and play? Well, we haven't even done introductions. Okay, boy. So we have to introduce Nancy. Nancy, Nancy, Nancy. Nice to be back too. We haven't done the show for a while and Freddie wants to talk a little bit about fantasy football because we have some fantasy football leagues in the church and we had our draft this week. And I did very well and I was very reverent, compassionate, contemplative, trustworthy, pure, grateful, loyal, and just patient and cheerful. That's right. Freddie remembers his cadet code. And Nancy didn't make it to the draft although Nancy's a pro-war. I don't know why she didn't come. We need her. She's like the vibe of Sacramento. Vibe of Sacramento. There you go, Nancy. That's pretty high praise, the vibe of Sacramento. So the big controversial pick I made was Ezekiel Elliot. That's okay. Go for it. Who is challenging the suspension. And so we'll see what happens with that. Who else can you do? I've got Matt Ryan. Oh, Matt Ryan is going to do very well because he made it to the Super Bowl last year. But what are you going to do now? You like the Patriots and now you got the Falcons. Come on. I do like the Patriots, but I don't consider myself a fan. Oh, thank you. I don't say anything. I like Tom Brady. Who's the running back for that? Oh, that's a good question. They have three or four of them and we don't know who it's going to be. It's always that way with Belichick. Oh, okay. How about you guys? What's your favorite? What's your favorite football team? Do you have a favorite football team? Well, you can't tell her what her favorite is. Basically, I think the Raiders are going to do good this year. I wanted us to get a car, but we didn't get a car. We have Andrew Luck, but he's from California. So that'd be nice. However, he is injured. Andrew Luck's a risky move for a quarterback. Who's the guy with UCLA that they drafted? You know who I'm talking about? No. Goff or something like that? Oh, that could be. He was a quarterback of Goff. Okay. And I think he either went to the Rams or someone else. Okay. So what's your favorite team, Freddie? I have to go to the Raiders. Go to the Raiders? You like the Raiders more than you like the Niners? I like the Niners too, but I like Clujo Jones. I like all those people. I like the new quarterback. What's his name? No, through the 49ers. Oh. I'm not sure. They left me. I can't think of it. I like the coach because... Yeah. Oh, one more thing. How's Michigan doing? College team? I don't know. I don't follow college football. I'm sure. Derek Zile. Derek Zile. You can tell Freddie how Michigan is doing. Please do. Come back only yesterday. Who? Really? Michigan. Michigan, yay! Michigan did it good, don't you see? You got the players and they're good to see you and me. But I'm from the 916, but I come up like this, like one, two, three. I got my prefix. I got Paul and Fancy Nancy. We're doing big things in the man seat, in the mansion. And we're good to go without a word to say because 916 is really good, you see? Okay. Okay. That was a good wrap. Any last words? Any last comments? We're not done yet. We're not done yet. We're not done yet. I got to find out who mom got for running backs. I don't know because... We need Reggie in here. Reggie had keepers. We need Reggie. Reggie. Reggie. Reggie. I think Reggie left. Oh. I think he has Jordan Howard. Jordan Howard. And I forget the other one. He had two keepers though. So he's got some good running backs. He's got really good running backs. Okay. And one more thing. Well, Rivercats... Oh, Pablo Sandoval. If you are watching, I enjoyed talking to you at the Rivercats game. You're a very nice guy. What's that lady's name that you know that he stays with sometimes? The lady told me. Yeah, I know. It's my niece. But... What's her name? Valerie Marble. Valerie Marble Sandoval. If you come back to the Rivercats next year... She is a Giants babe or whatever they call it. Okay. Well, if you come back next year to the Rivercats, I would really like to have a good conversation with you. And I would like to take a picture with you Pablo Sandoval because you got it going on like Donkey Kong. Yeah, I hope so with the Giants. I know, but the Giants are going to... Now, can we go to a little bit more serious situation? Go ahead, Mom. Go ahead, Mom. Yeah. Hurricane Harvey... Oh man, what the hell. ...is... ...devastating and today is the day that we are supposed to... The President signed a declaration that today is a day of prayer for all the people that have been affected with Hurricane Harvey. And my prayer is that they wrap their arms around Jesus and try to get through a very bad situation. Okay. All right. Thank you Nancy. That was no words of wisdom. That was good. All right. Okay. Are we all done? Paul, I have one question. Hold on a minute. Hold on a minute. Yeah, we can finish it. Okay. All right. So thanks for watching. Thank you. We'll be back next week. I'll come with my mom. I don't think I'm gonna be able to do FaceTime people, but it's okay. I'm gonna work on getting doing FaceTime another time. Okay, Paul. It's nice talking about football. Mom, come on. One... Love. Amen. Amen.