https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=vzTchz3SjRY

 Welcome to the Freddie and Paul show this is episode 58 57 57 okay episode 57 like you're cruising down the street in a 57 Chevy Paul Anyways, you know, okay. Freddie's got a wrap. Yeah, I got my own and then we're gonna have gg and tommy And then we're gonna run back to the av booth and put on the put on the music So, okay, Fred be tuned everybody get ready. You know i'm saying I do this really big I used to be in philadelphia. I pointed I did a show in philadelphia twice not once but twice And this is a treat Rhyme, put on a new state of rap. It's me freddy d. I'm heard all over the map I'll make you clap your hand It's off your feet because your body is moving to a hip-hop beat You should open up your read your bible pray every day That's the only way you're gonna make it man. I'm not you semeni sam I'm freddy d from the 916 Four sugar d don't you know I got my boy cj. He's beside kick. He's not here today So don't you dare trip? Rocking hardcore rocking non-stop people living giving staying on top Other lives that they live you see cuz i'm freddy d and i'm down with the showbiz. Who's that guy? He's freddy. He loves jesus christ g Who's that guy? He's freddy. He loves jesus christ g Jesus christ for sugar d don't you get it twisted g Crc is the best don't forget about paul. He's the big in the west Doing big things good to go. We got philip fast Don't you know He's my pop and nina's cool Don't you even look at those guys because they might even drool but back to the point I'm on the mic and this is my joint When I'm on six till we drop my mom is the king of hip-hop Don't you know good to go the word don't play but i'm ready here to play Every single day really though When I speak You will listen when i'm giving the lesson i'll be living The life that you're living I lay down so profound. I can't wear my chains in the water because I might drown Who's that guy? He's freddy. He loves jesus christ g Who's that guy? He's freddy. He loves jesus christ g Who's that guy? He's freddy. He loves jesus christ g peace out Now we got tommy And gg And it's a treat for you on the freddy and paul show Thank you paul and that's all you stand tall Okay, what no you got it thank you very much tune in I'll have some more music. Okay, you just keep going. Oh, we'll keep it going All right, keep going All right, that was cool trying to get you in the picture here. Yeah tommy and gg again boy two weeks in a row And and yeah, they should start their own youtube channel All right Okay, okay, we're playing a pedestrian and we're gonna go ahead and sing another original song for you it's called people whatever's Ghost ass F繁 To walk women And it slowly tears till it's a cold mess We give each other wolves that might need a heel And the red stains white till there's blue on heel If sorry means no pardons, it's just our damages We made a habit of tearing off bandages On little uncertainty this is all we could be Blooms in a field at the end of spring But the paper shade leads the days away, the flowers wither Paper staves, fragile steps There's too long when there's no one left And it slowly tears till it's a cold mess Whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa Whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa Whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa Whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa Whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa Whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa Whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa Whoa, whoa, whoa It's a gift and I love it And I hope we can do this some more And your comments, please comment on what they did And what I did and what Paul does I didn't do anything today Well you did your sermon and you were talking about Yeah that's true To trust in God That wasn't in the show Okay, well go ahead No I'm not going to do the sermon now No, I'm saying we're going to talk So just when Tommy and Gigi Just a little bit about them I'm sure So the name of your group is Planet Pedestrian Planet Pedestrian And you're on Instagram Yeah we're on Instagram at Planet Pedestrian exactly And we have a Twitter too but that's Planet Pedestrian1 Okay Okay, check this out Gigi You can go on my Facebook And now I got five songs on Rap Chat I'll do ya On Facebook now Paul And I'll be doing an album soon so you guys watch out It'll be coming out We're running out of time, we've got a little bit of time So Planet Pedestrian is their group Right And Gigi's a college student Yeah and I'm Freddie D Everybody knows who you are Freddie D Okay, okay You gotta spread some of the fame around I got a treat for you We gotta practice one day I gotta call her or you I gotta call you And we gotta sit somewhere because I want to do a song with you guys Oh yeah? Just like two verses Okay Okay Was that song specific to the like I'm Freddie D Oh I'm Freddie D, he loves Jesus Christ G Yeah He's Freddie D Can we base something on that? Yeah that'd be awesome Let's do it Right on So Tony's in high school, Gigi's in college They both play here at Living Stones And I knew them because they're friends of my kids Right And these are two wonderful young people Yeah they're wonderful And they are wonderful You got a good voice I'm thankful that they're up here on the show So anything else we need to talk about Because time's gotta go Well let's look out for the Warriors that's it Look out for the Warriors Warriors can do good Okay, you guys we're gonna do the one love because it's a ritual Anyways, ready Paul? One love Episode 57 like you're driving in a Chevy Alright, cool you guys