https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=yBKdIJ1Xnl8

 Welcome to the Freddie and Paul Show. This is episode 67. Yeah. 67. And this is before church episode. We tried to get the beat going on the PA system, but that didn't work. And so we just got a couple minutes before we got to start my Sunday school lesson. Freddie sings. What do you like singing about in the praise group, Freddie? What do you like singing? Because I like to glorify God. That's a good answer. And I like to harmonize with the other people that sing. Yeah. Oh, they're good people. Yeah. And I think I sound pretty good. But someone told me I needed a voice coach because my voice was too high when I did it on the thing. But you said we don't even need a choir because at one time. So I must have sounded alright because if you said I didn't even need a choir, I must have sounded okay. I thought you said I think that's good. You know, because Freddie, often if people up front, they try to sing, they're a little shy. You're not shy. You sing right out. I just do it because I've never seen that movie. Elf. Yeah. Yeah. Well, the guy sings loud. Yeah. Yeah. There you go. So what are you doing? Oh, I've been making videos. I've been how is it going on with your program? My program's doing good. I know. Now you have how many done? I've done lots. Oh, I do. Oh, just so you know, CJ might show up today. So maybe we'll have to go to the other room and do something or something and talk. All right. We'll see. Because he wants to see you because it's true that you've been wanting to see him. Right. Sure. Yeah. Because he makes you laugh. Right. E.J. does make me laugh. Me and him are the magic. We're hilarious. Yeah, that's true. We are. We are a cup of tea. Yeah. Sure. Cup of tea. Cup of tea. So the Giants, they won the other day. And well, you know, the Rivercats are not the same as they used to be. They're still pretty good. Yeah. But they need some improvement. That's OK. OK. It's just a game. But anyways, the Dodgers lost to the Rockies. So that's good for the Giants because the Rockies are a pretty exceptional team. OK. And the A's won to Detroit. OK. And oh, in basketball, we got Bagley. Bagley. From Duke. From Duke. For the Kings. What do you think of that pick? Good because he's a good player. He'll be good with Fox. Fox. OK. Or whatever. De'Aaron Fox is his name. I think that's not right. De'Aaron Fox. Anyway, so the Kings should be pretty good. OK. And yeah, so that should be pretty good. So, yeah, let's just make sure we get together after church with CJ, me and you. We've just had trouble getting together after church because we've got these other churches that rent. I know, but if I go quick in there, we can go in the other room. Yeah, we might be able to do something in the Sunday School room. All right. That'll work. And when did you want to go to lunch with me, Gordon and CJ, the three amigos? The three amigos. And you, the four amigos. The group's just getting bigger and bigger. I know, I know. We'll figure that out. Summer's kind of dicey because I got some vacation coming up. Maybe before vacation, though. Maybe before vacation. We'll see. I'll have to look at it. OK, I had one question before we closed this. OK. So we honestly have people in London watching? There are some people who watch from England. Yeah. I don't know if they live in London or not. That's amazing. That's what I've been told. Yeah, yeah. And Canada and Michigan. And Michigan. I got a family in Michigan, right? That's what Mom said? Yes, you do. You have an aunt in Michigan. Which one is that? Marion? Yeah, I think so. Aunt Marion? Yeah. Oh, OK. Because we used to go to the same church when I lived in Michigan. Oh, that's cool. OK. All right. Well, can I do a rap real quick? Real quick. OK. Here we go. We hot, we clock, but we don't smoke rock from all words that make people stop. Discrimination is not allowed because I'm determined to excite the crowd. I don't speculate because I am great. I was raised around the infidels. I live in college greens and I got the means to play all your suckers just like dope fiends. Rolling to the beat, rolling to the middle. When I'm on the mic, I like to play the fiddle. One, two, three, you know it's me. The white boy, they call Freddie B. 916, don't you see? Yeah, it's me, Freddie D. Who's that guy? He's Freddie. He loves Jesus Christ. Yeah. All right. That was brief. All right. There you go. Yeah. OK. Maybe we'll do one this after church. Hopefully. We'll have to see. We might have to go to the other room. We might have to go to the other room. We'll see if CJ shows up. I think he's coming. He told me he'd be here probably. All right. We'll see what happens. Thank you. Oh, one love. Oh, sorry. One love. Amen. Amen.