https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=bMh5OCHuZ2k

 Welcome to the Freddie and Paul show. Hi Paul, how you doing? I'm doing good Fred. How are you doing? I've been doing pretty good. Been keeping up on baseball because the Giants were in last place at first. Now they're in third place Paul. Oh that's good. They came up and the A's are in third, second place. Wow. Yeah. Someone said to me the A's never win because all the management doesn't really want to win. They just always want to sell players. What happened is this Davis guy they got, he hit, let's see, Davis had fire rate home runs. Okay. So all right so what are we gonna talk about today? You go ahead mom. Nancy doesn't want to talk because I talk politics in the sermon so Nancy doesn't want to talk politics. Well, but no not really. You know the first Freddie and Paul show we talked politics. We did. We did. It was Trump versus Hillary. Yeah. We talked about that. Yeah. You weren't there. Freddie and I were there. Oh yeah okay. I said she was a happy girl like you want. He said she was a good citizen. Good citizen yeah. And she said, he said Trump needed improvement. Improvement needed. That's what he said in the first show. Yeah. Have you rewatched that show? Right. I've rewatched it a few times. It's one of my favorite shows. I watch our shows sometimes. I'm glad I came back to me. I really am. By grace of God I bounced back. You did. That's awesome. Yep. But I never had nothing wrong with me. I just misunderstood because I was you know I've always been a good pronouncer. I know how to punctuate words and stuff like that. So because you know I got my own language kind of. Well sometimes when I'm funny you know. Yeah. I took Freddie Fred Foundation and all that. I wish you had a foundation. I know. Okay well check this out Paul. It said 35 on the next day again John was standing there and two of his disciples and looking at Jesus as he was walking by he said look the Lamb of God. Yeah he did. So that means if you follow Jesus then he will grant you eternal life. If you believe in Jesus there will be another life and another life. That's right. But our life is good now if you follow Jesus because it's what you think and what you know and things can be replaced but people and friends and good colleagues can't. So. Sorry. And it says. You got Nancy's notes? So yeah. Social politics. Love one another. It didn't take a lot of notes. Love one another. Bring Jesus' voice. So you're saying hear Jesus' voice and in seeking you shall find the kingdom of God and don't rewind. Okay. Well basically. Am I in the picture? I can't really tell. Yeah you are. Okay. Not really because you got the thing. Things in the way that's why I can't see myself but as long as you can see me out there I'm good. Okay. Okay. All right. Well. You gonna have the sermon report Nancy? Yeah let her do it. Yeah it's gonna be short but. Yeah we want to hear it. Okay. I can get a kick out of it. Now this is an election year and in politics. Trump. It's not an election year. Trump's pretty over with it. It's the year before the election year. Well it's coming. This election's gone forever. Yeah they're gonna see if Trump is gonna come back. Yeah. We will find out if Trump comes back. Yeah. But okay we're starting to talk about the election and we're starting to talk about the leaders. And what they're trying to do to me and other people is to get us fearful about our country. There's no reason to be. They're making us, whoever is making us say our country's a mess. Well and they're trying to get us angry and that's not good but anyhow there's two things in our lives. We have our social life. Life's doing good. And we have our political life. Yeah. So basically it's not a sin to talk about politics. No. It's just not to get angry with somebody. No. Right? Because politics are just things. I mean it can. Actually it can divide a household. Oh yeah. Okay. Yeah. Very much can. Alright. And that's okay. Okay. Freddie says enough of the sermon report. Alright. Love one another is what is important here. Okay you're right. And how do you do that? Cigarettes? No. With Jesus voice. I think cigarettes are Freddie's love language. No I don't love cigarettes. But you know these people that are saying things that they're saying. They're haters. And doing. As T. Grizzly would say they're haters. Yeah. What's that in T. Grizzly? Yeah boy. LeBron James. You're pretty cool. Okay. Yeah. Well. How long is the sermon report going to go on? I don't know about that. It probably should stop. But. Okay. I'm very concerned about this abortion thing and killing live babies. That is bad. I am concerned about other things. Mom, the time is all right. Yeah. Okay. So. But. With God's help. Let's slam the plane. Alright. With God's help. Okay. We're going to wrap it up. I need. I need. I gotta do a wrap. What you gonna wrap? You gonna wrap the Sunday School paper? Yeah. Alright. Here we go. And did you know Jesus is a man. If you believe him you'll be alright man. You'll be cool. Don't you know. Good to go with the roll. Coming up like this. Coming up like that. Seeking first. The kingdom of God. As for righteousness. And don't be odd. Coming up like this. And coming up like that. Enough to the chat. My stuff is fat. I bust platinum tracks. Ouch. You speak. Nine months later they announce me as the preacher. One. Two. What you gonna do? Cause Jesus Christ is the one you should read up dude. And he's the man in command. If he can't do it. No one can. Peace out to CJ. What's happening CJ? One love. Peace out to my boy Gordon. He's cool. And that's about it I guess. Alright. Peace out to Gordon. Peace out to CJ. I never know which way to go either. I just always go this way. Okay ready? One love. Amen. That was tight.