https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=66dF9ZYaVTM

 Hey, what's happening Pastor Paul? So Fred wanted, Fred suggested that he and I should make a TV show. What are we going to call the show, Fred? The Freddy and Paul Show. The Freddy and Paul Show. And Fred thinks this would be a comedy. I said Reggie and Four should be in it too. Yes, this is true. And Fred said that was okay. And so I asked Fred what we should talk about and what was your suggestion, Fred? Football and fantasy football and basketball. That's not what you said to me. Oh, what did I say? Trump and Hillary. Trump and Hillary, yeah. Fred wants to talk about Trump and Hillary. Now Hillary is a good candidate. They're saying she isn't that great, but I think she's a very good US citizen. Did... Okay, when you say she's a good US citizen, what do you mean? Like she pays her taxes or what? She's just a good all-around person. She's a good all-around person. How about Trump? What do you think of Trump? Trump is okay, but he's got a couple flaws. A couple flaws. What are Trump's flaws? Improvement needed. Improvement needed. Okay, how should Trump improve himself? Well, he should be more... treat others the way he would want to be treated. Oh, that's a good one, Fred. I like that. Apply the golden rule to Donald Trump. Donald Trump should treat others like he wants to be treated. Yeah, like you said in the sermon not too long ago. Like I said in the sermon not too long ago. Okay. So what else would... I don't know if people are going to be too interested in fantasy football or basketball or baseball. Fred's a little upset that the Giants are out of playoffs. Yeah, what happened to my Giants? Giants, come on now. We got next year, though. So who do you want to win, the Dodgers or... Cubbies. Cubbies. You want the Cubbies to win. Yeah. Okay, anything else you want to talk about in our little video, Fred? I should be making a comeback in music. A comeback in music. You got a quick rap for us right now, Fred? No, no, no. No? No, you had one and it would mean you and Reggie... I'm full, though. I'm full. I know. You're full? Yeah, I'm full. Okay, well this is the first installment of the Fred and Paul show. Right. Or Freddy and Paul. Is it Fred or Freddy? Which one? Freddy and Paul show. Freddy and Paul show. So why did you get Tapp Billy? I don't know. I don't know, because he's the one... He's the one that came up with the idea. Freddy had the idea. Thank you. He's the celebrity. So this is his idea. Yeah. Thank you for watching. I promised I would post this on Facebook and maybe even on YouTube. And we'll see what we want to do for the next one. So how do we say goodbye? We'll catch you on the flip side. Catch you on the flip side. Sacramento talkin'. Sacramento talkin'. One love. One love.