https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=S1-BRYZ061g

 Okay, welcome to the Freddie and Paul show. We have a special show today. This is awesome We got this going on see how it goes word gets out and now we got other people It's just a blessing. It's just awesome So what we're gonna do is sing send this out and then they're gonna do a song of their own Gigi has a song in Tommy. We should introduce them This is Gigi and this is Tommy with a sing and praise time for us She plays the organ and he plays the awesome guitar and anyway, this is gonna be a treat for you and let us know how we're doing and comments are always greatly appreciated And thank you for being on the Freddie and Paul show and how you been Paul? Well the Kings beat Houston But Yeah, they won against Houston that's great Yeah, all right and go Rivercats cuz the river cats are gonna go to the playoffs this year, okay Oh Said Oh Oh Oh Oh Oh Good job Oh So I'm Gigi and Tom and we are playing pedestrian we're a local band in Sacramento We're just gonna go ahead and play a song that Tommy wrote All in it's guy line Anything attitude is just a stylistic choice Sometimes up there just to float by brushstrokes Flank space same day Thor with thunder is heavy-handed painted skyline never ended I am tired of happiness In a dizzy world and sickle loneliness There's one thing I'm dreaming of It's a happy place Skyline Goodbye tranquil sky night up there So bright purple strokes on the blue space same day, but a different sky stars fall orange A brand new sunrise is about to be I am tired of happiness I am sick of loneliness There's one thing i'm dreaming of I can call it mine It's a happy place from the stars So I am tired of happiness In a dizzy world I am sick of loneliness There's one thing i'm dreaming of I can call it mine is to have a place in the stars So Yeah Thank you Jesus and Tommy, you're doing big things up in the 916 for Shiggy Dean. Blessed be your name in the land that is ponderful, with streams of abundance flow. Blessed be your name, blessed be your name, when I'm found in the desert place, through I walk through the wilderness. Blessed be your name, every blessing pour out, I'll turn back to praise when darkness closes, and Lord we say, Amen, Hallelujah. Good to go. Now Paul, let's say hi to David. Okay, David. What do you want? I can't say. You just say hi. Come here, Gigi. We gotta do the one love. I can't have. This is Dave Lindner. Don't flow. This is Dave Lindner. Here's Gigi. Alright, thank you all for being on the show. Thank you for being on the Shiggy Dean and Paul Show. Tune in and let us know your comments. We've got everybody in the 916 doing it big. So anyway. Doing it big. Alright, ready? Right here, David. What are we doing? Just go one love. One love. Amen. Where's Gigi's one love? Oh, she got in there. Alright, there we go. I want Gigi next week.