https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=xCJYMvHYiJ0

 Yeah, hey, what's happening? You are welcome to the Freddie and Paul show episode 21 21 and today we are here at Golden Corral and it's a very special day Today is Fred's birthday. Yes, sir. So happy birthday to Fred. Thank you, sir. Happy birthday to Fred We have a nice lunch at Golden Corral And we're gonna go to the Dollar Tree. Yeah, and get a three liter soda Yeah, because that's what Fred needs more soda in his life Yeah, although I was very proud of him that he only had one soda Golden Corral. He didn't have any refills did you today? No, no, no, he did really good on the soda today. So we're having a good day. So today the AFC and the NFC are their championships and so we know who's gonna be in the playoffs It's gonna be the New England Patriots the team that my family cheers for in New England versus the Atlantic Falcons, so what do you think Fred what's gonna happen in Super Bowl? Well You got Brady and You got all you got all those players But Atlanta has a good chance because they got Julio Jones. They got Matt Ryan for a quarterback and But you gotta look out for the Patriots because they got Brady for a quarterback and they got all those receivers name a couple of the Chris Hogan had a great game Julian Edelman had a great game. So Marcel is Bennett. You should be a good tight end. Good man should be an excellent Super Bowl. We're looking now What is this gonna be two weeks two weeks two weeks from today? That's right Super Bowls in two weeks So we're lady gaga is gonna perform Lady godhead know who's gonna perform lady gaga's Yes You know, I know about my music. All right. Okay, and you Kings if you are watching Kings, please get it together I I plead of you because I love the king and that's my team Even if you guys don't do good, but Demarcus cousins got it going on Rudy Gay is hurt. He got a torn So do you think some of the Sacramento Kings watch our show friend I don't know I don't know either we don't know who watch Maybe this is a nice a money He's waiting for a shout out shout out for the Marcus cuz Marcus cuz yeah, okay and Oh Your sermon was good. It was talked about John the Baptist and how we should be fishers of men and We should follow Jesus because Jesus was God's child God's son and To make everything productive and everything decent in order You got to be able to do what you got to do Otherwise, if you don't decent in order you're not doing what God wants you to do in his practice of life So total velocity of the second-hand motion. I still don't know what that means Fred Total loss of the second motion is like the procedure Okay, the procedure what you do or what you agree to disagree Like we talked about that one time. We did talk about agree to disagree. Yeah, it's my birthday Day But yeah quit smoking Fred can't do it yeah, yeah quit smoking no good for you But I'm okay, but it's Fred's birthday today, so it's my day I can do what I gotta do and we Fred said three cigarettes while we've been out today. That's that's the most I think we've ever had It's the most we've ever had going out Fred. Okay, but it's your birthday So I'll lay off you but you do got to quit smoking and what what shall we send the people off? What do we have to say? No, no, no, no, that's right. You got a wrap. You got a wrap I got to do right there. We're coming up or we're over three or almost have four minutes So you got to keep it going? Okay It's my birthday. It's starting to be cheer here comes another year Gotta keep it going till the night is through and when I'm on the microphone, I'm down with my crew I got CJ and Gordon you see don't forget about Justin too You know me by the way I walk by the way I talk by the way I ride by the way I slide I love Jesus Because he's the man if he can't do it no one can because I got to say I love my Pepsi Sip it like this Enough to the chat my stuff is fat. I bust platinum tracks out your speaker nine months later They announced me as a teacher one Ready one love happy birthday friend. Happy birthday, Fred