https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=MiqqyMx8WFw

 Welcome ladies and gentlemen to Local Talent Showcase. My name is Tony Francino. I'm your host and producer of Local Talent Showcase. My show will bring you good news and talent from the Sacramento, Roseville area. Tonight we have a guest. This gentleman also has a radio show on Excess Sacramento on Wednesday from 4 to 6. Introduce yourself. Hello people out there. Tony my name is Fred D. I've been writing lyrics and performing ever since 1997. I've performed at the state fair. I've performed at CalExpo and I've also performed at little venues as far as like Arco Arena. Performed at the Colonial and different venues and different talent showcases. How did you get started? Well I watched a bunch of people. One of my mentors is, you know who Will Smith is? Remember the guy, the Fresh Prince of Bel Air? Oh yeah. He was one of my mentors. So I followed the way he presented himself and after a while I just kept on practicing and matter of fact I had a CD out called The Method and I'm about to put it back on. People can purchase it and I'll let people know when you can purchase it. It'll probably be another month or two and then it'll be on the market so you can hear me perform. If you want to go on MySpace go under Fred D and it has the different performances. I have different performances. Now how would you classify your music Fred? Oh positive hip hop. And your radio, do you have guests on your radio? We have guests every three weeks. So if you ever knew of anybody that's doing music just let me know and I could have them on my show. I'd be more than willing to do that. How did you get involved with radio? Well a while back I heard about it and my good friend Shane Carpenter who's the worker, the director, he helped me out and he stirred me in the right direction and I had my own radio show and I do my DJing and then I do my performing as well because it's a hobby and I like to keep busy with music because I love music. I like to enlighten the crowd and show them a great astonishment of performance. Now you DJ as part of anything? No, no, no, no. I'm just a DJ for the radio station. Oh you don't do? No I don't DJ. Oh okay, okay. And now when is your radio show on? Wednesday 4 to 6. Every Wednesday 4 to 6. And it's on computer? Access Sacramento. Access Sacramento. But soon hopefully we'll be going FM. Right that would be great. Maybe in a year or a year and a half. Well if you ever need anybody for a performance where there's an audience let me know Tony because I'd be more than okay, more than welcome to help you out. Now do you have any brothers, sisters that are involved in? No just me. Just you? Yeah. And what kind of albums are you looking in the future to? Well I don't know if you heard me, I did mostly pop music but I kind of mixed in some Christianity. Did you hear that? Yeah. Because I am a Christian and I do believe in the Lord Jesus Christ. So he's the one that brought me to my horizons, that brought me to the top. And you know there's a lot of people out there that think oh you can't make it or you can't do this, you can't do that. If you put God first in your life you will make it because God says you can do all things through Christ that strengthens me. Now have you done this in churches? Yeah, I perform in churches. What church do you go to? Right now it's called Christian Church over off of Power Inn. Oh okay. Okay. Now, what are you looking for in the future? Well I'm looking to get my music out and then do gigs. So if there's any producers out there, is it okay if I leave a number? I will put a number. Okay, I can do that now? Yeah. Okay. If you would like to reach me, you can reach me at 916-550-2971. That's 550-2971. If you like my performance or you thought I had a lot of talent or some talent, just be honest with me because I'm open right now and I'm looking to be produced. I know I've got what it takes. I know I might be a little bit, what's the word, conceded, but I know I have talent so I would like to go further with my direction. You know what I'm saying Tony? Would you think about doing DJ at parties? No, I wouldn't want to. That's not me. Okay. I buy this. Now what songs are you going to do for us today? Okay, the first one is called Sacktown, As We Know. The second one is called This Is The Way I Walk. And the third one is called We're All In This Together. Now do you play any instruments? I made all the beats. I want to know. Oh, I forgot the tension. I forgot to turn it off. Yeah. Sorry about that. That's okay. I really apologize about that. I'm trying to turn it off. I want to turn it off out here because we're in another thing. But see, I've got people calling me that want to do performances and help me out. So anyways, yeah, I just enjoy what I'm doing. And I enjoy my DJing and I enjoy just talking to people and relating with people and find out what they like to do and how I can help them out or vice versa. I patch everybody. Basically you can patch mine. When did you grow up? I grew up from the SAC. Sacktown. Oh, you grew up in Sacramento. Right. And what high school did you go to? Colache. Okay. That sounds interesting. Then I went to college. I went to AR. Good college. And I have 26 units done. So I'm doing pretty good for myself. What did you major in? Probably music. Music, okay. They have a good program at the AR. Right. But I just so happened to see your show one day and I said, oh, this guy's got an interesting show. I want to talk to him and find out if I can come on his show. And I really like what you're doing and I think you're doing a great job. You're a good aspect to Access Sacramento. I don't know if you've seen it or not, but when I do my song, I mention Access Sacramento. Yes, you do. And that's very nice to do because some people don't do that. Well, Access is a little history of me. When I was growing up in Brooklyn, I grew up in Brooklyn and when I was about four years old, nobody could understand me. So you talk about bullying now? Oh. Oh, I see my mom crying to my parents saying, I'm not going to go to school again. Never, ever, ever, ever. And my parents said, you have to. I can understand you, Tony. Well, I improved a lot lately. And I found a solution. I figured if I didn't say anything, they wouldn't make fun of me. So I would sit in class and they wouldn't say anything. And the teachers told my parents, I think your son is mentally retarded. I told my parents, no, I'm not. I just don't want to talk. But if you told me then, I would have my own TV show here. I would have said, you're nuts. But it's fantastic. And I always wanted to bring good news. So when is this show coming on? It's on Tuesday at 930 p.m. On 17 or 18? On 17. Now, if it's a high school football game, I come on at the end of the football game. Oh, wait. Yeah, yeah, that's just. But I don't think it will be on because you said Tuesday. They don't play Tuesday nights. Yeah, it's on tonight. It's on tonight. I've seen it in the control room. Oh, this is going to be on tonight? No, no. Oh. But. Two weeks from now? My show that's on tonight, which is the one on paramedics. Oh, OK. I had, I interviewed three interns that come into American River to become paramedics. Oh, OK. And it was really interesting. What kind of music do you like, Tony? I like 15 Rock. I like Doo-Wop. You like all these? Yeah, I love them. I love all the stuff. Yeah, I like all these. And maybe I'll have you. Do you have any Christmas rap songs? Yeah, I do Christmas rap. OK. I could do like Rudolph the Red Nosed Reindeer. And I could do Santa Come to Town. That would be awesome. I will have you on my Christmas show. Right on. I'll be in touch with you. Right on. But now we're going to hear you perform. Right on. And we're looking forward to it. Oh, believe me, you'll be very pleased. So Freddie. Freddie. Dee. Dee? Yes. Let's do it. Let's do it. Let's do it. Let's do it. Let's do it. Let's do it. Let's do it. Let's do it. Let's do it. Let's do it. Let's do it. Let's do it. Let's do it. Let's do it. Let's do it. Let's do it. Let's do it. Let's do it. Let's do it. Let's do it. Let's do it. Let's do it. Let's do it. Let's do it. Let's do it. Let's do it. Let's do it. Let's do it. Let's do it. Let's do it. Let's do it. Let's do it. Let's do it. Let's do it. Let's do it. Let's do it. Let's do it. Let's do it. Let's do it. Let's do it. Let's do it. Let's do it. Let's do it. Let's do it. Let's do it. Let's do it. Let's do it. Let's do it. Let's do it. Let's do it. Let's do it. Let's do it. Let's do it. Let's do it. Let's do it. Let's do it. Let's do it. Let's do it. Let's do it. Let's do it. Let's do it. Let's do it. Let's do it. Let's do it. Let's do it. Let's do it. Let's do it. Let's do it. Let's do it. Let's do it. Let's do it. Let's do it. Let's do it. Let's do it. Let's do it. Let's do it. Let's do it. Let's do it. Let's do it. Let's do it. Let's do it. Let's do it. Let's do it. Let's do it. Let's do it. Let's do it. Let's do it. Let's do it. Let's do it. I could always pray, could never be sore, and when I'm on the mic I always go all. Roddy, for Roddy, a new state of rap. Is me Freddie, be a hurdle over the map. I'll make you clap your hands and stomp your feet, because your body is moving to a hip-hop beat. But you can't compete or try to compare, but sucker, you best not stare, And when I'm on the microphone, I do not sag, I do not brag, I just say my thing like a chicken wing on a string. Really though, good to go, without a word to say, from the SAC. Really though, what's really going on, don't you see? Good to go, without a word to say, when I'm on the mic, I got to pray. You, you, you, shall be in church, and stop looking at the girls with the mini skirts, Because God put me on this earth to preach, if you don't understand your how to reach. I said read your Bible, pray every day, that's the only way you'll never make it, man. I'm not Yosemite Sam, I'm Fred D, from the SAC. Really though, good to go, without a word to say, don't you know, the boy don't play. One, two, three, four, five, six, don't you know, I got that prefix, to come on down, to get around. I'd access Sacramento wearing my crown, gotta do what you gotta do, you see. I'd access Sacramento for shiggity. Rolling deep in my pocket six-fold, the speakers are bumping like a bo-bo. Couldn't get started till the night is through, gee. The Oakland A's tried their best this year, you see. But then we got the Giants, they're gonna come on top, like a champion, like me, the king of hip-hop. I've been taking it down, every single day. Rocking on the mic like my name was Kid N' Play. Good to go, without a word to say. I hope you like my lyrics, really though, okay? That's a wrap. Here we go. Your attention's a song. When I'm on the mic, I just make it go warm. Because you would meet, you can't fake me. The boss follows all over the colony. Yes, I'm well known in the SAC. Yeah, Kelly, baby, my eyes change to blind youth when you look at them too long. Blink, blink, blink, money ain't a thing. All you play ahead is just sip on some scissor. Because you just can't get with me. The everlasting friend dip. It ain't nothing but a chicken wing on a string. Don't you know if you know what I mean? Because you just know, you're just jealous that you can't compete to my level. Now, DJ, hit that treble! Who's that guy? He's Freddie. He loves Jesus Christ, Gene. Roll it deep, down the block. Got some speakers in the back, hoping don't you know. Pull out the 40 pounds, you know. You know how we do it? Always brought my paper, and I like to make my ladies laugh. For sure, friend D, you just don't know. Comment down loud, when a contender tries to take my title. There's no way you can take my title, Gene. You better be in the lower calories. Huh? When I speak, you will listen. Like I said, I be hitting lyrics all the time. Willing to bust a hardcore rhyme. I'm gonna tell you a little story about me and my friends. About something we did, going back when I was eating spaghetti. And getting kinda sweaty, when all of a sudden, he didn't walk very, very well. My girl, in these old days, and she had a lot of friends who would walk in my way. I said first, that was Helen. Then there was Ellen. But the best of my mom, she had to believe in herself. But my mom, she had bad things, she had some ony elbows. But that's okay, really though. When I speak, you will listen. Because I am vivid. A lesson to be learned with the life that you live. I be busting lyrics every single day. Rolling on the mic every single way. Kicking the exiles with the rhymes of Duke Flo. Because I'm an MC, that is my dispo. Kicking the exiles with the rhymes of Duke Flo. You know I'm kicking rhymes every single day. Really though, that's all I got to say. Peace out, SAAC. Local Access Sacramento, Duke. Because you know I'm coming straight to you out your TV screen. If you know what I mean. I've got a CD you can purchase out in the market, G. And if you'd like it, let me know. Because I'm Freddie D, came to steal the show. Every single day in a 5-0. Running deep, don't you know. Good to go, without a word to say. Don't you know Freddie don't play. Who's that guy? He's Freddie. He loves Jesus Christ. Who's that guy? He's Freddie. He from the SAAC. Don't you know me by the way I walk. By the way I stop. By the way I cry. Every single day. Yo, the kid don't play. Yo, word to say. Rolling on the mic every single day. Yo, I'm good to go. Roll. Every single day though. Really though, gotta keep it going. Gotta get on the mic every single day. Know it. To make it to the top. Never miss. All these players here just wanna try to diss. Try to be like me. But you can't play the boss baller like me. They call me Fred Dean from the SAAC. I want all your challenges to look at me. Cause I'm on top. All the ladies love me by the way I walk. Don't you know. Good to go. On the mic cause the boy don't play. I got my homie Gray. We be doing big things. Really though, okay. We be rolling through McDonald's. Getting our Happy Meal on comment. Every single day. Don't you know. That's it for me. Really though. So if you need to access Sacramento. Check out my show. I got a radio show. Yo. Every Wednesday 4 to 6. Check it out. Cause Fred Dean's the free face. Thank you very much. Peace. Out. Thank you. It was great. Thank you. I really. And I'm looking forward to my Christmas show. Right on. We're gonna be taping it on December 12th. Yeah I'll be available. What time would you like me here? The show runs from. It's gonna be an hour show. 6 to 9. So I'll have an half an hour to perform? No, no. You might have. About 10. 10 minutes. Cause I'm gonna have different groups. No problem. Santa's coming. Okay. Typically gonna have Santa. And last year it went really well. Well we had food and drinks and stuff. I'm working on that. Last year I had a cake. Just try to get some soda and maybe. We're just trying to get some soda and maybe some cake and we'll be good. Oh well, what can I have? The reason why I was able to perform today, I had two cups of coffee so that really energized me. So it really helps me out to have that caffeine because it just gets me where I need to be. And hopefully, I'm going to make it to the top and put Sacktown until we drop, you know what I'm saying? Because it's all about Sacktown. Sacktown to the back down, you know what I'm saying? So all my friends out there, you know, that believed in me. One love and I thank you very much for believing in me. I got to put shots out to my pastor, Pastor Paul. I got to put shots out to my Auntie, Auntie Nina, Auntie Carmen, my mom, my sister, and all the people that believed in me. Thank you very much. XS Sacramento. Got it going on. One love. That's fantastic. It's great. So hopefully I'll have you back. I know I will have you back. If you need me before then, you need to do a time slot, let me know. I will do that, believe me. Alright, I hope you enjoyed it. Give me your telephone number again to my audience. My number is 550-2971. That's 550-2971. Anybody that's interested, anybody that thinks I have talent, or maybe could work with me, please work with me because I'm open right now and I'm looking to be, maybe not signed, but someone that could help me out. I already got all my music done, okay? I got my one music that I got done and then I have eight more songs that I can put out. I just need to find somebody that can produce me because I don't have a lot of income to pay for right now and it's expensive. Well, you were on the right road there, Freddie. Thank you very much. And thank you for coming. Alright, it's been a pleasure. And ladies and gentlemen, watch my show. We're going to have interesting people like Freddie and we are doing a Christmas show, so be aware of that. And I'm going to have some more singers and dancers. I'm working on a square dancing show. So please, we want to bring good news to Sacramento. On Access Sacramento. And if you're interested in becoming a producer, call Access on 456-8600. You can come down. They'll give you an orientation. They'll show you to the studio. They'll show you the equipment. And you can decide if you want to take the classes. And once you take the classes, you can get certified on the cameras in the control room. And you can do your own show. Like I said, I didn't realize I can produce my own show. And my brothers in Brooklyn, they screened my show on the computer. And they said, boy, my brother is a producer. Look, it says here, produced by Tony Francino. Do we have three minutes? I was going to play one of my tracks off my CD. No, we're about to. Okay. Next time. Okay. Next time. I promise you that. But again, thank you. And radio, too. If you want to become a radio DJ, you can come down. And the classes are not very expensive. And you can have your own radio show, too. So ladies and gentlemen, thank you very much. And do come back and listen to Local Talent Showcase. And listen to Freddie D. and his radio show. Sacramento. Access Sacramento. One Love. Thank you. Yay. Ow!