https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=2zLUX_Do2VY

 Hey, how's it going Paul? I liked your sermon man, it was real good. I gotta give my introduction. I do the introduction. Alright, go ahead. Welcome to the Freddie and Paul show. This is episode 22. 22. And we're here after church on Sunday. Right. Yeah. Make sure folks can see your head. Oh. There we go. Freddie's been singing faithfully. Thank you. I appreciate it. For the praise time. Freddie has a good voice. Thank you. And he's been doing real well. I'm very proud of him. Thanks for the compliment. So what are we going to talk about today Fred? Oh, we're going to talk about your sermon. You talked about seeking the first kingdom with God. Knock and the door shall be opened unto you. That's right. Asking you shall receive. Knock and the door will be opened. And that basically means if you ask for God's help, he will grant it. That's right. And if you grant it, it will be done in a good fashion way and it will be decent in order. That's right. Decent. And Freddie's, lately Freddie's been real big on decent and in good order. Freddie was raised in the Christian Form Church. We believe everything decently and in good order. That would be good. And high kings, I'm proud of you. You beat Detroit. You beat... The Clippers. No, no, no. The Cavs. The Cavs. They beat Detroit. The Cavs. The Cavs. They lost to the Pacers, but that's OK. And they beat against the Charlotte Hornets last night. It's a way to go kings. So right on. We're doing good. We're doing good. Now, Super Bowl, who are you for? I got to go for Atlanta because I want to see someone new. I want to see Matt Ryan. I want to see Julio Jones. I'm conflicted. I kind of... Please go for Atlanta. I've got a lot of relatives that if I root for Atlanta, they'll be... They'll be mad at you? I've got a lot of rabid Patriot fans out there. Mel, I'm looking at you. So my cousin, Melissa, my mother, my brother-in-law, R Paul, they're all Patriot fans. OK, OK. That's cool. So I can't... What we'll do is you go for the Patriots and I'll go for Atlanta because I want to see an upset. OK. I must... And Lady Gaga is going to be there. That's going to be something else. You go to Lady Gaga. Yeah. I must say I do remember when the Giants beat the Pats in the Super Bowl. Oh, yeah. Yeah, yeah. Remember that catch. Yeah. That catch like on his head. Right, right. That was something else, man. I think the Patriots are going to win. They're a really good team, well-coached. But I appreciate the compliment about singing in the choir. You sing very well, Fred, and I'm glad you... I think I'm going to... I got my music. I think I'm going to start practicing. Oh, that's a good idea. Oh, and sorry, C.J., you couldn't make it today, but that's OK. We'll see you on another day or whatever. Yep, yep, yep. Anyways, basically, how many minutes we got? I think that's good. No, no, we got two more minutes. I want to do a rap. OK, do a rap. OK. And then you do one too. Just make one up. Do a Bible verse. You start. OK, I'll do Sikki first, the Kingdom of God. OK, OK. Because that's what you talked about. OK. Sikki first, the Kingdom of God. Asking it should be like that and not Todd. Stepping to the middle and stepping to the front. I'm not going out to lunch, but I got a lot of bunch. Got to take it till the night is through. Atlanta's going to beat the Patriots too. Paul's sitting down and that's OK, because when I'm on the microphone, it's an original way. It's very original. It was about Sikki first. So why don't you take a second look and do it like that. Enough chitter chat. My stuff is fat. I bust platinum tracks. Ouch, speaker. Because Pastor Paul is my number one preacher. He is the one in command. And Jesus Christ said you could do all you can. Understand this and you shall be good. Rocking on the mic and that's all I got to say. Elmer Fudd, really though, dude. OK. I don't know where he fits in. I know who he is. Anyways, what are we going to be talking about next week? I don't know. We'll see. The sermon. You said, oh, the Beatitudes. We did the Beatitudes this week. No, but you talked about it today. I'm remembering. And I was right there. Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of God. The kingdom of God. The poor should be thankful for what they got. I told myself I'm thankful for what I got right now. Because I'm doing what I'm asked to do. And seek and you shall find the kingdom of God in all mankind. I just made it up. Whatever it might be. But we're doing good. Let's land the plane here, friends. OK, OK. I've got 30 seconds. It doesn't say five minutes. If we have a three minute show, that's good too. This is number 22. Be good, blessed are those who come to the kingdom of God. We're done. And tune in to our show every Sunday because it's very good and very uplifting. One love. Amen.