https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=miHrdaA-XeE

 Welcome to the Freddie and Paul show. Hey Paul, how you doing? Good Fred, how you doing? Oh I'm doing alright man. Thanks for the breakfast. It really hit the spot. You're welcome Fred. You're welcome Fred. What do you want to talk about? You want to do a quick show of Fred and I? I just had a quick little errand we had to run this morning. Yeah but it was good and basically what I'm saying is, okay so the Warriors are tied with the Dallas Mavericks and then Phoenix is over 2-0 on them and Bucks and the Celtics are 1-1 and the Heat and the Suns are 2-0. They have 2-0 over this Miami Heat. Okay. And I only had one cup of coffee, I didn't have no soda this morning so that's pretty good. That coffee is basically a dessert though. I mean it looks like a hot fudge sundae in there. Yeah it tastes good actually. And basically what I'm saying is, yeah go ahead Paul talk about something. I don't know. Fred watched, Fred said today he was watching my commentary on... Mom was too. Mom was too on Jonathan Peugeot and Brett Weinstein? Yeah, yeah. Weinstein. Is he related to Feinstein? Is Weinstein related to Feinstein? Good question. I don't know. Dude, my company got jacked up. Anyway. There's the question of the day. Is Weinstein related to Feinstein? Charlie, do you know Charlie J? Tell me. I don't know if Charles J knows. I don't think Charles J watches my commentary videos. Oh, okay. So any other thoughts on that video? Were they scholars and gentlemen? They were scholars and gentlemen, yes indeed they were. Were they officials of men? Peugeot was trying to be officials of men. Weinstein not so much. Oh, okay. Because Jonathan Peugeot is a Christian and Brett Weinstein isn't. Were they special-aged and pure, grateful, loyal, industrious and cheerful? I thought they were those things. I thought they were those things. Alright, so I think it's time for me to do a rap. Alright. Check it out everybody in the place to be. We got Paul doing big things. Gee going 1, 2, 3, 3, 2, 1. When I'm on the mic I'm having some fun. Biscoe Kid was a friend of mine rocking on the mic and I got it like a nursery rhyme. Coming tight. Recite to a true delight. Kicking rhythm in the hips every single day. Yo, I came to play. Alright, it's a good one. Now there is, one of these times I'm going to have to write you some lyrics and you're going to have to butt some rhymes. Pastor Paul Rhyme. Pastor Paul Rhyme. Alright, thank you Paul. Alright Fred, you going to land the plane? Yeah, one love. One love.