https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=-J5ogGSjxhg

 The Freddie and Paul show. This is episode 36 maybe? I don't know I lose track. A lot of them. Maybe 37. I don't know. I'll check when I upload it. And it's Sunday and where this is the second Sunday of June. June. Last week was Pentecost. Last week was Pentecost. See I remember. That's right. And so today we're switching back to Second Samuel. Really hard sad story about it. Today's story was a very sad one about a brother raping his sister. And talked about sin and how sin affects our homes and affects our lives. And it's a very, very sad story. So that was what the sermon was about. Sometimes we preach about sad things. Well what I got is the people of Tamar, the spiritual solution, the city of God. David has a lyre riled. Anta to Maya made brieva brought bread to bed. He... Oh okay. So it says treat those good and they will treat you bad good. Well they might, they might not. Wow. That's part of, you know we talked about sin and we talked about our brokenness and we talked about that this world is not a stable place. Things go wrong in this world. But why? Because we rebelled against God. I know but why can't we just be good and be productive? It's not our capacity to be good all the time. That's what I want. That's what I am though. I'm a perfectionist and I like to be good. I know you are. And we wish we could fix it. I know but I do what's best and I play it by ear and I just go with it. Yeah. Anyways okay so. So it was a sad sermon today. Not sad hard things. I know but sometimes it's like that. But all we have to do is make what's good out of it. And well what we do is we trust in God. Right. Because he gives us good gifts and we take them in open hand. We can't secure the goodness for ourselves. Okay. We trust in him too. That's right. And we trust in him because he is good. Right. And so that's, that's, that was what the sermon was about. Okay. Last week you talked about David. Yeah we talked about David quite a bit today because the Israelites were thinking, the disciples were thinking about David as kind of a golden time. I had a question. Yes. Were the Spartans in the book, the Bible? The Spartans are not in the Bible. No Spartans. No. Philistines. Philistines yes. Philistines yes. But Spartans no. Okay. Alright well that's about it I guess. That's about it today. Okay. Thank you for tuning in. Yeah. And yeah thanks for tuning in. And if you have questions or comments about the show please leave them and we'll see you next time. Amen. Oops. No. One. One. Love. Alright. Thank you.