https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=rXFHEuPVSVY

 Welcome again to the Freddie and Paul show. Hey, how you doing Paul? I'm doing fine. It's been a while since we've had our show. Yeah, but that's okay because we got a lot of things to talk about now. I can tell you how my life is going and you can tell me how your life is going. That's true, that's true. My life is going like this. Okay, tell me if this is instinct, Paul. Okay, I didn't even call CJ, okay? And I was at the mall and he texted me and said, look behind me. Really? He was right there. Really? Now is that God or what? That's wonderful. That is instinct. I know that's, what's the word for that? I know that's instinct. That's providence. Providence. That's the word for that. That's providence. See what I mean, man? How God works. He works in mysterious ways. Yes, he does. He does work in mysterious ways. I mean, wow, he works for my life, your life. I mean, I've known you for a long time, pastor, and I know I've had tribulations, trials and tribulations, but I've always got through it. That's right. I've always said, learn from my mistakes and learn from my goals. And now, okay, so what, do you have any words with him for when I'm feeling upset or I want to talk to somebody about something? How can I go up to someone and really understand where they're coming from? You know what I mean? Just have a simple conversation because sometimes I get frustrated. Well, I think you're good at conversation, Fred. You and I have a lot of conversations. I know. And they're good conversations. That's true. And you're very good at reaching out when you're feeling troubled by something you reach out. Well, I try to help others when I can. I know you do. That's good. I treat others the way I want to be treated, like we always talk about on our program. Yeah, that's true. And then what's the other one? Oh, fishers and men. Fishers and men. But you didn't talk about that today, but that's okay. No, I really didn't. So what did I talk about? Do you know, you heard half my sermon. Hold on, I got one for you. Okay. Do you know that Jesus fed 12,000 people or more with two loaves of bread and three fishes? How did he do that? Five loaves. Five loaves? I thought it was two loaves. Loaves and fishes. I thought it was two loaves. I can't remember right now. We'll look it up one day. We'll look it up. We'll look it up. Five loaves and two fishes, I think it was. Now, Paul, I had a question for you. Can we, is there any way we could get a podcast and have our own little Bible study? You know, me and you just talk and we talk to people and they can call you. Well, that's kind of what we do here. Well, call in. That's true. I don't know that we're going to have any callers. Oh, well, how many people do we have right now? I don't know. It goes up and down. Oh, well, how can we get more people? I guess that's all I'm saying. I don't know. We'll let the Lord worry about that. We let them tune in? We let them tune in. Does Forrest tune in? You'll have to ask Forrest that. Does Reggie? Reggie doesn't look at a lot of stuff online unless it has directly connected to fantasy football. Well, I'll link Reggie into this and maybe Reggie will talk. Anyways, what about, remember I was telling you because I looked on my thing about the man in Michigan, our friend that used to go to church here? Oh, Derek Zile. He's in Massachusetts. Did you ever find out how I can log on to his preaching? You'd have to search Pleasant Street Christian Reformed Church. It'll be on their website. Okay, we'll do it together. We'll find out. Okay, let's talk about football now. Okay. So you played Leon today? Yeah, Leon and I are playing today. It looks like I'm losing. Yes, but you won last week. So make that prospect. But I have to win all my games to get into the playoffs. It's not going to happen. I'm toilet bowl bound again. Well, we'll pray about it and there's got to be a way to overcome. It's just a game. Well, let me ask you. It's just a game. I know, I know. I have a question for you, though. Yeah. This is a question. Should I pray for my fantasy football team? No, because it's only a game. That's what you're going to tell me, right? I don't know. I don't know. I'm asking you. I thought you were asking me a question. No, I'm asking you. Should I pray for my fantasy? I mean, I could understand praying if you're an NFL player to pray to win. I think that's good. But look. But a fantasy football team is not really anything. Yeah, it's just a game. I told you. Yeah. So, you're playing to win at poker. Now, another thing. For a Parcheese or Monopoly. I got something to tell you. I got something to tell you. Okay. Friends are hard to find. Material things can be replaced. That's true. So, if you look upon the Lord and ask the Lord for abundance, he shall seek and be, seek he first like the kingdom of God. Ask and thou shall be added onto you. Allelu, allelu. Okay. That's the way I look. And I don't know, man. I'm just, you know. Now, now, now. Okay, Paul. Okay. I will say the Kings won the other night. But they lost to the Knicks last night. But that's okay. They're a rookie team and they need to learn. Yeah. But at least they're winning some games. They could make the playoffs. I know I said this last year to you. And you said they lose a lot of games. That's true. How are the Warriors doing, my friend? I haven't checked with them. I haven't checked on them. I haven't checked on them either. But they're a lot better than the Kings. I know, I know, I know. Not much compares to being the Warriors and the Kings. I know, I know, I know. All right. Well, I'm not going to do a wrap today. We'll look forward to that next week. Okay. I think this is a good show, though, Fred. This is a good one. Thank you. And we're on which one so I can watch it? We're on Facebook and YouTube. No, no. I'm talking about what episode? Is it 38? 37 or 38. It might be 38. I'll have to check. When I upload it, I'll check it. I don't want to be conceited, but I have a good memory. He does. He really does. Anyways. Okay. One good thing I heard, Paul, before we let these people go. Yeah. I heard that... What's his name? Someone's coming out with a movie. Oh, in December, Star Wars is coming out. Oh, okay. It's not called Redo and End. It's called Return of the... I don't know if it's Jedi or something like that, but Star Wars. You look out for that, people, because that's going to be a good movie. Okay. I know it might not be Christian-like, but it is a good thing to watch because it's not that negative, I guess. It has a plot to everything. When you seek in the kingdom of God, you look for things that are great and things that are abundant and quaint and things like... I know, I have my own vocabulary. I really should make the Freddy Fred vocabulary. That would be something to do, you know? Maybe we could do that on one of our shows. Well, I am talking about the Freddy Fred Foundation. Okay, well, thank you, everybody, for tuning in, and we got to do our one love. Okay. One love. Amen. That was a good one, Paul. That was a good one.