https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=-LNrFaXCFPM

 Welcome to the Freddie and Paul show this is episode 72. 72 baby what's up? So what do you want to talk about today Fred? I want to talk about how the RiverCats did and I want to talk about how the climate is getting cooler so it's better. It's not as hot as it used to be. Well it's smoky, it's smoky today they got a lot of fires. Let's not go in there. Anyways basically what I'm trying to say is. We have Rick in the studio audience he didn't want to be on the show. Okay. Naina never wants to be on the show. Naina's cool. Nancy's over there too. Just Fred and I. Just us the buddies. The two amigos. Anyways so we're on number 72 and we've been doing this for two years. I think. Two years plus. Okay two and a half maybe. Maybe two and a half. I think we should have a special potluck for the Freddie and Paul show. I think that'd be pretty groovy. And I think it'd be very righteous and I think it'd be good. It'd be like an anniversary to the Freddie and Paul show. So now this is what I got to say. I got a lot out of your sermon. You said that seek and ye shall find and um. Oh treat others the way you want to be treated and. You hear that in every sermon. I know but that's what I get out of your sermons because they're so awesome. So help me out a little bit. Tell me. We talked about Hezekiah. Hezekiah okay. Hezekiah got sick he was going to die. Or did the Lord. Did the Lord heal him? The Lord healed him and gave him 15 more years. Oh that's pretty gnarly. Oh yeah. Well maybe he followed the yellow brick road. You think he followed the yellow brick road Paul? Now you're just pulling my leg. Not for real. The yellow brick road is in the Wizard of Oz. I know. I like the Wizard of Oz. Yeah yellow brick road is in the. Ease on down. Ease on down the road. That's from the Wiz. You're not likely to be 1930. 1939 version. Hey hey you know what Gordon would say. Hello the yellow brick road. Hi Gordon. You know what Gordon would say. What? Gordon would say. Hello the yellow brick road. Hold on you're gonna throw me off. I'm gonna forget what I'm gonna say. Hello the yellow brick road. Okay. Eeee eeee. Anyways. That's what Gordon would say. Gordon would say that he. Let's see. Okay we used to go to City College right. And Gordon would come over and he'd break out the dominoes. And we played with this guy named Lamont. He was really cool. He had a cane. And we'd go to City College and play dominoes. And then we'll be there for like an hour and a half. And guess who would show up? Mr. CJ. And we'd be talking. We'd go get a soda. We'd go get a sandwich. And then we'd go to our class. And our our instructor's name was Don Young. He was a very nice gentleman. He was a good instructor. So yeah. What was the class? Music. It was all music. Oh so you and CJ and Gordon were all in a music class? Yeah yeah. And a matter of fact I was in the gospel choir at City College Paul. Really? And I was in men's ensemble. And I got a A in one and a B in the other. That's good. And I was president and a count of four. And I was decent in order. And I have 27 units. So if I really wanted to go back to college I could. Because I have a good head on my shoulders. I don't want to be conceited. But I don't get it treated. Because I don't get it tweeted. And I don't get it belitted. Anyways. You're just making up words. No that's my vocabulary. The Freddie vocabulary. Seriously. All right Paul. You're gonna do a song? Yeah. I'm gonna do a precious lord. You want me to start the- Yeah. You can pause it. You can pause it. Okay. What's happening y'all? It's your boy Freddie Deet up in the CRC. You know how we do this? I'm gonna do precious lord take my hand. And I'm gonna rap it because I'm in command. Here we go. Precious lord take my hand. Leave me on. Help me stand. I am tired. I am weak. I am worn through the storm. Through the night. Leave me on. To the light. Take my hand. Precious lord. Leave me home. When we grow. When we grow near. Precious lord. Linger near. When my life is almost gone. Hear my cry. Hear my call. And that's not all. Because I stand tall. Hold my hand. Lest I fall. Take my hand. Precious lord. Leave me home. Like I'm here with my boy Pastor Paul. With YouTube doing it all. Doing it big from the 916. Don't forget about my mom. She knows the prefix. Just like that. Just like this. Enough to the chat. Like Paul says. My stuff is fat. I bust platinum tracks. Out to speaker. Nine months later. You know Paul's the number one preacher. Yeah on YouTube doing it big. I like your comments and I ain't no pig. I stay up. And I am mad. I might be white but I can get down man. With my funky fresh rhymes that I test. Me on the mic because I am the best. The best emcee. In the industry. Don't you understand? I love your views G. Like one two three. You know me. The white boy they call Freddy D. Coming up like this. Coming out like that. Ho! I think we got another track. When the darkness appears and the night draws near. When the day is in pass and gone. At the river I stand. God my feet. Hold my hand. Take my hand. Precious lord. Leave me home. Ready? Ready Paul? One. Love. Amen. Hallelujah.