https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=3KiM8VBMTEg

 All right, welcome back to the Freddie and Paul show. This is episode 9. Yes, we're doing pretty good, Paul. I like what we're doing. This was a very good idea. This was a very good idea. I think our friendship is growing on what we're doing together because I make you laugh, I say things, and I make you laugh. And laughter is the best medicine, Paul. Laughter is the best medicine. Yeah. So what are we going to talk about today's show? Don't judge your book by its cover. Don't judge your book or don't judge a book? Its book by its cover. Don't judge a book by its cover. Yeah, don't judge a book by its cover. So what does that mean? That means look for good things out of things that are improvement needed. Look for good things out of things that are... Can you give us an example of what that might be? Help me out because I can't really think of... Okay, well, if someone would look at me, what do you think they'd think? You're a noble man. And maybe they shouldn't judge this book by its cover, huh? Maybe they... Right. No, no, no, they should because you are noble. You are pure, grateful, loyal, industrious, and cheerful. I'm a good cadet. Yeah, you're a number one cadet. Okay, so don't judge a book by its cover. What was the other thing we're going to talk about? Treat others how they want to be treated. Treat others the way you would want to be treated and... Don't... Oh, don't take advantage of people that have disabilities. Don't take advantage of... Why not? Because it's not right. Okay, it isn't right. It isn't right. Because people have their disabilities and you should treat others the way you'd want to be treated. That's right. That's very true. Because I feel I don't have a disability, but people think I do. But I don't let it bother me. I just ignore them, Paul. If somebody gives me a problem, I ignore them and go my own way. That's a good thing. Because I don't care what people... Well, I care what people think, but they shouldn't be talking about people that have disabilities and have things that are flawed. And one of the things we talked about is that you should look on people's good sides, right? Look at their pros and don't look at their cons. Look at their pros and don't look at their cons. Yeah. Have a good proposition and let the bad proposition go. Don't even speak on somebody that's going to be negative. I think those are good things. Look for all pros, all positivity and wipe out the negativity. Okay. I think that's a good thing, Fred. All right. We're about out of time. This is episode nine, right? This is episode nine. Okay. We got nine done. And like I said, if you have any ideas of what we could talk about, let Pastor Paul know. He'll let me know. And we will get it on for you because your opinion means a lot to us. Okay. Thank you very much. Come on, Paul. One love. Thank you.