https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=1Wdi0fqnS2s

 Alright. There we go. The the the problem is if you don't record it, it's not recorded and if you want it, it's gone. So, well, let's let's start with you, Aaron. Tell me a little bit about yourself. Well, I'm currently living in the greater Tampa Bay area of Florida. By trade, I'm a psychotherapist, a licensed mental health counselor and yeah, for I guess the past four years now, I've been I've been doing counseling by video only so I no longer have an office. So yeah, it's it's funny to be because usually I'm on your end of things. You know, tell me about yourself. Like what brings you this little world? So yeah, it's it's very weird to be like, oh man, this is this is what it feels like to be one of my clients. So this is good. I mean, this is like really allows me to to really kind of get things from their perspective now. That that whole video counseling thing which of course sort of arose in COVID. Before then, it was like, you know, no, you gotta be in person and and then suddenly after COVID, it's it's most of the people I know especially if they don't especially if they have limited means and insurance is paying its video and Yeah, it's it's really strange. I started doing video only counseling. Yeah, I guess about a year before COVID and it was all tech. It was all like tech employees, tech executives and things that they were the only ones that that seem to be interested in video and then COVID comes along and suddenly I'm like swamped with like client. There were days where I was working six days a week during during COVID and it was it was really interesting just to see like this vast array of clients no longer just you know, educated people within the tech industry. Now, I have like this whole spectrum of of people coming in but I I find it's it's so much easier for me to get to get information out of people because they feel comfortable. They're in their own setting at a great office. So, for years, I was based out of the the Northern Virginia, basically the suburbs of DC and that was where my office was located and it was a great office but I could tell people how hard time you know coming into my environment because it's an alien environment. It's a foreign environment and so it took a lot longer for them to get comfortable with me and to really form that that therapeutic alliance that we needed in order to work from whereas with with video counseling now like oftentimes the first session people you know describe like very personal things, very difficult things and feel comfortable going into detail. I've had exactly that experience in terms of pastoral ministry because of course I never did pastoral ministry over a Zoom call. I mean that you go to somebody's house or they come to your office or you meet in a coffee shop. I mean that's that's where you would do these things and then the you know before COVID even with just talking to people that have been watching my videos, I was amazed how quickly they sort of got down to business. I had a pastoral mentor of mine when I was in college and seminary. He always had a clock behind the chair. You know someone would come into his office. They'd sit there. He'd sit there. I always had a clock. He said they never get to anything until 10 minutes before the appointment is done. They had all sorts of tricks and stuff to try and get them because of course 10 minutes before the appointment is done and then next time they come in maybe we'll get into it a little sooner but it's just like no you're exactly right. I'd never put that together in terms of space and location but it makes perfect sense. It makes perfect sense. Well anyway, I got distracted so okay so you're a so you're a psychotherapist and tell me tell me about the home you grew up in. Not that you've ever thought about this before. I grew up in a really small town in Vermont and it's like a town of like 1500 people maybe. So I'm 49. I'll be 50 in six months so I grew up pretty much in the 80s. That's like what I really remember is the 1980s. Little bit of like the end of the 70s but definitely much a lot more memories from the 80s and so in northern Vermont you basically have two ethnic groups. You're either Irish American or you're French Canadian American and that's basically it. You're like one of those two ethnic enclaves and that's where you're coming from and so I grew up in a French Canadian enclave. My grandparents came to the US out of Montreal and I have a lot of fond memories of my father taking us into Montreal and visiting some of his aunts. They would be I guess my great aunts. They were they were nuns in Montreal and he had some cousins that were also priests as well and so you know meeting them and things like that and and going to like going to Latin Mass at Notre Dame and it's funny I know you were talking about what you say the other day. We're all Protestants now and that really stuck with me because going to like going to Mass in Montreal versus going to Mass in my little town in Vermont you know it's like this church does not look like a Catholic you know it looks more like a Protestant church. There's very few beautiful statuary or other artwork inside. You know you have like the only thing that would denote it that it's a Catholic Church is the crucifix but if you were to take out the crucifix I mean it would probably just look like I don't know like a Methodist Church or something. Yeah but that being said it was a very strong French Canadian Catholic Church that I grew up in. You sang the hymns in French and that was pretty amazing. Did you know what you were singing? Was there enough French that you picked up along the way that? Because it's different than being in Quebec where there's this you know everywhere else in Canada. Well, y'all have to learn French but in Quebec you really have to know it because we're going to talk it and if you don't I mean it's it's I did when I was younger but you know after my grandparents passed because their English wasn't great so I had to use French to communicate with them. I unfortunately just I got out of practice and forgot a lot. I'm still very good at reading it like if you put like a newspaper in front of me I can like translate but in terms of like auditory and like verbal comprehension still kind of still kind of squirrely. Every once in a while I'll watch like a French movie and I can pick up you know bits and pieces here and there but I'm just like so so rusty that yeah I would not be I would not be very good in terms of being a translator. But yeah I mean I so I was part of that church. I was an altar boy I think when I was from 11 to 12. And yeah that that was basically the public school. So initially I went to public school all the way up into eighth grade and then once I got to high school the the public high school in the area where I'm from I mean it's basically It was designed for farmers the kids of farmers and so my parents my parents were very blue collar but they wanted my sister and I to go to college and you know we have like a more white collar profession. So as soon as high school came they said you know you're going to Catholic school you're going you know the big city which is like Burlington which is like 75,000 people. So they they they sent me into they sent me into the Catholic high school in in the city and yeah I went there very I mean I don't know if it still is but it was it was very rigorous back then like I had to learn Latin. 30 years later I still remember being in Latin class with Sister Margaret Mary and having to translate passages of the Sumo Theologica by Saint Thomas Aquinas. I think about that now I was like man that was that was you know in graduate school they weren't that they weren't they weren't that they weren't that heavy. So yeah it was it was I think it was I think it was a Dominican run school I think it was the Dominicans that that ran at least the the religious programs. How was religion for you as a teenager? Was it something you were interested in? Something devoted to? Something shaped against? Now we're getting into the meat of things. Of course that's what we're here for. Why waste time? Yeah so essentially I think of my my my spiritual religious life pre-divorce and post-divorce because my parents divorced when I was when I was 13. Oh. Like my entire world like just was obliterated at that point. Everything completely changed. So my mother wasn't raised Catholic. My mother converted to become a Catholic when she married my my father. Well basically my father got my mother pregnant and my father's father was like yeah you're gonna marry this girl or you're gonna be ostracized from the family. You know literally you know like a shotgun wedding essentially without the shotgun but yeah it was the threat was implied and so my parents got married and they just they had a very difficult relationship. They just were not they just were not compatible with with one another and my father had a lot of personal issues as well. So my mother really tried to stick it out. I mean she stuck it out for like 18 years. But finally my father his his drinking was getting out of control. He was starting to become violent and my mother said you know this is this is it. I've had enough. And so they get divorced and like the divorce itself like didn't really I wasn't like that that I wasn't that sad about like the two of them splitting because their relationship was just so horrible that it was like finally finally you two decided can't live under the same roof. But what was really hard on me was that my father's family just being very strict you know French Canadian Catholic they kind of just turned on my mother and they ostracized her from the family and that that kind of included us as well. And so no longer would we go to every year like they would have huge like Christmas celebrations. My dad had 10 brothers and sisters so there were 11 of them in the family and so I have like 100 cousins on that side of the family and so they would have these huge elaborate holiday celebrations. And my sister and I were just like no longer invited to these these celebrations. And on top of that my poor mother so the the church that I went to the Catholic church that I went to the priest wasn't wasn't a bad man but he was he was a very weak leader in that he didn't really run the church. There were a group of like literal church ladies who basically ran the church and they didn't like my mother being a divorced woman and and also you have to understand that like back back then back in that those days my mother was a very good looking woman when she was younger. She looked almost exactly like um Princess Diana. Like if you can picture Princess Diana like that's what my mother looked like back in the 1980s. So she's this attractive now divorce and my mother called out some of the uh some of the men in the church like hitting on her after after my parents uh divorce. And so these church ladies confronted my mother after my um after my uh my my confirmation. I was I think it was in eighth grade at the time and they basically told her that like you're not welcome here anymore. And my mother rightly so like lost it you know and uh I just remember like after after confirmation being in my little confirmation outfit my mother telling me to like go to the car you know go wait for me in the car and just hearing like her just like yelling at you know you know the uh the the church ladies and uh you know the the priest the father and um she gets in the car and just looks at me and is like you're not going to that church anymore. And uh confirmation done. Yeah exactly. You could you could make up your own mind from now on. Did you stop going to church entirely or did you go to a different Catholic church or did you go to a Protestant church? No um so I so I every every two weeks I would go I would spend the weekend with my father. Oh yeah. And he was he was still going to church. He was in it he was living in a different town. And and my father was was very much um I don't know I go back and forth on this. I I wish I had had the chance to ask him before he died but I feel like he was really a an atheist. Um and he went to church just because like that was what was expected of him. Um you know he came from you know a large traditional family where you had all sorts of family members going into the taking up the clerical collar. So I think he just did it what was expected. Because the reason why I say this is because we we literally went to this church that was basically designed for um uh tourists. And so there wasn't really much of a community in this particular church. And it was known as the the the priest there had the shortest like homily out of like all the other churches in the area. And so that's that's the reason why my father you know would go there was because you know he's like oh yeah yeah 40 minutes we're in and out. And it's you know we're good to go. And so um yeah I I would I would go to that church with him but you know we'd just not get like anything out of it whatsoever. Um and it's not like you know I would be able to ask like um you know deep theological questions with my father. It's just not just not there. Um so yeah there was once that happened it's like um it's like all the the the spiritual um um binds that that I had inside of me were just like cut. And uh I just really felt like well if this is what it means to be you know Catholic then like like why why why you know why follow this path? Like these people seem ridiculous. Um I don't see like a whole lot of you know saintly behavior among like uh this this particular group. You know all I see is is a lot of drama and just a lot of just very damaged people. Um and yeah I I at that point I I really did you know turn away from the the church. And I don't think I ever really like turned away from from God at all because um I I continued to to search and I I remember getting into a debate in in my religion class with uh God bless him brother Adrian. I wish he was still alive because I would go and apologize to him. Um you know he would always he would always talk about um like how impossible it was for for those of us to convert to something else. And I remember debating with him like well you know I was at the time I'd started reading um what was the name? Is it uh DT Suzuki? The guy who was very famous for writing a lot of um Buddhism texts. Um I started reading a bunch of um Zen Buddhism and couldn't understand like half of it. But uh I don't know I guess I was just trying to be edgy at the time or something. But I would bring like these these Buddhist texts to like study to my study period and sit there and and read them. And so I I was debating um uh brother Adrian about well you know what if I want to become a Buddhist? I think I'm going to convert to Buddhism. And he's like Aaron you're like you're you're like a bag of tea. You've been steeped in you know French Canadian Catholicism your entire life. You can't just become a Buddhist. And he had some other points he was making but I I just wasn't listening. I'm like oh yeah well I'm going to become a Buddhist and you know I'm going to show you and blah blah blah. And uh I didn't become a Buddhist but uh um I I was just in such a uh a rebellious phase at that point in in my life. And um you know none of the the the kids that I went to high school with didn't seem particularly they were all so much like um much like my father. They're just kind of going through the motions. Yeah we go to mass. We we take the Eucharist. But then you know on the weekends we party. You know smoke. We drink. Have sex. Like it's not you know it's nothing that uh it's just part of of what we have to do in order to to get through school. Yeah. Um so yeah I mean it really at that point I I uh I I would occasionally pick up like a book on just kind of general spirituality here or there. Um but really didn't do any kind of uh deep soul searching at all. In fact if anything by the time I got into college in my 20s I was just living as a a hedonist. I mean that that was probably my my my main spirituality at that point in my life was just being a hedonism and just experiencing as much uh pleasure physical pleasure as I possibly could. Um but uh it's really funny because uh you know my mother was also in in the same boat in that she was kind of done with with with catholicism because of what happened with the the church. And so she decided she was going to look into some some some Protestant churches. Um that did not go well because the thing about my mother is that she's basically a folk catholic. And what I mean by that is that um she has a strong devotion to to Mary. And I never really asked her about it but I I'm pretty sure the the reason was because my mother had actually lost her her firstborn child. My oh um he had died from um from SIDS when he was uh he was a baby. This is the child that they married for. Right right exactly yeah. Wow that'll keep a therapist busy for a while. Yeah yeah. But of course you've got a devotion to Mary you're going to New England Protestant churches it's like yeah well that I mean I think because because my mom losing her firstborn son just was able to identify with Mary so much. Yeah yeah. And that's the only reason I can I can come up with why she had like such an intense devotion to her. But yeah the Protestant uh pastors apparently weren't too fond of that. In fact one of them kicked kicked her out of a Bible study group because he thought because he thought she was a goddess worshiper. Basically accused her of being a goddess worshiper. And uh yeah so so she tried a couple of different um Protestant churches but none of them kind of stuck so um she just kind of uh I don't know I guess kind of became her own thing. Yeah yeah. Just went from there. Yeah wow so when did you decide to get into did you did you get in psychology into psychology to become a psychotherapist or were you just interested in psychology first? Uh none actually I mean I my my uh my undergraduate is I have a uh an undergraduate degree in psychology but I didn't go to graduate school uh immediately um after I graduated from college. I actually ended up becoming a police officer. Oh. And did that for for several years um throughout. In a big city or a small small town? No no uh small town. Okay. And um but uh in my my late my late 20s I guess yeah um because of uh some things that had happened at work started developing some some pretty severe PTSD and but I didn't I didn't know it at the time. I just started having these panic attacks out of nowhere and I didn't understand why I was having panic attacks and so uh I found this really great therapist. Uh the guy had been um former um Vietnam vet had been an outlaw biker um had scars on his face from getting into knife fights in bars and uh was just a a really great ended up being a a little bit of a clinical mentor for me for a while after a after graduate school but um yeah so I found him and started going into to counseling and um just had a really good experience really positive experience with him um and then I started asking questions about like well how how did you get into this like why did you decide to do this and so he um he went into his story and and told me a lot about that so I was like ah I think I might apply for graduate school and and you know kind of do a similar path and um but at point though I I was in the DC area and so I went to uh to graduate school in in uh in Arlington Virginia um so that's that's where I started that that path um ironically at a Catholic university but I mean they they pretty much were not very Catholic by by that point in fact I remember being in graduate school and like the most um one of the uh one of the most shocking things was that the university had just elected like their their first uh secular uh president and one of the first things he did is he had all of the uh the crucifixes taken out of the classrooms and uh there were a lot of people who were like shocked and very angry about that wow so what was it what was what was it like getting into this profession for you did you find it did you find it life-giving um getting into starting to do starting to do therapy with people well um yeah it was um I found it life-giving I also found it um I just found it very interesting like it was just endlessly fascinating like I never ever got forward like that was kind of one of the things that I always found interesting about this profession other jobs I had worked I'd go through periods where I'm like I'm just not into this anymore I don't know if I'm going to do this anymore I've never had that thought in in counseling whatsoever um it just it keeps me endlessly fascinated with uh yeah with with the human condition and and human beings and how people react to different things um I mean one of the reasons why I started um enjoying your your channel so much was early on when when you would have the uh the pot smokers outside your office um like that that was basically my first job out of graduate school was working at a community mental health center and uh my office was right outside the the main entrance um of this uh this human services office building so you have homeless people coming in and out all day long yeah and then once I can't like right outside my office I have to go outside to kick them out I was like oh wow I recognize that yeah yeah I have this fence now so it's it's different I don't know if it's a good thing or not but it uh it's it's I don't know the way homelessness is going in Sacramento I don't know if I could keep ahead of the other but um wow yeah um so so how did how did you find how did you find me Jordan Peterson are you watching Peterson no actually I had a lot of clients that kept on asking me do you know Jordan Peterson have you ever read any of his books um and uh I did check out some of his uh some of his videos but that's not how I I came through you through the Jonathan Peugeot uh pipeline okay uh symbolic world pipeline um because I I think I was just watching I think I was watching a bunch of videos on just like young in um symbols or something and so you know the holy algorithm was like oh well if you like this then you know maybe you'll like these videos and uh so I started um yeah watching um the symbolic world and and just being very interested in that and then of course like you popped in there and I'm like oh what is this guy and so I watched a couple of your videos and uh I think where you hooked me in is yeah whatever video that you had early on that that where you said that the problem with the protestants is they never stop protesting and I'm like wow that's spicy and uh so yeah I uh you just it's funny how like you just became part of my my morning routine I I would just for whatever reason I guess like your your videos tended to come out uh in the mornings on the the east coast yeah and so I would you know watch like uh one of your videos while just preparing my my breakfast um setting up my coffee because usually my first client isn't until like 10 11 a.m so I have a lot of time in the morning um so yeah you just became part of my my routine but I felt like I have more of a parasocial relationship with you versus like some of the other podcasts I listen to like like Peugeot like a lot of the the other podcasters I don't feel like I know anything about their lives like you're the only one that really talks about like your personal life and the other podcasters I listen to I don't I don't know anything about their personal so it's more like watching I don't know a documentary or like a news program or something like that whereas with you it's a lot more personal so um well well what do you want to talk about because now I got a sense of you so um so what happened with the religion thing are you I mean you're watching Peugeot so did you start thinking having second thoughts about leaving religion or is this something that's sort of out there or what's what's up with that well uh I just I literally followed your advice Paul I just went to church you go to a Catholic church uh not initially initially um I mean down where I'm at there's like basically every flavor of like Protestantism I mean you've got because you have a lot of um uh East Europeans that came here for the the fruit industry back in the 60s you have basically every Orthodox Christian church you can imagine I mean you've you've got Greek Orthodox Russian Orthodox Serbian Orthodox Romanian Orthodox um so yeah whatever you're interested down here there's probably a church for it as well as I live like right near you know the the corporate headquarters of Scientology so I thought I'd go in that direction very easily do that as well so um well when I when I first moved down here I was dating a woman who she was a um she was basically an evangelical convert she she grew up in a secular household she was from Great Britain originally but grew up in a secular household um you know she uh she she converted to Big Eva and started going to a mega church and so she tried to make me go to her mega church I was like ah you know I'll give it a try but man you know I walk in there and they've got like a coffee bar and then you know once they you know break out like the rock music I'm like I can't do this so um yeah I uh I I started um I just started going back to to to Catholic mass and um it uh I'll be honest with you didn't really do much for me uh at first um but there's also just so many because you have so many snowbirds who come down in my area there's just there's a lot of um Catholic churches and there are they're all very different um some of them cater more to the Latin American community um you know some are are clearly geared towards uh the retirees so each each church is is is very different but recently I found a church where um the the the lead pastor is uh is Nigerian and um I was able to have uh uh coffee with him at one point and he just talked about his experiences growing up in in Nigeria where like if you're Christian like you have to be serious about it because you know you have uh Muslim fanatics that are going to try to blow up your church or or shoot your your congregants and so just hearing about his experiences was just uh really amazing I can't remember if it was you or Jonathan Pajot one of you guys talked about how um more and more you're getting it used to be that um you know the Europeans went to Africa to evangelize the Africans and now the Africans are coming into the United States yep yep that's that's happening all over yep we've got we've got a Nigerian Anglican church here and there's a there's a white guy he's been on the Freddie and Paul show and he's he's gonna get baptized in the Anglican church next month and I'm afraid we're kind of pulling him in though because we serve donuts and they don't and he likes donuts so I think uh I I don't want to get on bad terms with my Nigerian uh Anglican priest so yeah they're they're very passionate yeah um yeah and so he's a he's a very good uh evangelist um normally I tend to tune out during the the homily but um I enjoy listening to his uh his homily good um so yeah I've been going to to that church for a little while now so that's that's kind of where I'm at um but I think it's really more about the older that I get I find um it's important for me to to connect with my my ancestors um and that that pull gets stronger and stronger the older that that I I I get um you're not a Buddhist you're not a Buddhist I tried I really tried in my 30s I went to a couple of Sanghas and um joined a couple of Buddhist groups but then but then um I I was married for 10 years and and I got divorced when I was about 40 and um after my divorce I took a trip a long trip to Southeast Asia and met like real real Buddhists I was like wow like you guys aren't like the American Buddhists like the American Buddhists yeah they don't they don't they don't practice the corporate Buddhism in in places like Thailand they're they're pretty militant um so I was like this is this is ridiculous like I always knew in my heart that it didn't matter like if I tried to practice the eightfold path or or any of that that I I was never going to feel like a Buddhist it was just brother Adrian was right he was right the entire time I I sort of listened to him but I was young and stupid well we don't listen when we're young we don't know enough to we don't know enough to recognize wisdom when it's spoken to us well what did what did you want to what did you want to talk about I mean you've satisfied my my curiosity about your story is there anything in particular you wanted to bring up or talk about yeah I mean I don't know if you even have an answer for this but um lately I've been getting a lot of young male clients and when I say young like like 21 22 23 um you know the the Zoomers Generation Z um and uh the these these young males they they um they all seem to have the the same story and it just it's it breaks my heart it's so difficult for me to to hear um you know so many of them are just they're they're they're almost like shut-ins in that I'll ask them the same question like well you know like you like tell me about yourself what do you like doing like what kind of activity what kind of hobbies are you engaged in they're like oh I I play video games at home you know I live with my you know my parents and it's like okay well so you don't have any friends no I have I have friends um okay well like other than video games like what do you and your friends do well you know we'll go out like maybe twice a month you know to do something and I'm like so you know you're just sitting at home like you know the the entire time just playing video games and um yeah I I just uh it's just it's such a an alien experience from from how I I grew up then when I was in my 20s like when I was in my 20s I I'm an introvert like I I am not an extrovert but I was willing to go out to the clubs or to you know because I knew that's where the girls were so like you know I I pushed myself out of my comfort bubble in order to you know seek the the female race right but I asked these young guys like what about like what about girls what about you know young women well I talked to some girls online and yeah I I don't know I mean I guess I guess what my question to you is like do you see anything within the greater Christian world on like how to to deal with this I mean it's just the reason why I ask is because um I was reading some articles the other day about muscular Christianity back in the late 1800s early 1900s and I remember when I was in my early 20s I worked out at a an old YMCA and this YMCA had been a YMCA for like over 100 years in this this building was a very old building and I remember the basketball court had an area where it looked like um at one point a boxing ring had been set up because you could tell like where the posts had been had been taken out and so I talked to the at one point I was talking to the director of this YMCA I'm like did you guys have like a boxing ring in here at one point he's like oh yeah they they had a boxing ring you know in there for for years and it was like it was you know it was a huge Saturday night event you know all the young men would come and and they would either fight or or they would watch um you know the boxing and you know there was probably some gambling going on as well but it was it was a you know it was a huge event it was a big draw and I was like well like why did you guys take it out like what happened to it he's like well back in the 70s they were afraid of you know liability issues you know somebody gets hurt and sues the Y so you know we took out the the the boxing ring and you know of course they're the the young male you know population after that like probably shrank um um so yeah I don't know I guess like is is does anybody have like an answer to that question in terms of like how do we how do we bring in these these young men who are clearly not getting anything from our current society or our current society is just you know garbage essentially it's just being fed into them and does do any of the the Christian denominations any of the churches have any kind of answer in in that area well I would imagine porn would be an issue that would be the sort of the top of my list if you have young males who are staying home and in front of screens all the time they might not that might not be the first thing that comes out of their mouth but as in your case with your story what traditionally has driven men out of their homes is the search for women and porn is this drug that basically you know if you want to if you want to sort of emasculate a you know half of your population porn pretty effectively does it and um so that would be and and so I think at least if young men are going to church and being raised in the church whether or not they're doing porn if they are doing porn that least they know it's an issue whereas I suspect further out in the rest of the culture it's a given and so that's not even a thing that's going to be addressed and then following that is obviously computer games and I I think churches I think thick strong church communities have at least a shot at uh sending sending the men out um to do things and at least even poorer communities and ethnic communities have more of a shot because there's not the financial buffer that will allow uh a young male to freeload and so then it's going to be pressure to go out and get work and bring in income and do something and all of that too is going to be a a useful thing now now I'm you know I at my youngest son is 23 and he um is by no means um he doesn't spend hardly any time playing computer games he doesn't spend a lot of time watching tv he spends a lot of his time with friends and so almost pretty much every night he'll go out and he'll do things with friends and he likes uh building stuff and working on stuff and he's currently looking for he just graduated from college looking for more of a full-time job and so I'm fortunate in that I'm not staring that in the face um with one of my sons he tended to spend a lot more time with computers and computer games and we put when he graduated from college my wife and I put a lot more pressure on him that he was not we knew that if he didn't we knew that if we didn't one way or another keep his you know keep the pressure on him in terms of bringing in income okay you can move back home but you're going to pay me rent you're going to pay insurance on that car you're going to start paying for that car and you know I I very quickly put the put the screws on him for money so that he would get out there and work and eventually he did in fact get a job and he's he's engaged right now and and that's doing well so I haven't had a lot of problem with that with my sons but I do see it and um and it I think it is I think it is a big problem interestingly enough um I think you know Jordan Peterson obviously had a big impact on this population um at least some of them and and then it was interesting that when my local meetup here one of the things that they wanted to start was a discord server and I had never heard of discord I had no idea what it was but of course it was video game adjacent in that that's where video gamers could meet and talk to each other and so part of what we did with estuary and with the discord server which is sort of a half step to that is again helping helping guys discover that real people are way more interesting than computer games and hopefully that real women are they're way more complex um but also more rewarding in the long term more meaningful than porn so I that's not something that I necessarily be also partly because of my congregation many of the people in my congregation their children are my age so they're dealing with other issues so I am by no means um tremendously experienced with with the younger element it's also interesting that my channel people don't really start picking up on my channel until age 25 or 26 generally which is super interesting so it's like they they stagnant and then at least something comes in and they realize they need they need a lift they hit a wall and they have to go beyond so I don't I know that there are people my age who have sons in that age group and I remember one friend of mine he this one son he had wasn't his other sons had pretty much taken off okay but this one was sort of stuck in what you just described and then he started hearing Jordan Peterson coming out of his room so he knew he was watching Jordan Peterson and then he heard my voice and so um he thought well maybe something I don't know I don't know if he took off but um I sometimes sometimes guys need a provocation to break out of something like that and I'm I'm not sure if he's going to be able to do that but I think it's going to be a very serious thing and I think it's going to be a very serious thing and I think it's going to be a very serious thing to break out of something like that and I'm I'm more I'm more afraid of a situation where you've got a young man in a house with a single mother because I think in a situation like this often it would probably be the father that would look at that young man and say no we're not having this and I fear let's say a divorced mom might coddle instead of figure out a way to get the kid out to the world but I don't have any answers but that's just off the top of my head. I just wish there was it would be nice if if the churches could do yeah like have another revolution like what the the YMCA did back in the 1800s where you have you have a place where kids men young men especially can get involved in athletics sports they can be around each other in a healthy manner they can compete um that happens in the black community more and I think part of what provoked it and has traditionally provoked it was young men that are idle are big trouble they get into problems with the law etc etc and that then mobilizes the community I've seen that in the black community and where gangs are an issue because because the problem is gangs then but what you're describing is affluent capture by porn video games and probably pot and alcohol that sort of become this one this pen that's going to sap away years of their life and again by the time people sort of find me they've maybe been in it a few years and something has happened and they're trying to wake up yeah but I don't know of anything you know besides mom deciding to go full mama bear and say uh by the way there's no more internet in the house you turn off that internet well either is going to learn to pick up a book or he's probably going to leave the house for something so if I had to if someone if a mother came to me and said this is my son I would say turn off the internet in your house try that and I bet you something would change he'd probably get a driver's license and because boredom don't boredom use boredom yeah that internet's just killing them yeah but at the same time I mean there there's clearly a lot of these young guys know that that they're missing out on something within within those particular areas especially something like athleticism I mean you how else could you explain somebody like the rise of like Andrew Tate who's just yeah you know you look at the guy and it's like why are people attracted why are young men attracted to this guy well he's you know former kickboxer and you know he's buff and um you know he clearly speaks to that that side of them that they know is is is um is just not engaged yeah yeah yeah no I agree I agree 100% and I think within them there's something stirring but you and I both know motivation within people is a really tricky thing and if if people will often do what is easy and I think the internet is just so easy and it's giving these substitutes for the real thing yeah so yeah I would tell mom turn off that internet don't pay a smartphone bill you know and uh to whatever degree I mean I I don't know how because I know other parents have had difficulty but you know I I always made my kids there are exceptions but generally speaking you pay your way you want a car you know maybe maybe I own the car but you're gonna pay the insurance and then you're gonna start paying me for the car I mean kids they need a challenge they need something out there and nature provides that it's just we've we've been we're very wealthy we're very affluent yeah well the other issue that that I see a lot of times um with these these young men is yeah whatever parent around is is they're they're fully engaged in whatever whatever stressor in life that they're they're with they're just kind of checked out as a parent so um you know trying to get them involved in um you know helping their their their child move forward is is a very very difficult task as a therapist well they land up with you because they want you to fix something so I've often oh yeah I'm I'm totally the dad substitute I've seen this again and again over the years well and my wife so my wife's a school teacher and it's gotten worse you know parents are afraid of their children they're afraid to say I'm afraid my child won't like me right right okay well yeah you're gonna have to risk that and it might they might not like you for a while but you're the parent you're not their friend they can have lots of friends they've only got one parent you're gonna have to learn to do this and you know and again Peterson sort of came on with this and there's still a reaction to him well well that's being mean no that's not being mean because the truth is you help raise that child and they won't wind up in jail you if if the first person that says no to a kid is a cop you have not done your job that doesn't mean that every kid's gonna wind up seeing a cop but I mean this is and this is a systemic problem in our society right now and it's getting worse yeah boundaries it's all about boundaries boundaries are being torn down in in every every sector of our society from the families to the greater to communities cities cultures all boundaries and it's driving my wife crazy because what's going on in the schools now is that schools are taking away the very limited set of things that teachers have little things that pinch a little and what I mean pinch I mean you're gonna lose some of your recess no you can't do that and it's like and then the you know then you talk to the parents okay well you you know why isn't why isn't johnny doing better in school well you know is is does johnny have any reason to do better in school and it's it's the the difficulty is that um children are really going to suffer because of this and if you start if you start yeah I mean peterson's talked about this too I mean you start you know you start young when they're three and four and you start with very small things and they learn as they grow and they're not not all kids are the same some will be more rebellious some less it's a very complex thing but you know it's if you're if you're having to deal with this stuff when your kid is 21 it's a lot harder than having had to deal with it productively when they were three to six yeah if you do that work well when they're three to six when they're 21 I mean my children did not my children did not when people always roll their eyes talk about teenagers and I don't want to be too judgy with respect to this because every kid is different but I we didn't have any problem with our kids when they were teenagers um and they you know they respected their parents they feared their parents they probably feared their mother more than their father in some ways but I mean it's this is what parenting has always been and and we as a culture have lost this and we're gonna pay for that loss and that the problem is that often lessons learned too late have to be learned harder right than when they were small and they they sat down for a little time out and they learned that well you know if you maybe do this good thing then you don't get the time out then you get these other good things and you know you get little stickers and stars and one of our children was probably the most difficult of the group to motivate and you know we homeschooled so we had to deal with that because you had them the whole time and you know we had stars and stickers and you know you five stars for you know cleaning your room five nights in a row and you learn a little lego toy or a matchbox car you know something small I mean it's just parents have been playing these tricks on kids forever and nobody sat me down and taught them but you figure it out and you watch the kid and you kind of know where it goes and but yeah and they're 21 or 22 and they're trapped by you know video games porn and you know weed or alcohol yeah you got a problem and then usually it's probably going to be a 12-step program or you know something a lot tougher or jail I mean a lot of people in the in the city well you know this um some go to jail and become lifers others go to jail and there's a shock and maybe they find a maybe they find a street preacher or someone and they turn around and you know they straighten out and they correct their life that's yeah but there's no formula you know you'd love to give them a pill there's no pill I don't know that's been helpful at all it's probably everything you already know well I'm glad we solved that issue Paul yeah yeah we agreed that we have no solution for it besides everything that's always been so I didn't have another question for you this is just like curiosity on my part but are people like constantly trying to figure out what's going on with their videos I'm not going to do that on my part but are people like constantly are your listeners constantly contacting you and asking you to convert to I don't know orthodoxy, Catholicism or something because you seem to bring that up a lot whenever I turn on one of your videos like no I'm not going to convert to you know whatever it's like is he getting hammered every day by people who are like it's not constant it's okay it's regular people can't figure out why I would you know but but oh that's projection you know screens work on projection and you know especially when my beard is long people are oh he's he's already got the beard why isn't he orthodox it's like and you know Muslims and some certain certain Jewish friends of mine are particularly persistent in these areas but even though claiming not a proselytizing religion but uh but why do you still those tribal those tribal games are they're just normal when someone when a high profile person aligns with whatever tribe you align with it feels like a win in the universe and that your team is winning so it's just okay but it's not it's it's not a it's not a big deal I mean I wouldn't be doing this if I didn't have my own mind and and and people's you know even though I probably am a little bit more transparent in terms of my life and other areas of my life than let's say maybe Jonathan there's whole ranges of my life that if you know what's so funny is that I have a church here and you mean to to meet me I mean if you if you want to have a zoom call that's that's kind of tough because there's maybe four or five slots that I have that can get filled a week but if you want to meet me just walk in at nine o'clock on Sunday morning and you know you can set up chairs and but that's you got to be here then and then and then it's suddenly a little demystified you know just a just a regular guy and normal people and you know I might be a big deal on the internet but here on flooring road I'm I'm a rando so it's good it's good I like it that way I when I think about what Jordan Peterson's been through gosh I wouldn't wish that on anyone can't go to the store can't you know you know whatever because people are gonna stop you and that level of fame that's gotta suck yeah yeah I couldn't imagine that's it's that's gotta be that's gotta be really difficult to just try to live your life without being in a a fishbowl essentially yeah yeah well did we did we check off any you know everything that you wanted to uh touch on at least for today uh yeah yeah um I I uh I certainly went into uh everything that that I wanted to to go into I mean certainly if you have any more questions I'll be more than happy to to answer them um kind of disappointed that that Jonathan Peugeot didn't become Roman Catholic like man come on he's still young maybe maybe I don't know the whole icon you should write him dear Jonathan have you considered returning to the Catholic Church maybe if I do in French he will there you go he will pay more attention I don't know maybe maybe it's maybe it's Matthew you should work on because he seems uh he seems less committed to a to a body right now so work on work on Matthew I was following him on Twitter for a little while and he's Matthew's kind of out there yeah he's out there oh the world people all like I mean like it's good to hear you say you like your job because people are interesting the day you're a therapist or a pastor and you no longer find people interesting you should definitely get a different line of work because um people are interesting and once you once you get a chance to know them and sort of see the world through their eyes you know that it's fascinating yeah yeah it is it's funny when I when I first started listening to you I just happened to get a client who was a a pastor and so like listening to you and also sort of just you know um having him as a client getting that like inside baseball sort of point of view in terms of being a pastor at a church like what kind of pressure you know your average pastor is is uh is under and um just him trying to like deal with that that that stress uh it was it was pretty amazing uh experience just to have him as as a client just getting to hear all of that yeah as a protestant pastor in America you it's it can become sort of a service a service industry and that's it's it's you know you have that to degree as a therapist too if your client doesn't like you they won't you know but as a church it's this big it's or this this this group of people and they pay your salary and there's a lot of there's a lot of things that can that can get involved and it's not getting any easier because in when my grandfather and my father's day the tradition sort of carries you and as these traditions sort of evaporate yeah yeah but it's uh I mean I know he wasn't uh he wasn't reformed um but he was part of some sort of organization because they had his church had elders yeah um so but like just the the internal politics like many of the elders didn't like him but the the the larger congregation did like him so you had like this this tension that you know he's trying to deal with and he's trying to to navigate and yeah it was it was just very very political wow wow wow well Aaron it was it was good to meet you cop turned therapist um I'll send you the recording and then we can see what we want to do with it all right sounds good it was great meeting you you know like I said after you know listening to you all these years in the morning to finally like meet you and have a little bit of a normal relationship rather than being like well he doesn't even know I exist and I know all about his life just feels weird oh it's it's a pleasure it's a pleasure that's that's what's fun for me about these conversations it's I just said to I was just talking to someone right before I was talking to you I mean it's just talking into the camera isn't that much fun it's much more fun when the camera talks back so yeah all right Aaron take care you too bye bye