https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=UmJLfyQTTSw

 Hi, this is Paul. This is Friday morning live stream. I don't have any special guests on today. I wasn't sure I was going to live stream this morning. I was actually thinking I wasn't. I was just going to do some admin work here in the office. But stuff happens. And well, how did this happen? Well, you know, I talked to Rick and we thought about doing BOM, but BOM should really happen next week. So if my schedule permits, I'll do BOM, bridges a meaning question and answer next week. But I wanted to, I actually cruised over the broken clock tower discord to see if I could find some branding right away. So I could just one of the things that Grimm Grizz does, of course, when he live streams, he's got all this branding, which lets him sort of take a step back and do stuff and didn't do that. So I wasn't sure what I was going to do today. I was watching the unheard year and review video and found some really cool stuff that I hadn't seen throughout the year. That's kind of the real good thing about year end things. I was watching Burn Powers and Justin Wells talk about movies. That was cool. I watched the I watched Asteroid City last night with my wife. I haven't had a chance yet to look at the Thomas flight YouTube about So a bunch of stuff was happening. I woke up about a little before 6am this morning and was, wow, I'm really blurry on the on that screen over there. I don't know why. I know why it's this crappy resolution that I have with with stream art. How does the picture look to all of you? Does the picture way back? Mayo is writing on you. Yeah. Well, you know, writing is a difficult thing. Hi, Sam. I get your email. I haven't read it yet. It's there in the queue. So I woke up early this morning. And what often happens is if I wake up early, I don't want to bother my wife. So if I get up out of bed and go do something in the other room, but this time of year, my house is full of people. One of the things that my wife and I talk about is getting a bigger house just because not not because she and I need a bigger house, but because we have five children and we raised the five children in this house and they're all five little children, five little people and two big people. And now when they all come home for the holidays with their boyfriends, girlfriends, fiancees, husbands, wives, pets, and someday grandchildren, it's like, boy, we just don't have enough house for all these people. So we actually talk about getting a bed and breakfast, but we don't want to leave Northern California and we're super close to our jobs right here. So someday this will be resolved. But anyway, so I wake up early in the morning and I go back to sleep. I don't know if I'll go back to sleep. I always have this long list of things that you people send me to watch and pay attention to. And oh, Justin Brierley has his latest episode and it's Paul King's North and Martin Shaw and I owe Martin Shaw an email and I should have Martin Shaw in January. We'll have a proper Randall's conversation. I met him at ARC and we didn't have any time to connect or talk at ARC, but that was one of the coolest things about ARC. So I was listening to the Paul King's North Martin Shaw episode from on Justin Brierley's podcast stream. And oh yeah, I didn't really watch that Paul King's North scene and unseen. And he starts in on that and Justin, there's some good stuff in that Paul King's North thing, but then Justin's, Justin Brierley just has a quick, quick offhand quote from Francis Spewford, who I had never heard of before, but the quote sounded really intriguing. And so, okay, got to look that up and oh, that was cool. So let's play a little bit of that. Professor at Goldsmith College. Okay, let me know if the sound works, because I'm not used to doing this this way. And I know Jacob is gonna harass me about not having a countdown and all of that, but just let me know in the comment section if the sound is there. You teach this stuff. How much pleasure do you get from, as it were, seeing others sort of develop those talents? Enormous. Because it's all so different. Books are more different from each other than almost anything else that goes around in the world under the same name. So everything that anybody is doing is its own. Okay, is that better? I just turned it up like 20% of your own volume. Oh, that's bad. That's bad. And they watching them grow is like a kind of, it's a sort of garden where every single plant is a kind of is a kind you haven't seen before and up it comes. And sometimes it goes wrong, and sometimes it doesn't go wrong. But I'm not bored yet. Some of the connection between teaching, writing and actually writing is the other way around. And I learned things from my students. And I partly started writing fiction, dared to do it at last, because I was dispensing all this advice gaily to my students. And I thought this is pathetic. You're not taking the if you can tell them how to do it, then you really can dare to do it yourself. When it came to the the child of books built you, you obviously had some more to biographical content in there. But then you sort of closed the door on sort of what happened after childhood years. And you sort of opened it up a bit a bit again with unapologetic. In fact, you write that you were an atheist for 20 odd years, having grown up in a church setting. So just sketch out briefly what happened. Why did you turn your back on church? Well, I'm going to be I'm going to I'm going to respect my own privacy, the way in fact, I did in none of the non apologetic because it seems to me that I'm to write that book. Mark, Mark, Mark, unprofessional stream so far, very disappointing. Well, maybe I'll maybe I'll maybe I'll not. Basically, this this was an excellent conversation. And there's a piece of it that I'm going to clip and put on to Vander clips because he he basic. This is also from the King's North video. You know, we're having the rewilding of Christianity, and that is going to be a very messy business. He basically talks about that the fact that every generation has to in some way make the faith its own. And it does so by figuring out how Christianity and that particular culture actually play together. That kind of productive play that verveke likes to talk about. And that's very true. You know, I've I've spent some time watching Malcolm and Simone Collins. And I know some of you are annoyed by them. But then again, the sample of all of you means any given thing I put up on the screen, a certain number of you are annoyed by them anyway. And some of you are annoyed by just about everything. You know who you are. And so I just find Malcolm and Simone just fascinating in terms of their making up their their new religion, no matter how heretical. And I hope it doesn't come around to destroy them, because the thing about making up your own religion is that it's sort of like Dr. Frankenstein making a monster. In that it can destroy you. But Malcolm and Simone are very interesting. And so I threw some clips over in the Vander Clips channel. And those of you who don't know about the Vander Clips channel, it's just a channel where if there's something on YouTube that I see that I find interesting, and I have time, I usually clip it and I'll just throw it up there. And that way I'll be able to find it later and often it will come back into videos. The channel is unmonetized. It's just other people's stuff. It's not clips of my own. I played around with that a little bit. But I got tired of making my own clips because I hear myself talk enough and I get tired of listening to myself talk. I'm much more interested in listening to listening to others talk. So, you know, this this blurriness, I don't know what's going on there. So I'm so ADHD. See, if I had the branding, I would just throw up branding and then I'd collect myself and get my thoughts together and have something coherent. So that got me to Francis, Francis, what's his name? Spuford. And he's a fiction writer. And so there's some really cool parts of that conversation. And right in there, that then back to the Paul Kings North conversation and then Nick Cave comes up. And yes, I know a bunch of you are going to say, I've been telling you forever. Nick Cave, Nick Cave, Chad, Burn, many of you. And so, you know, the way this works is you send me stuff and I look at it. And sometimes other people have already sent it to me. Sometimes it's new. But if it's really new, it's OK, sort of hard. And so then I went to the Nick Cave unheard conversation and I went to a bunch of the I went to a bunch of the Nick Cave stuff. And I tried listening to a number of interviews. In fact, last night I tried listening to once again, tried listening to that unheard interview because everybody's and their neighbor is telling me, oh, Nick Cave, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah. I never heard of the guy. So I just couldn't find a way in. So I thought, you know, he's a musician. So the way into him will be his music. So because I have YouTube premium, I went to YouTube music. And if you go to YouTube music, if you go to an artist, it will tell you like the most popular song. So I'll start with the most popular song will crowdsource it. And that's where this got this this red hand thing. And it was like, oh, and that that song grabbed me immediately. And it was like, oh, so then started listening to some more of his songs. And it was interesting. OK, Lance, that Lance is shocked that I'd never heard of Nick Cave. I don't know. I don't know. I have no idea. How do I how can I prove a negative? So I never listened to him. I didn't know who he was. And the sound was interesting because there are some there are some vibes from kind of the electronic music of the 60s and 70s. His voice sounds a little bit like Jim Morrison as some kind of has some of that quality. He's a very masculine singer. But the words in that song just sort of grabbed me. It was like, oh, oh, oh, there's some things some things going on here. And so and then, you know, I had I had also tried to watch the the sacred podcast or listen to the sacred podcasts where he and this other guy are talking. And let's see, I gotta figure out this this string yard is not my not my native language here. Oh, come on, Kindle behave. So no, it's it should be. OK, present share screen, entire screen, this screen. Bang, there it is. OK, so then, of course, I download the audiobook because it's early in the morning and I don't want to do too much and bother my wife. So I've got some audible credit. So then I download the audible book of this. And to my delight, it's the two people doing it themselves. Oh, look at the epigraph. A little child shall lead them. Sean O'Hagan, I'm surprised you agreed to do this, given that you haven't done any interviews for a long time. Well, that explains a few things in terms of Justin Briarly and the other. I don't sorry. I don't know the name of the woman who Justin Briarly is doing that scene and unseen podcast with. But she's like, they're like, oh, we've been trying to get Nick Cave on for a long time. And it's like, boy, if Justin Briarly can't get him on something's must going on with this guy. And everybody's telling me, well, who wants to do an interview? Interviews in general suck. Really, they eat you up. I hate them. The whole premise is so demeaning. You have a new album out or a new film to promote or a book to sell. And that's that's again, part of the reason I do the randos interviews. And I don't like going after people who have done a book. And you know, if they're a friend, I will definitely do it. But I don't like going after people because you tend to get the same thing. And that's why I do make exceptions. I would talk to Jordan Peterson on the channel. Yes, I would. You know, I went after Mary Harrington because I found her so interesting and bracing. And I love that conversation with her. I went after Tom Holland because, you know, yeah, you all know how I feel about Tom Holland. I love embarrassing him just by glowing too much about him. But so I really agree with Nick Cage here. The whole premise is so demeaning. You have a new album out. You have a new film to promote or a book to sell. After a while, you get worn out by your own story. I guess at some point I just realized that doing that kind of interview was no real benefit to me. It only ever took something out. I was always had to recover a bit afterwards. It was like I was going I was looking for myself again. So five or so years ago, I just gave them up. Right away. I that's how the book started. I said, Yes, I am in. How do you feel about this undertaking? I'm thinking what undertaking? I don't even know what this book is about. But the cut but the title, Faith, Hope and Carnage. Oh, I'm so in. I do like having a conversation. I like to talk to engage with people. I've always had a big sprawling. I've always had big sprawling conversations. Yes, I'm in. So when you suggested it, I was kind of intrigued to see where it would go. So let's see, shall we? When you spoke back in March 2020, your world tour had just been canceled because of the pandemic. I have to say you sounded remarkably philosophical about it. And it's interesting also in the King's North conversation with Justin Briarley on the Seen and Unseen podcast that he used for the feed of the I should have Justin on and say, How exactly are you doing this podcast? Are you making this up as you go along? Kind of feels that way because I had I and Hersey Ali in recently. It was a strange moment. That's for sure. When COVID hit, my manager Brian told me we wouldn't go on tour. I felt this kind of emptying out like the whole world had dropped out from under me. We all put an enormous amount of thought and effort into how we were going to present Ghosteen. Now he gets into this, this album Ghosteen a little bit later in the chapter. And I tell you seldom have I ever seen a there are times when I read something in a book and it's even more powerful because it's in an audiobook and in his voice. Now he's clearly reading it for the audiobook, which takes a little something out of it rather than a live impromptu conversation. But there were points in this, just in this first chapter, I haven't gotten past the first chapter yet. There are points in this first chapter that I just had to stop because it hit me. We'd all put an enormous amount of thought and effort into how we're going to present Ghosteen live. And now Ghosteen is, as he says later in the chapter, is the spirit of his lost son. And when I say his lost son, I don't just mean a son who got rebellious and went away and to a far off, I mean a son who has died. And that for him was a was a point where obviously it grabs you. Now this week in some of my videos, I talked about pain being a megaphone for a lost word, for a for a deaf world. And that's something you really have to be careful. I know that there was a comment to our personal friend of CS Lewis that I heard a recording of him kind of aghast at this line, given the fact of Lewis was very cagey in that he loses his mother when he's six. He is a veteran of the first world war. Lewis obviously carried with him a tremendous amount of pain. I think that probably is the best way that and just stupid male youthfulness. We'll get to whole math at some point. Obviously was someone who carried a tremendous amount of pain in him, but he very, very seldom, with the possible exception of a grief observed and a few other places, let the world see his pain. In fact, even in a grief observe, well, especially in surprised by joy, he points to it, but pain, this is a problem with the, this is a problem with, okay, here's Vander Clips. I made two, I made two videos this, added two videos this week to Vander Clips. Both of them were from Malcolm Collins. The first one was about the urban monoculture, but the second one was about the loss of religious tradition. And that one about the urban monoculture, he starts out talking with Chris Williamson about the fact, thank you Upcycle. And I got your Upcycle. So for those of you who are supporters at that level of membership, I share with you my cell phone number, which is probably a really crazy thing. And I got your message Upcycle, but for a lot of these foreign people, and I got your message Upcycle, but for a lot of these foreign, foreign countries, it's so American centric, for many countries, for many countries that are not the US and Canada, I can't text back on that. So what I'm actually going to do is if you're on WhatsApp, I'm going to take your number and I put it into WhatsApp. I'm going to contact you through there because WhatsApp works a lot better for, I sort of use WhatsApp for my overseas contacts rather than the number that I gave for the supporters in the membership channel. So I did, but I did get your Merry Christmas and I really appreciate it Upcycle. So appreciate it. Anyway, back to the story. Pain. One of the things that, well, what did, what did, what did, what did Collins call it? He calls it like right away here. Oh, okay. Well, the volume is going to be low and yes, the quality of this podcast is low, Mark, but here it is. I can't hear it. I crap, crap, crap. I see. I clearly need extremely hard lessons. Anyway, this equating of pain with evil of suffering with evil. I understand why people do that, but it's, it's not right. It doesn't work. And that gets into the mystery of pain. And of course, I think it's in the crucifixion of Christ that that finally gets addressed. And so I mean, Chad talks about it. Chad talks about it often. This, this strange reality of the strange reality of, Oh, I know how I can get the sound in there. It doesn't matter. See, this is, this is why I don't make my videos this way, because this is what you're seeing right now is how I make the videos. And, and that's why eventually I learned to stop it, to pull something up, to have the sound, hopefully semi right and do it. But anyway, like Chad will often say things like, you know, his, his relationship with his alcoholism is complex because on the one hand, he, Chad knows something of hell because of it. We had an awesome little live stream on Grow Our Country yesterday. If you want to dig that one up with Luke and Sam and Chad and myself, and then a few others joined in. But at the same time, if he hadn't found, if he hadn't known alcoholism, he wouldn't have known AA and then found Christ and then all of the things that come. And so I think that gets into the relationship with the fall that of redemption. Someone recently wrote me a letter. It was a very touching. It was an email. It was a very touching email where someone wrote me a letter. It was a he like Mother Teresa believe that God just has his back towards him. And then so redemption for him is a mystery and he desperately wants God and God doesn't, God isn't returning his calls. And that's not an uncommon thing. And so then I pointed him to James Scope's biography of Mother Teresa, which is one of the few blurbs, a few books out there where I have a blurb on the back because James Scope asked me to write a blurb for it and I did. The book really touched me. So pain is a super complex thing to talk about. It's a super complex thing to talk about. And for Nick Cave, there are a few pains as great as the loss of a child. And so this ghosting album of his he talks about later is he believes sort of the in some strange way the spirit of his son inhabits that album. Now I think materialists would say, oh, that's metaphorical. Brett Weinstein would say, well, that's metaphorical truth, yada, yada, yada. Sam Harris might sneer at it unless you put all kinds of conditions around it. But I take this stuff seriously. So in other words, COVID hit. Let me bring back up. All right. So COVID hits. They did a ton of work in terms of getting this thing together. Now I say this with great caution because I know how disappointed the fans were. But to be honest, that feeling of existential collapse, well, it lasted about a half hour. Then I remember saying to my manager's office and thinking something guiltily, you know, should I say the word? I feel like such a pansy. Fuck, I'm going on tour. And perhaps for an entire year, suddenly there was an extraordinary sense of relief, a sort of wave washing through me, a kind of euphoria, but also something more than that, a crazy energy, a sense of potential, maybe. Yes, but true potential, potential as powerlessness, ironically, not the potential to do something, but the potential not to do something. And again, in the Paul Kings North conversation with Justin Breyer Lee, Paul Kings North talks about this and that, what's the name of that woman that they're on this podcast with? Belle Tindall. There we go. Sorry, Belle. If you're watching this, my apologies for not knowing your name. But she said, she made the comment that, you know, at the beginning of COVID, something happened to the world. Planes stopped flying. People stopped rushing. Streets were empty. And yeah, there's a cost to that, but there was also a beauty to that. And it was almost as if in this mad frenetic world, nature and humanity with her took a breath. As it went on, there seemed to be a time that was out of joint. Days were just drifting into each other. Did you feel that? Yes. Time seemed altered. It seemed almost wrong to be saying this, but on one level, I really loved the strange freedom it gave me. And I think a lot of people can connect with this. I loved getting up in the morning and having another day where I could exist and not have to do anything. Now that was not my experience because for some of us, COVID put us into high gear. For others, COVID was a letting up off of the accelerator. The phone stopped ringing constantly and very quickly my days became beautifully repetitious. It was oddly like being a junkie again. The ritual, the routine, the habit. That's so interesting. Now I'm saying this, even though the previous tour where we played Skeleton Tree album live was one of the defining moments in my professional life. Now a little bit later, at least in a conversation, I think later in the chapter, we talked about the transition from Skeleton Tree to Ghosty. Now I haven't listened to most of this music. I've listened to a little bit of this music and I appreciate on Twitter, a bunch of you said, oh, listen to this, listen to that, listen to that. You're sharing YouTube with me and that's really helpful because then I can just find the songs. Being just on that stage every night with that fierce energy coming off the audience. This guy, now I understand why everybody was screaming at me because this guy really has a way of seeing things and pointing them out because that is what an audience gives. That is what a congregation gives for those of us who are extroverts and like it to get up in front of an audience. There's a nervousness, but there's a thrill. I know public speaking is sort of a huge fear for many people, but for some strange people like me, I love getting up in front of an audience. It's fun. Skeleton Tree album was one of the defining moments in my professional life. Just being on that stage every night with that fierce energy coming off the audience, it was difficult to exaggerate the extraordinary feeling of connection. It was life-changing. No, actually life-saving, but it was also seriously punishing physically and mentally and that's totally true. That's sort of how I feel about these two European trips that I took. On one hand, they were exhilarating. On the other hand, they're taxing. When the recent tour was canceled, the initial disappointment was replaced by a feeling of relief and yes, strange and wayward potential. I feel guilty even saying this because I know how devastating that pandemic had been for many people. From the chats we had back then, it was clear that you sensed early on that the lockdown would be a time for reflection. I instinctively felt that way. I remember feeling it really didn't seem right to try and do performance online from my kitchen or from my bathroom or my pajamas or whatever else that some of the artists were doing back then. All those artless conspicuous displays of fellow feeling. It felt to me like a moment to sit inside history and just think. I felt chastened by the world. I had a weird reflective time through the COVID summer. I'll never forget it. Sitting on my balcony, reading a lot, writing loads of new stuff, responding to questions on red hand files. I'm going to have to figure out what that is because that sounds very TLC. It was an interesting time despite the constant background hum of anxiety and dread. Now, either in this chapter or in another place, he talks about, I'm always super interested about people's creative process and for him, he goes and he writes during office hours and that's when he writes his songs and it's so interesting because one of the interesting things about a creative process is everybody's different with theirs. For me, part of the reason I don't finish my sentences, I don't finish anything, my wife and I were talking about that this morning. Part of the reason I make these monologue videos is because this is part of my creative process because I don't know, I just discovered it and it's life-giving for me and it's fun and that's why I make so many of them, probably way too many of them but it's super fun and it gets me into a flow state and I enjoy it and the fact that any of you watch this continues to sort of baffle me and there are plenty of other people out there who have clicked on my files and feel the same way about you that I just said but other people are very different. So, I asked Spencer Claven about how he writes books because I did this podcast with Spencer for his channel and I was just curious and I often ask people, what's your creative process and everybody's different. Some people say I'm going to write 5,000 words a day or I'm going to spend four hours in my office. I asked the same thing of Greg Hurwitz so I'm very curious, especially authors, but he kind of goes into his office. Anyway, back to the text. I remember that we were talking on the phone right at the start of the pandemic and you said this is a big one. Yes, I think I just read something that really brought home to me the sheer immense power of the virus and how extraordinary vulnerable we all are, now completely unprepared as a society. Now, I know that's going to be seen in a different way because right now the virus is just simply something we live with and you get COVID. It's just something that you do. It's kind of like getting a cold and I've had COVID, I believe I've had COVID three times and I basically know it's coming because my nose gets a little runny and I have a bit of a headache and at least the first two times I had fatigue, the second time I didn't even have fatigue. It was just I feel a little off for a couple of days and then I'm fine again. Now I know for some of you, long COVID, there are people around here that I know that have long COVID and it's a strange, strange thing, but it's important to remember the early days when morgues were filling up and they were bringing in freezer units and things like that. I did a video with a CRC chaplain, a Navy chaplain from Italy and it was crazy at first. You and I were both pretty spooked by the invisible thing that was outside the door and I think that was a lot of it, that in this materialist world where we imagine that everything can kind of be measured that this thing was going and I think that's part of the reason that there was so much desire to develop a test so you can have this little strip and you can you know swab your nose and make the little test and say, ah I have COVID instead of I'm sick, I don't know what to call it. I'm not going to the doctor, I'm not that sick, but it really did feel like end times had arrived and the world had been caught sleeping. Now if you read the Bible, that's always how it arrives. Just read the Gospels where people will be marrying and giving in marriage and of course that gets spun into this idea that some dispensationalists have of the rapture, but it's that that I'd say is sort of metaphorically true but physically probably not. It felt as though however we had assumed was the story of our lives this invisible hand had reached down and torn a great big hole in it and that's the day of the Lord and if you follow my rough draft for Sunday and this next Sunday sermon which after I finish this live stream I'll have to make the rough draft for Sunday then too, there's a lot of that that the day of the Lord comes big and small and it interrupts our lives and nobody no one expects the Spanish Inquisition and on and on and on. It makes me think of the idea of the disrupted narrative I've heard you talk about in relation to your songwriting, how both the subject and the meaning of your more recent songs have become less straightforward and more elusive. Well exactly, my songs have definitely become more abstracted for want of a better word and yes less dominated by traditional narrative. At some point I just grew tired of writing third-person songs that told a structured story that began at the beginning and moved obediently towards their conclusion. I just became suspicious of the form, it felt unfair to inflict these stories on people all the time, it felt like a kind of tyranny. It was almost as if I was hiding beneath these neat manicured narratives just because I was afraid of all the stuff that was boiling away inside of me. I wanted to write, I wanted to start writing songs that were truer somehow and that were authentic to my experience. Okay authenticity, sincerity, authenticity, profelicity. Specifically to your more recent experience, yes which was one of rupture I would say, same as most people's but purely from a personal point of view living my life within a neat narrative didn't make much sense anymore. Arthur died and everything changed. That sense of disruption, that disrupted life infused everything. There's the day of the lord, there's the apocalypse, there's there's what we in our emissary mind culture want to desperately avoid and it is never avoided. It is put off, it is held at bay sometimes but at some point it will come crashing through and your aspirations of godhood will be exposed and you will be seen for what you are merely a human being. So let's pull up the bible, shall we? I'm a Christian minister if I can't read the bible on my own channel what can I do? Scholar of nihilism. Weird thing with Rick Rubin is that he isn't even using, okay I gotta bring this to the correct screen. Okay so yeah I just had logos working on my sermon I should probably have. Come on you can do it. You can do it window, you can do it. It's on one of these tabs. Oh it's not Joshua, it's Isaiah. My favorite passages in the bible. Comfort, comfort my people says your god. Speak tenderly to Jerusalem and proclaim to her that her hard service has been completed, that her sin has been paid for and that she has received from the lord's hand double for all her sins. Now this of course is pointing to the calamity of Judah and the destruction of the temple and you can go back on some of my sermons recently where I was talking about this. A voice of one calling in the wilderness prepare the way for the lord make straight in the desert a highway for our god every valley shall be raised up every mountain and hill made low the rough ground shall become level and the rugged place is a plain and the glory of the lord will be revealed and all people will see it together for the mouth of the lord has spoken. In the Wes Anderson movie Asteroid City they have this weird scene which is so so 60s avant-garde play thing where they have the whole cast in the stands and they're saying to wake something to the effect of to wake up you have to fight you have to be asleep and in many ways C.S. Lewis often points out that you can't rise again until you are dead and it's in the wilderness every valley shall be raised up every mountain and hill made low and the rough ground shall become a level and the rugged place is a plain and the glory of the lord will be revealed and all the people will see it together for the mouth of the lord has spoken. A voice says cry out and I said what shall I cry and this is the word all people are like grass and their faithfulness is like the flowers of the field oh that is so perfect all people are like grass we're here and we fade and our faithfulness is like the flowers of the field you see someone you see what someone step up and be faithful you see someone whose spouse has been stricken with dementia and they step up and love them well you see someone who you see a child who is stricken and the parent steps up and cares for them you see the the parent who is stricken and the child steps up and cares for them that's like the flower of the field you look out the field and you see a flower and the whole field is green and it's as bright yellow but our faithfulness is like the flower of the field the grass withers and the flowers fall because the breath of the lord blows on them yeah this is getting into some theology here surely the people are grass and the grass withers and the flowers fall but the word of our god endures forever of course i'm preaching on mark one you who bring good news to zion go up on a high mountain you who bring good news to jerusalem lift up your voice with a shout lift it up and do not be afraid say to the towns of juda here is your god see the sovereign lord comes with power and he rules with a mighty hand see his reward is with him and his recompense accompanies him that's that's sort of the the large and in charge god that we're looking for and you know the romans are here and just you know that antony they're they're inhabiting the antony a fortress and they want jesus to just come and smash it level it with an earthquake if you can still a storm you can start a storm jesus can't you cause and can't you focus an earthquake under that fortress and drive out those romans he tends his flock like a shepherd he gathers the lambs in his arms and gently carries them close to his heart he gently leads those that have young and and and it goes back and forth that's what i love about isaiah 40 it goes back and forth you have you have you have the sovereign lord comes with power in verse 10 and then in verse 11 he tends his flocks like a shepherd and gently leads those who have young and and and if you're strong and you're moving together as a group and you're hiking a lot of memories hiking as a kid and of course as as you grow older and you get bigger and stronger you can keep up with your dad but then you have younger siblings and you have to stop on the trail and wait because your little sister has to catch your breath he gently leads those that have young who has measured the waters in the hollow of his hand or who has met or who with the breadth of his hand marked off the heavens who has held the dust of the earth in a basket and weighed the mountains on a scale and the hills and a balance who can fathom the spirit of the lord or instruct the lord as his counselor job figured out he couldn't whom did the lord consult to enlighten him and who taught him the right way this is right out of job who was it that taught him knowledge or showed him the path of understanding surely the nations are like a dot drop in the bucket they are regarded as dust on the scales he weighs the islands as though they are fine dust lebanon is not sufficient for altruism nor its animals enough for burnt offerings before him all the nations are nothing they are regarded by him as worthless and less than nothing with whom then will you compare god to what image will you liken him as for an idol a metal worker casts it a goldsmith overlays it with gold and fashion silver chains for it a person too poor to present such an offering selects wood that will not rot and they look for a skilled worker to set up an idol that will not topple do you not know have you not heard has it not been told you from the beginning have you not understood since the world was founded he sits enthroned above the circle of the earth and its people are like grasshoppers he stretches out the heavens like a canopy and spreads it out like a tent to live in and he brings princes to gnaw and reduces the rulers of this world to nothing no sooner are they planted no sooner are they sewn no sooner do they take root in the ground that he blows on them and they wither and a whirlwind sweeps them away like chaff why do you complain jacob why do you say israel my way is hidden from the lord my cause is disregarded by my god do you not know have you not heard the lord is the everlasting god the creator of the ends of the earth he will not grow tired or weary and his understanding no one can fathom he gives strength to the weary and increases the power of the weak even youths grow tired and weary and young men stumble and fall but those who hope in the lord will renew their strength they will soar on wings like eagles they will run and not grow weary they will walk and not be faint be silent before me you islands let the nations renew their strength let them come forward and speak let them meet together at the place of judgment and on he goes from there but you israel my servant jacob whom i have chosen you descendants of abraham my friend i took you from the ends of the earth from its farthest corners i called you i said you are my servant i have chosen you and have not rejected you so do not fear for i am with you do not be as dismayed for i am your god i will strengthen you and help you i will uphold you with my righteous hand we are dust our faithfulness is like the flower or yes which is one of rupture i would say same as most people's from but purely from a personal point of view living my life with a neat narrative didn't make much sense at all arthur died and everything changed that sense of disruption of a disrupted life infused everything in terms of what you and i are doing here it is difficult for me to go back but it is also important to talk about it at some point because the loss of my son defines me i totally understand so telling a straightforward story in a song however dramatic became altogether less important to you yes but i didn't step away from highly visual songs it's more that the storylines became more twisted and tangled mutilated the form itself more traumatic my music began to reflect life as i saw it the day of the lord had come and his son was taken that said the songs on my last few albums are still narrative songs but the narratives have been pushed through a meat grinder ghostine for instance is still telling a story in fact it's telling a vast epic tale of loss and longing but it's all busted up and blown away it's certainly a very different kind of narrative much more ambitious than the one that i'm going to be talking about it's certainly a very different kind of narrative much more ambitious even conceptual yes radically different there's nothing linear about these songs they shift directions or rupture or worse atomize before your eyes the song exists in their own freakish terms really i sense that some fans have not been altogether happy where your music has gone and this this goes to a point of anyone who has lost or lives with trauma that has at least been partially redeemed or at least redemption has touched it knows this and on one hand might one might be tempted to say well i wish i wish i wish i never knew these things i will i long for naivete and innocence again part of me does but part of me doesn't yeah there are definitely a number of disgruntled older fans who wish i'd go back to writing so-called proper songs but i can't see that happening anytime soon there's a deep nostalgia for the old songs and it follows our band around like a dozy old dog that's the negative nostalgia that vervecky is pointing to but nostalgia is more complex i sense the bad seeds have been around for so long and undergone so many iterations that some people feel very attached to the past and more precisely to their own pasts to the so-called better days and that's true about music i mean music is this funny thing that bonds with us and becomes part of us i've told the story a number of times i go to the hospital it's often the case that people who used to be a member of the church and then they left the church and they go don't go to any church and then the day of the lord comes to their house there's a crisis in their life and they reach out to me they didn't leave the church because they didn't like me and then they call me and they say he's dying and so i get down to the hospital and i go into the room and he is dying but sometimes people die you know they're on morphine and they're sedated and the whole family is sitting there and they're mostly sleeping and every now and then they say something everybody's just watching and they're like oh my god i'm going to die and they're like oh my god and they're mostly sleeping and every now and then they say something and everybody's just watching the chest go up and down and they're looking for breath that wasn't this his body was spasming and they basically had him restrained and it was awful so with a situation like that the family is not lovingly around the bed listening to music they are in the waiting room in agony and this brother and sister stand up and embrace each other and they start singing kenny rogers the gambler and i think both of you were raised in church both of you were raised in church both of you were filled with christian music but this is the song that binds the two of you christians might feel offended but lay your fence aside and learn so the idea that we would make a different kind of music seemed to them like a kind of betrayal almost and i understand that in a way but you can't allow the nostalgic or sentimental impulses of certain longtime fans to hold back the natural forward motion of the band thankfully there are so many people who are eager to journey with us to experience the lovely discomfort and danger that comes from attempting something new for me the push-a-waist guy was a very good friend of mine push-a-waist guy which would you released in 2013 seemed with hindsight to signal what was to come with certain songs like higgs boson blues or jubilee street sounding somehow looser and less linear would you agree well it's certainly it's certainly important because that's when warren and i started writing music together creatively that was a seismic change for me and that's something i ever expected to happen to have an actual songwriting collaborator with whom i had deep deep synchronicity it was a radical change that came out of my frustration with the traditional way of doing things which was to write a song and present it to the band could we talk about ghost how ghostine was made particularly the creative dynamic between you and warren i suppose the big change was that by the time we wrote ghostine warren and i were purely improv were purely improv improvising i would play the piano and sing and warren would play electronics loops violin and synth with neither of us really understanding what we were doing or where we were going this is flow stating we were just falling into this sound following our hearts and our understanding of each other as collaborator towards this newness we spent days playing more or less non-stop they are this is a deeply spiritual process then there were more days of sifting through it all and collecting the bits that sounded interesting and in some instances that that was maybe just a minute of our music or a single line after that it was really about constructing songs from these lovely disparate parts our editing process was akin to a collage or kind of musical assemblage then we'd work at building songs on top of that it sounds i dare say like there was an element of winging it involved now this part really grabbed me there's parts of this first chapter that just i thought wow because this is sort of like preaching for me because i don't wing it now there are many times i can wing it and there are sometimes when you have to wing it because you have you haven't had any time to prepare you didn't even know what you were walking into and now suddenly stand and perform but most of the time i don't want to do that i want to but but it's never just sort of i don't work from a manuscript no that's really not the case we weren't just two guys who didn't know what we were doing there's a deep intuitive understanding between the two of us and of course 25 years of us working together it's an informed improvisation a mindful improvisation by mindful do you mean meditative or considered i mean that it's intuitive but also considered if that makes sense in terms of the lyrics i'm never improvising from scratch that's important to stress having done a tremendous amount of thinking about the project i come to the studio with loads of ideas and enormous amounts of written words most of which by the way are discarded and that's exactly like my videos nonetheless there is always what you might call a lyrical context and there are also certain dominant or overarching themes that have preoccupied me in the weeks or months leading up to the sessions it's a very liberating way to work and i i read this and i thought wow yes i totally understand this so to be clear you're not improvising in the way jazz musicians improvise on a melody or theme no it's more that we're trying to arrive at a formal song through the perilous process of improvise of improvisation to stumble upon form through musical adventuring i think that might be key that we are actually using a kind of mutual unknowing in an attempt to catch songs so now we're getting into some of um raveki's playdo project and this this this this unknowing in in in the process in order to know and that's actually part of what i think freezes churches and makes them missionally infertile because there's not a sufficient respect for the unknowing and so the um the prescriptions they write for hurting people are just simply too tight imagine that process could go awry in the wrong hands well it does much of the time even in the right hands but you only need 10 songs 10 beautiful breathtaking accidents to make up a record you have to be patient and alert to the little miracles nestled in the ordinary ah yes one of one of warren's singular talents is to be able to hear the potential in something that is unformed and in its infancy he's amazing in that regard he hears things in a wholly unique way one of the pieces we worked well together is because i have the ability to see words weaving themselves around a piece of unformed music tying it together making sense of it it's a visual thing to see the song to give it a rich narrative intent so when you're working in this way do you spend hours in the studio meticulously editing lyrics no never i'm so glad he said that because there are some of you that do there are writers and there are editors and i know writers who are just just flow state writers and i know writers who are editors they birth something and they work work work work work work work until it's perfect and until it's perfect and both are completely legitimate ways of creating but some of us aren't that way when i'm working on the songs at home they take a long time to write a lot of thought and real care and dedication to the form but when we're in the studio i'm a butcher who is happy to cut the legs off a treasured lyric in a heartbeat in a way the lyric lose their concrete value and become things to play with dismembered and reorganized i'm actually very happy to have arrived at a place where i now have an utter ruthless relationship with my words wow i have to say it sounds like quite a brave even reckless way for a songwriter to work while improvisation is essentially an act of acute vulnerability but it's also a path of creative freedom to wild adventure and with in which things of true value can often emerge through musical misunderstandings our improvisation is rarely harmonious it's often a struggle for dominance but then suddenly it just falls together for a moment or two a bit like warring lovers so if you look at um um i i've got all this muscle memory i was going to pause pull up the book matthew mcconaughey's green light book and read to you the relationship between his father and his mother that's that image right there but because i'm live streaming this and i have no branding you know it's you'll just have to take the mention and you can go do your own digging and looking i won't provide it for you in this video temperamentally the two of you are quite different i guess yes but we're usually in tune with each other even though we are coming at times from very different directions a little thing can nag at me and put me off the whole song whereas warren's always looking at the bigger picture ha ha ha master in the emissary right and left brain back and forth ian mcgillchrist he's much more instinctive than me he's a very good friend of mine and he's a he's much more instinctive than me he can see the beauty of things earlier than i can it's a great gift but you also have to understand that warren's doesn't really care about lyrics in the way i do he's much more interested in emotion sound and music so warren is the master and nick is the emissary and they're working together at this from early on he'll be saying this is fucking amazing whereas i'm really uncertain right up to the wire see master and his emissary that marren and nick are working together it just takes a lot longer to arrive at a song somehow that difference sets up the right kind of dynamic given that you have such an investment in getting the words right that's the emissary brain is it accurate to say that this is a process of discarding and dismantling while liberating may not work for certain types of songs ballads let's say well you couldn't do it with how david lyric or indeed some of your own songs i don't know any of these songs so i just found the guy no that's true but i've made over 20 albums and i can't just keep doing the same thing over and over and that's very true of creative people and that's why i very seldom recycle a sermon you will hear my ideas get cycled through things again and again but i i get bored quickly with myself mostly and you know i i had a conversation with my wife yesterday and you know i mean part of what happens is that during the school year she's so busy with her classroom that you know we're sort of doing our own thing but then when there's a break sometimes she realizes that i'm i'm all over the place and then something comes up and she's like where did this come from and that's like i cycle through a ton of stuff so then she's like well i want to know more what you're cycling through it's like okay you know i i'm not going to give you the fire hose that's kind of the youtube channel actually the youtube channel is really a garden hose compared to the fire hose that is here um but i'll i'll i'll give you a few drops along the way so i sent her the nick cage song this morning and um but anyway so it's you do this stuff long enough and um you just you just you get you get addicted to the muse i'll say it that way you get addicted to the flow state you have to operate at least some of the time in the world of mystery beneath that great and terrible cloud of artistic unknowing the creative impulse in me is a form of bafflement and often feels dissonant and unsettling it chips away at your own cherished truths about thing pushes against your own sense of what's acceptable it's the guiding force that leads you to where it wants to go it's not the other way around you're not leading it i really sensed that when i first heard ghosting i'm not sure that i what i was expecting but it really took me by surprise it was such a conceptual leap well i'm glad to hear that we were locked into such an intense often mystifying way of working when we made it the atmosphere in the studio was extremely i don't know concentrated it's thick unsettling and strange i don't know if i can ever really articulate it fully but i do think the great beauty of ghosting ultimately lies in the tenuous grip warren and i had not only on the songs themselves but on our own sanity it does sound like that but in a good way well warren was in a strange place at the time plagued by his own problems again pain is a megaphone for a deaf world my my my wife would talk sometimes about people who had golden lives and these are people that their emissary seemed to be working well for their life and everything that they planned came about and all of their endeavors seemed to succeed at least from the outside at least a sufficient majority of them so that everyone else looking at them would say well this person is getting exactly what they want so when you're a pastor you work in these churches and you meet people from other churches and every now and then you spot a saint now there's a double sense to this for protestants you know the church is filled with saints i get that but every now and then there's an exceptional person who shows this some of these some of some of this incongruity that holy people have they are both strong and tender this is again tim kellers um that he gets from jonathan edwards i like calling it incongruous excellencies and that's of course what shines out about jesus is why jesus continues to be fresh for every generation at least for those who seek him and and even for those who fear him paul kings north watch the kings north briarley thing i've never met a person whose faith i really respected who hadn't been broken and sometimes horribly mangled by pain it could be something in their life it could be the death of someone it could be an addiction but i i often say god god is if you think of god like a mechanic he is hard on his tools that's what jesus keeps saying about the prophets he's hard on his tools and and and the tools that god uses don't sit in some suburban garage that they were gifts from a well-meaning spouse who hoped her husband would you know do more around the house these are the kind of tools that someone who really works and really builds uses really works and really builds uses every day and these tools sort of like the velveteen rabbit these tools they have the fur worn off of them well warren was in a strange place at the time plagued by his own problems i was trying to well i don't know contact the dead i guess it was a strange haunted time never leaving the studio working trying to sleep working trying to sleep and out of that confusion came this weird beautiful holy music that spiritual intensity is palpable there is such a heightened almost exalted feel to the music on that record there were spirits in the air that's for sure i knew there were making something that was powerful and moving and original i was sure of it whereas skeleton tree made little sense to me even when listening to it all the way through for the first time in the studio it was too close to the time of my son's death for me to feel anything or to reason clearly that's understandable and yes it's interesting that i can still listen to ghostine in well a kind of awe given how radically different ghostine was from what came before did you intentionally have any trepidation about how it could would be received you can ever predict how people will react that's true i find that on youtube all the time you can never predict how people are react that's why i read the comments because y'all are reacting and it's fascinating and it's really interesting you know especially the more i get to know some of you you know you think you kind of can track with someone you have a mental map of them and then they say something it's like where did that come from and that makes you all the more interesting oh anselman you and gaza and israel yeah people would pay to to hear the anselman randos conversation i know it we're stalking you man you can only hide for so long you never can predict how people will react but i guess i did expect it to be divisive to some degree i was on tour when we did a kind of a preview on youtube with some beautiful accompanying graphics i remember i started reading the early online comments i don't know what i was thinking but they were so bad i mean truly awful this is shit nick cave art rest in peace vomit emojis and stuff like that see the negative comments have their place people who shut off comments are weenies you know look at the comments or get off of youtube so i thought the record i thought for the record was just going to fall off in a fucking black hole but it was very painful then the reviews came in and the tide shifted as if people were changing their mind the more they listened and connected to it and it felt much stay and it pretty much stayed like that critically it was what received it's quite difficult to describe the atmosphere of that record without resorting to words like wonder and joy which paradoxically didn't like wonder and joy which paradoxically diminish it somehow what was really exciting lyrically was that i was able to find lines through improvising in the studio that i could never have found by writing songs in my office alone at my desk it was quite beautiful that's very spiritual the spirit is between us okay so give me an example of a line that could you could have only arrived at in that way well an obvious example would be when i speak sing and i love you over and over on spinning song and then follow it with peace will come i could never have actually written something like that down on a piece of paper yet it is perhaps my favorite moment in that record and again that's part of the reason why i do these videos i am definitely thinking of getting a teleprompter not that i can read scripts but that when i do conversations i can actually look at the people and not look to the side but there's something about this that allows things to emerge that wouldn't emerge but there's also something about the other and i really do have to i really at some point i have to write because i've just put out so much into the world that something has to organize it and and and preserve some of it at least find out what's good before those lines would never have made it into an actual song not in a million years there wouldn't have been a place for them and even if it had been i don't think i would have had the nerve or confidence to sing them those lines are so sudden and raw yes and also sounds spiritually ecstatic well initially i had a song lyrical idea for the record that was very much based on the series of ecstatic images i saw the record as a series of highly visible connecting images i actually saw this is fascinating do you mean that it came to you in a vision we're so secular a vision a vision how dare you people have visions all the time people some of them are little some of them are bold this chapter is very apocalyptic i had a persistent mental image of a man standing on a beach surrounded by panicking animals the hills were on fire and they were screaming animals racing back and forth sea creatures leaping out of the ocean and a spiral of spirit children that climbing up to the sun revelation much it was wild it was a wild recurring hallucination part horror part bliss and somehow embedded within my imagination i'd lie in bed at night and see these images filing by one after another was this before you started writing the songs i may have actually i may have written a few rough lyrics but it was certainly long before i started making the record in fact i actually wrote a long wildly descriptive letter to my brother tim who was not someone i normally have the opportunity to discuss creative ideas with but i was actually writing a song about but i was excited i told him that i had seen the record and that it would be centered around a hallucinatory image of wild animals on fire running up and down a beach and a dark force part leviathan part child beneath the sea and children ascending into the sun yeah i'm in he thought i was kind of funny you know the mad ambition of it all so in the studio did you essentially set out to describe or evoke those visionary images yes for me the images were really the starting point for the whole thing and they remain central to the meaning of the record it's intriguing to me that you began from images rather than words from visual rather than the written yes it does seem to be the case that of the late the single radiant image has become more compelling than the narrative itself the extremely vivid solitary image at the heart of a song or indeed several songs and by allowing that central image to occur in more than one song are you somehow foregrounding your lyrical preoccupations for the listener now that you mention it yes for me the repetition of an image or a series of images that follow the songs around and change meaning depending on the context is a big part of the reason that the record has has that strange uncanny feeling it's an inbuilt feeling of deja vu almost and a sort of building of intention the songs feel as if they are in conversation with each other really what i am aiming for at ghosting though was the creation of a single moment that was being looked at from various different points of view i didn't quite get there though at this point i was thinking wow this is book of revelation creative flow how does this work i had sort of forgotten arthur and then the next next part of the book made me lay down what was that moment i'm not even sure maybe it's more that there seemed to be a singular impulse at work and the songs looked at that impulse from a different point of view i think ghosting was essentially an epic story created from an contained memory a contained moment that is very difficult for me to describe it's an ecstatic spiritual declaration declaration emerging out of an ordinary moment okay so an ordinary moment rather than an epiphany of some kind this is so beautiful because the ordinary he shines through all that's fair holy holy holy is the lord god almighty flee from him in terror the whole earth is full of his glory yes and perhaps the central image is a static one static because that's if you read the body keeps the score so often what happens with trauma is it creates a static image that we can't process and that static image sort of acts like a rock in a stream and you're gonna have a rapids because of it okay the line in the spinning song that goes you sitting at the kitchen table listening to the radio this line is of course unremarkable as an image but to me it is anything but ordinary because it is the last memory i have of susie before the phone rang with news that our son had died it is a commonplace image but for me it's transcendent because it's the last unbroken memory of my wife essentially ghosting rises out of that moment of peace of calm of simplicity before everything shattered and it's quite hard to explain but i think that comes close to it i had to lay down after reading this sentence there are lines on ghosting where the imagery seems so vivid and dreamlike that it's as if you are channeling your unconscious thoughts or dreams or maybe accessing another part of your consciousness oh we love these words i'm glad we're talking about this because they're mysterious to me also i'm glad we're talking about this because they're mysterious to me also but they are at the very heart of what i do now as a songwriter as i said i had these wildly vivid images in my mind long before i made ghosting then when i started writing at home other more solid images presented themselves a guy driving his car through fire a feather spinning upwards i remembered moment at a hotel in new orleans where suzy and i conceived our children jesus in the arms of his mother the leviathan moving beneath the water these were the images that kept emerging echoing each other as i was writing if you look at my notebooks these explicit imagings recur over and over again road kill rising from its own blood the three bears a mother washing her child's clothes they became the framework that the record was hung upon they recur throughout the record alongside the idea of the migratory spirit the ghostine that passage from image to image and from song to song threading them together for me the record became an image were imagined world where arthur could be where could you evoke his spirit perhaps well i think ghostine the music and the lyrics is an invented place where the spirit of arthur can find some kind of haven or rest sean this idea is as fragile and as open to question as an idea can be but for me personally i think his spirit inhabits this work and i don't even mean that in a metaphorical way i mean that quite literally i'll forgive the use of the word it isn't an idea i have articulated before but i feel him roaming around the songs it makes me think of inception it is not an imaginative projection much more than that no not imaginative literal but this is a whispering intuition and as an idea easily dismantled i don't know it's kind of hard to talk about i can imagine that for me songs like sun forest or hollywood singing close to dream songs yes i can see that but i don't think they are in any way surrealistic which is what the term dream song immediately suggests there's a precise meaning behind even the most fractured images that end up in the finished songs and as a whole they are a collected collection of images tightly knitted together to form a sort of impossible realm so it's absolutely important to me that i find the meaning behind the appearance of a particular image and that's what i'm trying to do with my book yeah some of you are gonna buy this book and a bunch of you i got maybe i'm the last guy to not know about this guy or this book but i i i i i i yeah yeah so yeah that that that rocked my world this morning so i had to do a live stream and i've already spent an hour and 20 minutes of it just reading a book i was reading sorry about that um i know some of you are coming in late and i mean what a title faith hope and carnage but when i heard the title of the book i knew i was going to have it because a title like that yeah faith hope and carnage faith hope and carnage wow all right i should get on to some other things let's see let's go to the studio let's look at the book let's see let's go to the studio let's look at the content let's share the screen sam oh let's let's talk first about let's talk first about um whole math that's sam's comment jordan disapproves atheism by letting sam demonstrate how boring it is it's a great comment sam i would i would pin it but everyone has already pinned it by uploading it um yeah i met home math and um home math is an interesting channel um christian youtube so boring you know some people want me to do things like christian youtube but i find it so boring i so i so homeathletic left a comment you know he doesn't like uploading no i'm not going to upload your stuff i'm not that kind of channel and i'm so freaking adhd i might forget about you six months from now but enough of you know about this channel because of the marriage crisis know about this channel because of the marriage crisis and the thing is and rod and katherine and amen and i have to get back on that horse um but and i completely understand and remember what it was like being a young man in a culture that who one of its principal idolatries is romance and so if you're a young man you've already got you've already got testosterone through your veins um you're saturated with sexual images now thanks to the internet pornography is ubiquitous oh by the way um oh gosh can i pull it up grim gris i can yeah i'll just pull up my um so again for those of you who want to know um you know my i keep my file cabinet online somewhere between vander clips and leading church.com the dark legacy enduring legacy of friends grim gris keeps talking about friends as normalizing porn and i you know grim gris has said that had said that often and um i i was a little bit late i never watched much friends and then when new girl came and i saw what was on new girl i was shocked just how mainstreamed sexual practice was on american sitcoms and yeah that sort of came in with friends and but then there was also this um oops you guys can't hear it there's this news story about a university chancellor fired not for watching porn but for making porn and i thought this of course is one of these liberationist um goals to have sex work be normalized and of course only fans is kind of doing that so so whole math is sort of in that sort of in that same sort of in that same field because you've got young men who have not yet settled into a long-term stable relationship with a woman now ideally that relationship would be a marriage till death do you part and for all of you young men still in this position i totally get the mystery that our women i mean and if you have trouble understanding women when you're just trying to find a girlfriend wait until you marry one that's what i've got to say but we married men can't make channels like this you have to kind of put it out there quietly so but there's but to me one of the one of the most interesting things about whole math wasn't just all of the because you can find all the whole math stuff in the jordan peterson sarah hill conversation there's a bunch of that and yeah women are more complex and women are mysterious and so i you know yeah i can i can derive i can derive benefit watching whole math and learning some psychology i found his embrace of sort of the integral levels i found that very interesting and it was it was it's a it's a very it's a very clever channel it's probably not a channel that's going to keep my interest because of course um i'm not in that position in my life where i'm frustrated by not being able to get a girlfriend at this point in my life a girlfriend would be a disaster in many ways a girlfriend is the last thing that i want i've already got a wife and wives and girlfriends if they're not the same person it doesn't go together well so but anyway it was an interesting channel and and there are other men out there who have and you know who you are who have in many ways mastered the art of getting girlfriend and in fact you've had girlfriends and you've had you know i really liked some of his things he had these um you know he has like the keeper the sleeper and the sweeper i thought that was really clever and many of you have had sleepers and sweepers and you might even had some keepers and they've gone by the wayside so yeah um yeah that's me with a girlfriend that's funny oh oh grizz grizz grizz grizz i don't know why i do know why grizz doesn't have a million subs um because he's he's hard to keep up with but um yeah i uh bern you're still awake so yeah we can talk about home math we can talk about nick cage and we can talk about um sam harris and i know you know some of you are sick of hearing about sam harris but uh yeah the sad do i get triggered by sam harris yes but um yeah there it is so i dropped the link um if you want to come in and chat let's come in and chat and uh i didn't know i i thought of you i thought of you uh bern if maybe you know because time wise bern is on the other side of the world from me so the time zones don't always work out well and you know so bern bern is burning the midnight oil to actually be watching this live stream but um so yep so anybody wants to come in if you want to ask a question put either do a super chat or put all caps stream yard is supposed to somehow try to integrate twitter and so people can leave uh tweets and now those will come into here um so i don't know how that works i haven't been reading the comments because obviously i can't read two things at once so yeah the body cow thing with girls of my age is what bothers me um are there oh twitter comments stand out don't they okay grim has it down yeah mark was i noticed mark was playing with it yesterday so stream yard is working there's also stream labs which is integrated with my little stream deck thing and stream labs is free so when my in march my stream yard subscription runs out and i might play with some of these other things so um can someone agree with me that sam harris looks a bit like there's a lot of sam harris hate out there and i'm not um up up up up here they all come but now all good here's bern those of you who don't have cameras on um you're not getting in because here they all come but now all good here's bern oh you got a mute grit you gotta mute yourself bern done okay so uh nick cave it's about time i sent you links about the book last no not this november but november 22 i was reading the book then but you're busy i understand so uh yeah not trying to colonize i understand so uh yeah not trying to colonize just little little remarks so so um anything you want to add because we're not alone i first ran into nick cave almost literally uh i had friends in new york city when i lived there in 1982 and i had a very good friend named tom who went and saw him said it was the most scabrous dangerous show he'd ever been to it was his group the birthday party which immediately made me say oh my goodness what's going on here and uh the and like people he would hit people with the bottom of the mic stand that's how over the edge he was if you watch uh the birthday party video for fears of gun he's screaming the words fingers down the throat of love as if someone's pulling up a grappling hook out of his throat he's just like he's just out of his mind this is why i immediately said i gotta pay attention to this guy because it was a case of me thinks he protests too much and i said he is so far now my friend went backstage and met him uh with another friend and he said totally out of his mind on heroin absolutely you know alcoholic heroin just a complete mess and yet this brilliant guy my friend you know and so i bought uh all the birthday party records at that time and i just said and and i have a book of all of his lyrics from that part and he has like songs like uh big jesus trash can and so i was just okay who is this i need to me he was the furthest over the edge of any performer i had ever heard of at that time there were other people doing stuff like cutting themselves and stuff but he seemed like the real thing he seemed to be like this guy that was just so far he understood the implications of what the punk scene meant on i don't think he he was seeing himself that way as much as he was just living it and then um about a year later or so i think was 83 84 he came out with his first album solo album and i immediately noticed a change evidently the birthday party band was so i mean it was just a loose collection of four guys who are all just like completely living on the edge with nick being one of the worst but there was also a bass player named tracy pew who ended up dying a couple years later of a heroin overdose i mean these these are the guys nick was a part of and then in his his solo album i started feeling something very different happening there is a song on there this is again 1983 called a box for black paul and uh he was basically saying that he was singing this on and it was like a weird crucifixion it was like this you got the feeling you almost felt like it was like the final scenes from jesus christ superstar or something but done in this really slow strange menacing way and he had another song there uh from her to eternity where he was talking evidently he had a relationship that was going bad and that sounded really painful in fact all the songs sounded painful but but honest then the next album came out and i said ah he's really on the journey now and because what he did was he started uh he sang a song about the old blues man blind lemon jefferson he did another song that was based on a sea shanty he did one that was based on uh chain gang music and i knew all the references and i immediately said ah anyone who starts digging into that stuff is going to run straight into gospel music he's going to run straight into you know this this old blues stuff has so much spiritual content in it and that's exactly what happened so within a few albums and i remember reading an interview with him about 1986 or so when he was saying things like i don't understand why people laugh at tammy winett's stand by your man i think that's a an honest song from an honest perspective and i said i really like this guy now and i and from what i heard it took him 20 years to clean up his heroin addiction wow and uh he evidently was a maintenance guy after a while where he just had to get enough but he tells a story i think it's in that book or in one of the interviews that he does as a no it was it's in that book where he tells a story where he's in paris and and he's just arrived there but he has no connection and he's starting to go nuts but this was only you know i don't know 10 years ago or so it wasn't that long ago but soon he's starting to do songs like mercy seat which is filled with biblical imagery he's doing one song called new morning which sounds like a hymn this is about 1990 then he put out a couple of lectures he gave on songwriting but also on the uh his perspective of god and at that time i started saying he's very platonic in the way he talks about god and what's between that time the early 90s period and up until the point his son died his first son died this book ends just as his second son dies he lost two sons two and so what i highly recommend is going and watching the unheard uh interview with him yeah i started watching that last night but i i i learned i very quickly saw i don't know i don't know enough well you don't know well i gave you three videos to watch that just one will be the absolute depth of despair the next one will be in his biblical image period and then the next one is all the way over there on the other side and it's been a long long process i actually met him briefly once i have a very good friend in new york city a different friend who took me over he you know because of his honesty he really has a devoted but not huge following i mean it's it's enough to sustain a very good career and to give him you know maybe 6 000 seat audiences wherever he goes but he's certainly no taylor swift so i never heard i never heard of him it is nick cave i the people are like oh nick cave i'm thinking yeah yeah no well i figured that's what when i sent you a message i'm sure nick cave didn't register at all or if it did for a second he was like musician i don't know him but he's really become important and what i realized when we were you know a few years back when you know we started talking about the meaning crisis and and people like uh peterson and all this i said paul really should know who nick cave is Nick cave has been in this zone for a long time and and sometimes he says you know like he'll be asked are you a christian and he'll say things like well if it walks like a duck and quacks like a duck and talks like a duck you know he'll say these things he's australian of course but uh no i highly highly uh uh recommend spending time there's just so much in his uh work to do but start with the three parts of his career you know so that's my feeling all right i'll look up did you send those to me on on twitter so i can go back and find them yeah okay all right they're not they're not in your dms they're just on your page so they're on your normal profile page there are you you there you know you sent you put out a little thing uh mentioning yeah they're on twitter comments there you notified me on twitter so i could find them there a lot of people they're commented okay okay i mean if you want i'll send them on your dms but no no that's fine i can find them on the on the twitter stream pete how's it going theology how are you i'm doing well can you guys hear me okay yeah we hear you great okay great some people don't know pete has a channel pete why don't you tell people about your channel i have a channel it's called strange theology we look at uh theology as it pops up in strange places one of those places happens to be the bible i think that um some people one something you were saying earlier paul made me think of the thomas jefferson bible and i feel like we've just sort of almost subconsciously been all reading the thomas jefferson bible it's like every time the miracles show up you know you're talking about this guy and his visions and stuff like that it's like yeah that happens in the bible people have visions it's strange but it's there doesn't just happen in the bible doesn't just happen in the bible that's true still have visions that's true that's true they just don't talk about them in public because right people they're worried someone might put a straight jacket on them yeah and this this kind of takes me to this the conversation with this guy nick um sorry is a cage cave cave um because because something in that you know it's like are we have we sort of watered down things enough that when someone gets really really honest you know he was talking about his music and if it wouldn't appeal to a certain audience basically once he got really really honest and i feel like that's such a shame that that is true sort of within i don't know i call it sort of normie evangelical christianity but um yeah that some people experience that that that honesty isn't allowed maybe or something weird well if you so i'll speak as a pastor of the church because pastors are are regular um pastors are regularly guilty of this if you are dealing with a group of people wild is difficult because groups find wild disruptive and they bring chaos into a group and so pastors are often they know the wild people in their church and they're usually trying i mean if you have a wild sheep you have a problem in the pen and so part of what happens with um civilization is domestication but as we've seen let's say with seed you you you need to do some domesticating but if you domesticate too much it's sort of like the chaos and order thing if you domesticate too much you lose your future because all you do is you have all of these domesticated animals that are like hot house tomatoes right or domesticated animals that are going to be fall prey to wolves and so on and so forth and as cultures continue to move through you need that wild stock to help the the herd continue to update its genetics to engage the context around it and that's the missional challenge and that's part of the reason um miss the missional work almost always spins out heresy right but heresy and orthodoxy basically co-emerge because you're not going to know what the truth is until you've you've begun to you've begun to see what things aren't working right so so we need we sort of need that environment that will because i because i feel like there's there's a there's a there's a quick sort of um trigger when it comes to that sort of uh pushing or or like you're saying this wild seed right because what happens is you become vulnerable to parasites if you're not genetically diverse yeah and it's almost like our thinking our theology can sort of be vulnerable to sort of these parasites yep if we're not incorporating some of that stuff that stretches us so this is what the philosopher does and i think that sort of theology and philosophy this is what the musician does well and someone like nick cave does i mean listening to what bern just said about him it's like exactly yeah he's and and i just so i just pulled up the top thing in his youtube thing was you know he's dropping f-bombs and i'm just thinking yeah this is gonna make people squirm but you need it in the community yeah yeah so so chad are you also mad at me because i didn't listen to you before and here i i come late to the game no no i just there's a lot of things that i talk about that people just kind of overlook is this weirdo is talking about it it might have a lot to do with the overselling too actually because if you're like me and somebody says you gotta listen to this i'm like screw that i'm not listening to that you know it's like when they challenge you to jump off the rock into the lake it's like jump do it do it then you don't want to jump for some reason i had this whole issue with uh with uh the game of thrones everybody's like you gotta watch the game of thrones i'm like i'm not gonna watch the stupid game of thrones and then like three years in i was like watch i watched everything else and i finally came to game of thrones and i was like son of a bitch this stuff is great and then i was pissed because the end so stupidly yeah well and that i mean that i i haven't watched game of thrones but i've heard everybody complain say the same thing about the ending and i think that's part of that that's part of the storytelling crisis burn i i'm halfway through your talk with justin and yeah and that you know put me onto some things too and and like the uh once i once i was a hippie then i was a stockbroker not a hit i immediately looked up that song it was hysterical yeah it is it is well it is late for me so i am going to uh turn into a pumpkin and anyway i got a question for you before you yeah the question is um i have this idea about um the idw is to christianity what the what led zeppelin was to the blues and in other words the blues were reintroduced to americans via the beetles and zeppelin and and the rolling stones and the idw i think in this this youtube medium has kind of done some of this to the culture what do you what do you think about that i'm not sure about that that comparison uh and are you saying that the see to me i look at led zeppelin and other metal bands and stuff taking blues patterns and kind of injecting them with a kind of electric steroids but coming at it also with a certain set of interpretations that you know for instance the long guitar solo you don't find old blues songs that have the long guitar solo like that so it's it's both a misinterpretation and a you know steroids for the sound and i don't look at the idw as being like that that's my immediate thought okay let us say i don't think the idw is you know rocking stairway to the bible idw is kind of coping for um for for political exiles from the left in a lot of ways that's what it was yeah i look at it more as a doorway you know and it's a doorway that swings both ways in a sense it's it is one could call it something like an estuary it's where the salt and the fresh water meet yeah yeah that's true that's true okay all right bern have a good night draw a beat we'll meet again later all right thanks for having me on paul yep hey it's good to chat sorry i think i do have to go as well sorry i can't stay long but not a problem look forward to catching up with you guys again soon chad i think we're we're on to catch up soon right yes yes chad's running his randos a lot of your randos aren't so random though chad you're getting a lot of the uh usual faces i what i want is the stories about them themselves not necessarily what it is they're talking about i like that yeah i love i love what you guys are doing so appreciate it sorry i couldn't stick around longer but i got to help uh the fam all right pete so thanks thanks for hopping on yep well well chad it's just me and you it's just us yikes uh well i have a cigarette so when this is gone i gotta go do some work oh i i should i i should find out what it would take for so i i have a bathroom i have to remodel you had any advice for me uh find somebody who knows what they're doing to do it because otherwise there's there's a saying you get what you pay for and that is there's a reason for that i mean we're i'm doing remodels and a lot of these remodels are things that people did themselves and then regretted it and there's a lot that goes into doing it correctly and you're gonna there's a reason why you pay so much for it um and so that would be my advice you know like find somebody with a good bid but you know who has a some good do like my wife does she does reviews she looks at reviews on everything before she pays for anything and so i would do that um but yeah that's what i would do i don't i don't know what took so long to get mark in here mark what took you so long oh i i wanted the nick cave stuff to burn to have his thing and you know i don't you know i'm not i'm only jumping in because i think nick the nick cave thing is though i can't comment on the never heard of the guy i know all these weird musicians from my musician friends never even heard of this guy uh you want to you want to talk about you want to talk about sam harris yeah well you saw some of my streams so i love your your input i didn't see a lot of your stream i was trying to get a sermon done but i saw you were streaming so i hopped over there and left a snarky comment but i didn't i didn't stay for too much oh i did read some of the comments though so joey's comments but joey doesn't joey doesn't like what i do with sam harris so um no i'll see joey i'll see hopefully i'll see joey new year's eve joey's coming over the house oh nice that'll be great that's what's that's what's nice about local is he can actually can actually do some stuff so i know no it's definitely nice about local that's here comes another creature oh good so so what what first sam harris first grim yeah or grim do you have a mission that you came in here to to comment grim usually lays his payload and then leaves that's grim's style that's that's the old Popeye grim i'm not him anymore uh first first i have to apologize to eric i was just demonstrating he wasn't protected with a wrench and so i timed him out for 10 seconds and now he's not speaking anymore oh you you timed out a priest hope you have your savings throws up you need a bunch of his posts and then timed him out no just just the timing out for 10 seconds automatically deleted all his posts i didn't even understand that but so um here's that penance in sir penance for that i'm sorry and uh and sam harris is the king of the midwits i think we can just say that uh nick cave is designed and directed by his red right hand and um what was oh the whole math yeah the charts man people like charts people do like charts navigating patterns you need more charts mark they almost navigate do you know how much how much work those are slides are a lot of work paul you should know that my slides in particular because i'm always trying to fit in all these ideas and you know one thing and yeah anybody like to do slides contact me on well there's there's um there's the mapping guy that i had he's still in the membership section his his video hasn't been liberated to the full channel but i think he wants you'll want his video out so there's a lot of guys in the corner who like making maps and oh okay all these different maps of things yeah that's true but but i always invite them over i'm like i got slides that we could i've got i've got two more i've got my model my model of knowledge video uh with the slides i've got two more of those that we could go into that i think people would really find helpful but my focus has been terrible just because in the middle of a lawsuit and there's all this garbage going on and it's just been hell so my focus keeps sliding off of all these long-term things i've got all my i've got a bunch of my navigating pattern stuff ready for podcast it's been that way for like three months like i would come around to doing the rest of the force and in fact i did three of the steps today i'm like oh i'm this close i can just start uploading yeah just it's been it's been hard but well i thought i thought the thing the thing to me that that that i thought about the sam harris convo was peterson doesn't push back which you know whatever there could be a reason for that but like you and yeah i liked your video i had to listen to it at double speed to fit it in before i did my stream and i wanted to do that because like your feedback is excellent always because you're you're very you're a genius so you you really catch stuff but the the thing that i don't like is that people aren't catching the fact that he actually said well if you make things if you had a button to make things less bad then that would not be good and so you wouldn't want to hit that button like that is actually his whole argument like no really that's actually his whole argument problem is and it starts at 106 or so in the transcript you can tell i did my homework if you read it it's like a long time see it's a long time before he actually says that and i think you it's easy to get lost and say wait a minute all he actually said was happiness is goodness and and if you had a button that could make things that would make things bad or make you less intelligent or you know whatever he has three or four yeah yeah i remember that section but but that's his whole definition of of of the most evil and i'm like forget about direction away from evil doesn't get you to good although also that he doesn't even make a real argument he makes a self-referencing argument and then like i said like you didn't point out at one point he goes well you know the the resurrection of japan is a miracle and i'm like wait a minute didn't you just say like 20 minutes ago that the resurrection of jesus christ wasn't a miracle like i don't like really dude you're using the same word and he used the word spirit and i'm like because to me it's a it's dare i say it it's an evolution in his thought it's an advancement of his thought because now he's using all the terms that he wouldn't use oh yeah because he's run out of material terms like the materialism is ending like well i don't have any material terms for this thing i'm trying to communicate and and i was shocked that you missed all that i'm like this is the best sam erich conversation because usually i'm 10 minutes in and i'm done i can't i can't do it anymore no this one i had no problem listening to uh it's it drives me nuts it drives me nuts i could tell you got upset at the end of your at the end of your thing and i was like oh paul's actually angry i like how you caught that peterson was just giving him enough rope to hang himself go ahead sam keep talking keep talking i i mean i i mean you'll watch enough peterson you know how he is with people and you see how he is with different people and with sam it's like what's jordan doing you know he just he's letting him think right because to talk is to think and i think he's like and and i i said this in my live stream like it's very clear to me that sam never thought about the things he was talking about when he was talking about was the first time he ever actually thought that through and that's why he kept running into problems and then hitting into self-reference and hitting into words like spirit which he normally doesn't run into but like it's the end of materialism baby like it it has it has its limits oh no i missed this one this oh no i missed this one this is the this is the one i was looking for yeah grim grizz looks like brett weinstein now he came in the implications of that comment sir are immense i wanted to point out that hyun shi over on x said that lex friedman is the king of the midwits and i don't know if sam has ever been on lex but that would be one of the most boring circular conversations i can imagine a lot of agreement lex i can't imagine sam yeah no but but but but look but look i mean sam has achieved nirvana by eliminating all the critics on x and now he has a happy life which means it's good i mean that's like when he said all that i was just like did you just say that like on public on a stream dude on a on a video that's not going to play well later now now nico i i bring nico up here because that um this is a comment i get fairly regularly actually i get it fairly regularly for just about everyone give jordan peterson a rest give sam harris a rest the reason why i pick some of these people is not just because i want to highlight these people or platform these people as if my platform means anything compared to these mega platforms it's because these people represent significant spirits in our midst and i think the spirits have to be pointed out and the thing is that you know if if i'm on something that you're that it's map territory just watch navigating patterns or grim gris or you know i'm dyslexic i always get the pointing wrong watch some of these guys how much of it was that like you know you owe it to the algorithm as like a peterson commentary channel to feed it some of those no no you don't feel obliged no audience or algorithm capture and then rod then my friend rod and he said this to me privately as well as publicly i think sam harris can bring these to bring out the worst in you no way um but um his i i actually it was i was you know for the most i don't listen to sam's podcast i don't do any of that stuff but i lit i did listen to him and eric on trigonometry and that made me i i i'm listening to this and i'm thinking you know because on one hand i nations they need prisons you know the nation's got to do stuff i totally get that but it's the the difficult thing that we are that we always deal with is that spirits inhabit people and those people energize nations to do hugely destructive things right and the difficult thing i mean it is a miracle what happened in japan after the second world war and also in germany after the second world war yep because these spirits were pretty effectively exercised in germany and japan very quickly became better places to live and much better citizens and this the islam question is a is something that i you know if you're listening to my videos you say i'm approaching it very carefully because and you don't want to accidentally draw a cartoon no it's not that it's not that i'm afraid of islamists because um there's much people of higher profile saying much more radical things about islam it's because so i have a friend who was a missionary in a deeply muslim country and i won't mention his name or the country lived in yada yada yada because there's very sensitive things there and i asked him once i said talk to me because this is a guy i knew from college i know his family and he says um i said what what has living in this country taught you and he basically said something to the effect of how beautiful the people are and how terrible the religion is but it's really hard to separate people from these things and so it's really easy to just you know sort of blind side a whole group of people because of the religious label i try not to do that with atheists i try not to do that with whole groups of other people why should i do it with islam and that's where i find this show rami on hulu the the seasons get consecutively worse but i really do want to pay some attention to that show on my channel because here is a young egyptian a young second generation egyptian growing up in north jersey very close to where i grew up and he's dealing with all the same kinds of issues that most other american kids are but it's got the islamic valence instead of the christian valence and it's very interesting watching this go through and i think a lot of people who've gone into orthodoxy will will find some very interesting similarities there so it's islam is a very interesting test case and it's a little easier to deal with mormons are a little bit we're more more familiar with mormons at least if you live in the western part of the united states right because mormons i i don't have a lot of respect for the mormon religion but i've got a ton of respect and love for mormon people but those mormon people were formed by that mormon religion so it's a very interesting dynamic so but islamism is a big deal but it is the formation part that i think everyone it's the time component right it's like i was talking about this on my stream like look what would happen if you try to enact a secular world how long would it take for you to find out two generations and then i go look around like what do you think it right if you thought secularity was a reasonable frame or a valid frame to have in the world and and which would mean there was a state of no religion then what would happen and how long would it take well it turns out it would take about two and a half generations or so and i would argue that's kind of what we're seeing is the results of behaving as if yeah it's and you know there are there are interesting um you know with turkey that whole process that turkey went through and you know grizz your story i mean you saw that on the vander clips channel i took that really wonderful description of your church going unitarians though they may be um um there are a fair number of unitarian pentacostals out there they they um but anyway so you know secularity is a very tricky thing and now grizz is living in the bible belt and now mark you are a yankee not yet you're a yankee who moved to the bible belt so and there are a lot of yankees who moved to the bible belt because the weather up there sucks and um but you know a lot of what we're dealing with in this corner are these issues but with a christian balance now with an islamic balance things are going to be different and and just the geopolitical aspect of islam is very different um oh wait you should drop the stream link again so somebody can come on and fill my spot i'm sitting here looking at this thing and it's like it reminds me of how they used to say we had an angel on the one shoulder and a devil on the other and i can't figure out who is who in this scenario so yeah turkey is very secular turkey went through this process basically of secularization you know egypt did to a degree too you know my conversation again it's still in the member section it'll come out soon with um with ash from egypt that that conversation from start to finish was just fun but he's armenian who had got so christian you know orthodox christian goes to egypt you know eventually comes to america spoiler alert becomes protestant um the particular you know reformed protestant so it's it's it's super interesting well my actually grim my time is pretty much done here i really have to get on with my day so we don't really need someone to come in and fill the slot but um yeah time to land the good time to land the plane gris now let me ask before i while i got you here how do you do your live stream how do you click into those that branding so quickly it's there under you have to click off of the comments into branding and then down into the mp4 as you upload it oh you use these you upload these things into stream yard and then you can just click into them and you click into them and it's really handy if like your computer goes down and you can but you still have them when you get back into stream yards because out of different device so it's terribly handy so you can preload like i preload my little video that i do in the beginning my little animation for my live streams and then i preload the you know all the other stuff that i want but you could load it before you did the stream for specific stuff for the stream and then go to branding and go click and it'll come up on the screen right away that's yeah it's pretty cool you have to cut them in like obs or whatever make your own little mp4s first yeah but that's easy to do and we'll invoice you for the stream yard tutorial well i you know i actually uh oh uh oh oh no oh no the twins are here oh oh no i can't leave paul you need the backup oh my gosh oh so but but you know actually what i should do is i should fly chad out to fix my bathroom i just have to figure out what that would cost but you should all right man well i was gonna i was gonna land the plane but you're i don't want to throw you know bump onto you in the runway so what what did i do wrong uh nothing that i saw because i just helped here so dutch nothing that i saw i was raised by dutchman you know i i know i know your i know your kind you didn't talk about whole math enough we need some more whole math according to the title complaint let's hear let's hear what you guys think of whole math i'm you know you're all single guys i'm a married guy like i said if i get a girlfriend i have real problems i lose my job i lose my wife my kids are mad at me girlfriend is not something i'm looking for i don't i saw a few of his videos and you know he seems very pessimistic and like nothing works and it's like you know i go back to the peterson thing right if it's all women maybe it's not all women maybe and i'm just like boy i'm getting that peterson spidey sense on this one um yeah i saw i saw another one of his videos last night uh when i was uh luxuriating in a in a warm bath and i was like now dude you you you sound bitter and and but to be fair i mean he's pointing out something very important everyone's telling you how to do these things and the things they're telling you are just wrong and and and that's the issue is like we're so and and what you've seen my twitter age of gnosis we're so stuck on the age of gnosis that we're looking for a proposition a set of propositions that will answer our question when what we need is a set of exemplifications that we just follow almost unconsciously they give us what we want now you're not married yet are you manuel no okay i just just just check it i don't want to reveal anything here there's a spirit of individualism that that's really strong in the world right and when when you have that spirit active in a relationship right like that means that you have two parallel things that get bound in the same lane by being together right but but that's insufficient right like that binding needs to start happening at at a different level at some point and like sometimes you get lucky right and you get this romantic sense of love or you you actually submit right and you have to surrender part of the individual identity to to that relationship and like that's so big a step for a lot of people and and like obviously it happens right because like mark has been talking about cooperation a lot in order to cooperate you you have to do that right but but it doesn't happen in a in a fundamental way right it's like like oh i do this because because i like it or it works for me right so there's a there's a transactional component always present and yes it's really hard to overcome that especially if you're you're in your head the whole day and they don't talk about that like this is like like like for vacay's agent arena relationship is really good framing especially at the individual level but but it actually doesn't work well until you realize there's no arenas with only one agent and there's no agent in only one arena and now all of a sudden you start to go oh that means something important yeah it means you're not alone in the world and now you could have because they talk about domicile i think this is new thinking i think all domicile is spiritual there's no such thing as material domicile yeah because all homes are fundamentally spiritual that's right you can't make a home without that higher thing and and if you have that higher thing anywhere you are can be a home to you right because just people just living together is not a home now now we're barking up grizzly's tree here but but let me let me weigh in on home math first i like the levels because the integral system uses the wrong color scheme and he ties it to the chakras colors which is important and relevant and and like i said in the comments you highlighted the the unfathomable men demographic is huge but this whole like the all women comment mark was making is because like there's been the death of the shadow matriarchy and so set is training the women on how to be what a woman should be and what a woman should be according to set is not in alignment with biology and or the human culture at all and so that the women are like that is because also of there's a huge demographic of unfathomable and unmothered girls out there growing up into what set has been normal raid them into and so they need it they need their own version of that channel yeah i don't know that they have that no women are trying to be powerful in a masculine way instead of precious and so men have nothing to protect so they've got they don't know what to do i ain't got nothing to protect what the hell do i do right and at the same time women are trying to be men and so they're actually competing and that gets back to what manuel was saying is good two people who are together but they're not united right they're in parallel instead of taking on roles where where one specialization helps the other specialization right they're both trying to do this we're both trying to have jobs intact or whatever right we're both trying to do this thing and it's like is that the most efficient and efficacious way to live your life you know because i don't think it is and and and i've seen this i'm experiencing it now you know some people get really calm down when all they have to deal with is like housework and stuff and then other people when they don't have to deal with housework or like going grocery shopping for example like they can now focus on things they couldn't focus on before like that's real that happens to people and and no one's talking about that like wow wouldn't it be great if you only had to worry about these four things instead of these eight things and then somebody else worried about the other four things they didn't have to worry about the four things you're worried about wouldn't that be better for both people i'm like it's a struggle and it's a sacrifice and at times it really sucks but on balance and this is where it gets tricky it's better especially over time joey got it right in the chat there paul joey joey a joy we we need to hook up holmeth and mary herrington and see what happens we can do it as a corner we can pressure them into it let's make it happen folks yeah mary mary herrington is a leviathan she is uh she is something else um you should hear the real quote i gave justin briarley he used a little bit for his thing but i came i gave him a much more salty quote that he doesn't want to put on a christian podcast um so i i want to add something because i think uh i've been reading uh playdo while we finished with mark and a couple other guys on the texas wisdom community channel uh so yeah check it out if you're reading playdo but playdo talks about this these generations right so he starts basically with the philosopher king and he has the society around it and then it starts devolving right so he's putting it in stages right and and what happens is a new generation occurs right and and then it gets equilibrium right so there's a normalization of something and then after the normalization happens the stage of regression can occur right so the societal structure regresses in phases and it ends up in tyranny right and when we're talking about these women and and and how they're individualized and masculinized right like we're not at the end of of that journey like the end is going to get worse and and like it's going to have massive societal impacts that it's not having now all hail guvdans avatar um what was i any of you watched the jordan peterson sarah hill conversation just because you brought the homeroom yeah it's it's really good and sarah hill i i'm really tempted to buy her book except i buy too many books but it's i was really impressed with with her and that conversation with jordan and i think part of the i think grim your point about the shadow matriarchy is important and i still have yet to the um the conversation i did with andrea with the bangs in germany is out on um but that conversation we did about and and frozen texan yeah i still have to listen to a bunch of those things you sent me i know you sent them to me but part of i think part of this is that we think wisdom can be transmitted all in the same way through like telling people what to do and right propositionally and some things can be and i think that that again tends to be much more of a masculine direct visible thing but i think i think the feminine is better caught than taught and the difficulty is that these tools that we have are better at teaching than catching and so i agree 100 which you have to say grizz about see that's why i say grooms grizz is a genius because i mean when he was going into the shadow matriarchy and i was thinking yeah yeah that's that's a real thing and so it was like when you highlighted that the jacob's story about his grandma yeah the discovery of the washing machine it's like that's what she lost with for an exchange with the washing machine is their access to the communal wisdom and since they operate on that social layer they catch i guess embodied norms and wisdom through witnessing those interactions on on ways that men don't because we look at things but i'm running away now bye everybody all right i should i should land the plane here too you should your job work to do i told you i i'd make a commentary video on the on the tag that you did about the the feminine with andrea with the banks oh did you think is it out yet because like i don't think it's out yet it is out you can find it so um cassidy is posting them but there's not a lot of views on them so i you know maybe during i i've been putting so much stuff through my channel lately um i should i should start posting some of those things too but it is out so that recording is out and it's pretty good the first talk i gave the volume's kind of low so i'm sure i'll get some complaints about that but the anyway i i i had a lot of points to make you did you had a lot of uh yeah i know that you had a lot of things to say about that so you should definitely make a commentary video on that conversation monwell and get that out there so and we've got navigating patterns and what's the name of your channel monwell agapic orientation agapic orientation i'm sad that you don't remember they need to try harder you don't say it every 10 minutes that's so like you can make fun of me all you want but everybody knows my damn channel name yeah that's exactly right that's exactly right it can be annoying but it's effective that's that's right well have you seen the convivium talks and have you seen dr jim's channel no dr jim is a channel oh good when i met him in arkansas man that was like wow this guy's awesome he's way better in person than he is on a lot he thinks dr jim's good online wait till you meet him in person he is great he is true he is tremendous and um i didn't i didn't know he started a channel so he has he had a channel he put at least two of the convivium talks out on it recently so it's sort of revivify i think three and then the golden echo is ted's channel he's the one that ran the the conference it was really a retreat was awesome all day it was all day just hanging out with the same people eating all nine yards all day campfires was wonderful but those talks have started to come out and and i continue to insist for maybe maybe for somewhat selfish reasons once you hear the talks that did the best talks out there uh they were they were really good i i thought the best peterson peterson sphere talks are the convivium talks and i'm so glad i i drove out there and and and did the paintball and everything else oh yeah we did paintball yeah oh yeah so part of the problem and and actually someone who has made much larger platforms has talked to me about this problem before part of the problems we have in the corner is we are very decentralized and there isn't sort of one place that and jacob of course has been complaining about this and everybody wants me to organize this but i'm not going to organize this because i'm i'd be really bad at it because i already have a church and i'm really bad at organizing that and so if you give me something even bigger it would be even worse but we do so what's the channel name of where we can find drop it drop it in the in the chat marv i'll drop uh dr jim's uh channel in there and then yeah he's got four of the talks up father eric has one of the talks up on his channel and ted's got one of the talks up on his channel um so yeah i mean it's uh it's great um i i i don't know if they're all going to get on one channel or not uh hopefully they will um but but they were um they were they were such good talks i really i really enjoyed uh not only being there but i've been listening to the after the fact and you know they're they're they're more rich the second time around i would say yeah um and and that that to me is is important right because it it sort of indicates that you know that thing that john bravicki's talking about right when he he says oh you know there's a depth there um that that you wouldn't catch otherwise so there's all the three channels that the talks are on that i know about and okay and yeah i don't know if they'll all end up on golden echo or if they'll all end up on dr jim's or or what their plan is uh jess edited them so they're gorgeous and jess's talk is out and of course like of course you want to hear jess's talk like come on you gotta hear jess's wait a minute mark you posted the same link three times oh did i oh that's not what this thing told me let me uh let me figure out what's going on here no this one says it's the right one okay we got quarry post your father big mac there we go yeah the copy paste doesn't work anymore a bunch of things are broken i've noticed in the computer space lately just yeah broken for everyone i haven't figured it out yet yeah a golden echo didn't post them no just dr jim's yeah father big mac so i found one on father big max but yeah those i that would have been a totally good conference i still haven't i still haven't figured out if i'm going to the symbolic world conference in florida yet out if i'm going to the symbolic world conference in florida yet um that's you know it's these conferences i'm i think these conferences are so crucial because hey if you go to europe you can meet monwell and monwell is a cool guy and you know the nice thing about and if you you know if you can meet mark at one of these conferences and you can sit by him and you can bother him so he can't listen to the the talk while you're sitting next to him we bothered each other we bothered each other but the conferences are are really important and um we yeah we we don't have a lot of them planned for 2024 interestingly enough so not that i've seen i don't know what catherine's doing i was real hopeful that we were going to get thunder bay every year uh because that was so i mean you want the divine feminine boy like that go into that conference because there were just stuff that happened and like yeah things would appear and i was like you know and i'm talking to catherine's like well no that wasn't planned i'm like well then how the hell did it happen like like how did this ideal thing appear at the ideal moment ideally i don't understand and it turns out that scott's wife was you know making things happen just by seeing a lack and filling it and i was just like i didn't even know that was a lack until it was filled and then i was like this is brilliant and there's the divine feminine in action right the shadow matriarchy whatever you want to call it that's and and that's different from you know a guy would just say you go do this but women just make things happen and you know who knows how i don't know i i don't understand and i love the german event the german yeah that was there was also some divine feminine going on there and like when i was leaving like i was talking to the wife of the guy who runs the place and and she said you're smiling brighter not the place and i'm like wow right like like that that just hit right because she's she's just doing stuff in the background right she's she's relating to all this stuff and it's like oh like that's the way that that i made an impression upon her right and and like what is she attending to right like she's not attending to the conference right she's she's attending to how things flow like like whether there's a need and like i came in and it was it was amazing so i'm just sitting on this table and at a certain point this these two kids right because they're already these kids as well they come up with a cup of cappuccino with like a nice foam on it with with with the lines and everything and i'm like i cannot say no to this like like i just have to drink this cup it's like like it's too cute and and stuff like that right like it's amazing but you also have to learn how to appreciate it right like yeah you can also be like look i don't want coffee so so gretten guriz says april 8 basquedale illinois i don't know anything about that i know corey's been trying to work on one november ish corpus christi texas texas is a place that there are a lot of people but texas is a big big place so um what's it about doesn't my quite like what's the what yeah who's gonna be there i mean we i mean israel was gonna happen but israel's not gonna happen now obviously yeah and so but no i and john and jonathan and john and i should probably do i'm i'm working on scheduling another talk with john and another one with jonathan and probably the three of us should get together again so talking about things happening i'm actually thinking of organizing something myself but yeah i don't i don't want to do a conference like i'm getting sick of those things uh too much talking like i want to do like a week of camping do a retreat yeah and like we have people come in with their practices right like whatever they are like if they have something that that's moving right and then communal cooking right like like i want to i want to do the the being together aspect and and the cultivating of community and and the participation because like that's that's what i'm all about but i don't i don't think the talky talky stuff does anything if it's not embodied at some point well convivium was was paintball then dinner together around a huge campfire and then we go to this place and that's where we're sleeping and that's where we're getting our meals together and you know and and that's where the talks are and those three buildings are right by each other and every night it was campfires until bad so it's basically like you're just hanging out with these people all day and having eating with them and everything else and and it was really rich because there were campfires every night and there's something magical about the campfire thing the dc event the magical thing there was everybody singing together obviously right these little things are not little and when you add them to something like a conference everything sort of changes all at once well i i think definitely rod and chris need to um need to do nashville nashville i can get to nashville and rod um you know rod and nuance forum i mean they're they've kind of been out there and you know i know rod but the thing is i would i would definitely go to anything rod would organize because rod's got a heck of a heck of a rolodex and um rod also watches far beyond us because part of what keeps this stuff part of what keeps this stuff live is if again it's got to be estuary like is you've got to continue to bring in new things and not just keep doing the same thing over and over again and um and you know that's kind of how it develops in every conference and that's that's part of the reason that i've i've resisted too much centralization with this because if rod puts together an event or monwell puts together an event or you know i should probably do something at living stones at some point too um everything is going to be different and so there'll be some similar and some different and then each event is a unique thing yeah you need to you need to check out the catholics you'd be like it's all under one umbrella and it's all so different yeah it those two things are not are not as connected as you yeah yeah the catholics you know not such a happy family right now um actually they're not no the the the the uh proving out of the west minister confessional does not make many catholics happy but yes well actually micaela lives in um micaela lives in arizona now oh did she move to arizona they moved to arizona they were in nashville then they were in florida too much mold in florida so they moved to arizona where no mold in arizona no mold in arizona none zero so yeah when is what yeah luke when is minnesota going to do something they've got tons of um yeah i don't know i don't know you know people have to organize things and they have to sacrifice and lead things and do a bunch of work and it's a pain to do a bunch of work right manuel and i know all about i know i'm really good at not doing work sure all right we're gonna land the plane here because i gotta i gotta be pastor paul thank you paul always a pleasure thank you all thank you all for the live stream and uh take care everybody ending transmission or you're you're