https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=p9ysEIpd894

 Little countdown. Well, it says we're live. Yeah. So, all right. Well, welcome. Zero, zero, zero people watching. I haven't, I haven't checked the live. I haven't checked the live yet. So, um, yes, this is a streaming errors. No, it says, it still says upcoming. Let me refresh this. Oh, we are live. Okay. So welcome. This is Friday morning and I am trying something new. We usually do the bridges of meaning PVK question and answer. And for the last couple of years, we've done it every week. I actually think every week is a little too much. Once a month might be a better pacing. Um, some of, I wanted to, I've been watching some of the, I've been, particularly Jacob play around with a stream yard and he's spoken quite highly of it. And so this morning I thought we could do something a little different part of, um, you know, I, I try a lot of things and not everything works out the way I'd like it to part of what I wanted to do is have a major echo. I don't know about major echo. Are you seeing major echo, Rick? I don't know. Um, part of what I wanted to do is always have more participation. And because listen, I get to listen to myself talk a lot. And those of you who know how much video content I put out, no, I get to listen to myself talk a lot. And so I actually get bored with that. And I would actually rather hear some more ideas from all of you. And we do live estuary meetings at living stones and there are estuary meetings starting up in all different places. And we have a format for running these meetings, um, that we call the estuary protocol. And so I thought we would give that a try. We already lost somebody. We would give that a try and just have a conversation together. Now I don't quite know how it's going to go in terms of people coming in and out. Um, I don't know if all of you can go the whole two hours. Um, so I might allow some in even in the process of the meeting. We'll see how the conversation goes. But what we're going to do is basically start something like a, an estuary meeting that's, um, that's live and on the air, which is different from what we usually do. Estuary is usually in person. So the way we do this is we're going to go first, go around the circle and introduce ourselves and tell us, you know, one or two minutes, a little bit of about yourself, where you come from. Um, maybe how you found this little corner of the internet and, um, why you decided to jump in this morning and give this thing a try. And I'm just going to go through. Usually if we're in a physical room, we can just kind of go around the circle, but I don't know if you all are on the same order on my screen as in all the screen, so I'm just going to sort of lead us through. So Kara, why don't you, uh, let us know a little bit about yourself. Hello. Um, so my name is Kara. I am a YouTuber, uh, used to stream on Twitch, uh, with a friend where, where we would discuss poetry and different poets. Um, was fun. We had been doing it since the beginning of the pandemic and in real life, um, I'm a financial analyst, also a singer and a business woman and a landlord. Yeah. There is many things that I do. Um, I also write poetry songs and paint, draw as well, like different stuff. Uh, how did I get on bridges of being a friend brought me in, uh, shut out iron route, he was the one who invited me to bridges of being, and we used to do my line by line podcast together as well at the beginning. And right now I deviated to invite the different guests. So, yeah, basically at the time I'm analyzing song lyrics, but not through the lens, how the, the musician meant it, but through our own projections, what we see in it, what we feel, what this particular music reminds us of. And yeah, big fun of Paul as well. And the basic ideas of humanity, helping people and seeing in others value, even when others don't see value in themselves. That was a big deal for me. So thank you, Paul. And how did I join to that meeting? Uh, I was procrastinating. I was about to do something really, really useful. Then I decided, Oh my God, that's looks really more useful. So, yeah. All right. Wonderful. Thanks for the opportunity. Thank you. Thank you, Kara. Uh, Dolly, and please correct me if I don't get your names right. So, no, that was pitch perfect. Um, Dolly, I'm a homeschooling mother of two. I am a super duper over thinker all the time. I'm stepping off to the side and having conversations about what all sorts of current events and literature and just the soup of daily life means with my overthinker friends. Um, and Paul, I've been watching your videos for some time. I think probably something from Jordan Peterson was the first that, that drew me in, but then you, you show up in different, you're, you're a guy who shows up in a lot of different places. Speaking of which yesterday, I was, uh, listening to your conversation with or on McIntyre. So I'm interested in a lot of different things. I'm, I've been a lifelong Christian. Uh, just a lot of different interests and saw this morning. I was, I have to admit, I was looking on Twitter this morning. I usually, I usually avoid Twitter on Fridays because it seems like it's a slow day or it's a day where people are just reacting, reacting, reacting to something. But I must confess. I was enjoying a little bit of people's reactions to, to the musk purchase finalization. So I was on there and have them see that you were going to have a live stream. And did this completely on a lark. Wonderful. Wonderful. Well, thank you, Dolly. Xander. Um, hi Paul. Yeah, I'm a, I'm, I'm a newbie here. I actually, uh, came in from, uh, or joined the discord from the, uh, the, uh, conference in Thunder Bay. Uh, and, uh, uh, from there, I've just been, I, I, it was a very profound experience for me, um, and I, uh, it mainly because, uh, I am now a Christian and now a believer, but I started out, I was actually a big part of the new atheist movement and I was a, uh, also a philosophy of mind and cognitive science major. So I came from the, the Revecky world and, uh, because of multiple factors, I ended up in the, uh, on the other side of the divide and it really gave me an opportunity to, uh, reintegrate those two parts of myself and, uh, yeah. And since then I've just been, um, like there's, there's some big insights from that conference and I've just been writing nonstop ever since, so month and a half feeling the Holy spirit, just plowing away. It's been amazing. Every day has been an adventure and I'm looking forward to the adventure continuing. Now I just came from mass and I got the notification. This is starting up and I said, yes, I can do that. Well, thank you. Thank you, Xander. That's wonderful. Um, uh, I'm going to have to wear glasses. Um, the text is small, but McKenna, McKenna, McKenna from Hawaii. Yes. Yes. And yes. Um, so, um, so, um, lifelong Christian, um, I'm a pastor of a small dying church, much like, uh, PBK. So there's some, I listen because I identify in many ways. Um, I hope to be you in 20 years. I don't know if that's a good aspiration, but anyway, go on. No. Um, let's see. I, gosh, I probably, I think I stumbled onto this channel backwards. Probably through a Benjamin voice conversation. Like I'm trying to, you know, it's like not long time, not short time, some in midterm summer during COVID. It's hard to remember. Um, but just kind of identified with all of that, you know, it was just, um, it's been very helpful kind of crystallizing something, some threads that I was well aware of, well, not well aware of, aware of, um, through education and other things. Um, and just, um, I mean, and just the way everything's kind of weaving together. It's really been, um, it would been influential for me. Oh, I don't know how much, much more to say. It's not, I mean, that's good. Real normal story. That's good. You'll, you know, we'll, we'll keep talking as the, uh, as the estuary protocol progresses. Michael, Michael, you're not a, an unfamiliar face in this little corner of the internet. Yeah. I've been around for a little bit now. Um, I found your channel, uh, through a random search. It was for Jordan Peterson and Francis Schaeffer. I had remembered watching those Francis Schaeffer videos when I was a teenager. And, um, so I stumbled onto your conversation with burn power and then, uh, been watching your channel ever since. And, you know, you're interested in about as many, um, interesting and diverse topics as I am. So it's, uh, you know, it's, it's a good, uh, the, the, the change of topics and the, the variety is, is good for me. Um, so I usually enjoy having that. Um, over the past year, I've just been getting connected with a lot of other people in this little corner. Um, been having some conversations and making videos and putting them on YouTube. Just, just trying to put, put it out there and see what happens. See what sticks. Okay. Wonderful. Welcome Michael and Shane. Why don't you introduce yourself? See if he's still live there. Shane's been having trouble with his feed. I think. Um, are you in there, Shane? All right. So I think we're gonna, is there another, another instance of him now? Nope. All right. I think Shane's been having some technical problems. Well, let's, let's be, let's begin then. And so that's the first round in the estuary protocol. Now in the second round is where we're going to share, or we're in a sense, going to bid or propose. Um, we're going to propose at least the topic of our initial conversation. And there are four areas. There are four areas that you can talk about, um, share something that you've been thinking about or ruminating on intellectually, or share something contextually, um, in and around your life that is meaningful or important that you'd like maybe for the group to, to discuss or chew on a little bit. The third is share something personally that has happened to you that you'd maybe like the group to discuss or chew on that in a sense, you'd like to bid for the group to consider as a topic of conversation and the fourth one is estuarily and I know I had the thumbnail this morning that we, uh, we don't talk about estuary and actually in estuary, one of the four possible topics is, um, what about, what about the estuary and this estuary? Now this is different from a normal meeting where you have, um, you basically have some continuation because you've got a fair number of repeat people. You often have a new person or two in the mix. So in this case, you can talk about, well, at least what we're playing with, or at least ideas about this little corner of the internet. So, um, so yeah, share, share something. Now I'm going to again, go around in the same order that I started with and you can pass if you want to. We don't have a lot of people in here, so, um, we're going to at least need some input and I usually don't try to give too much of my own input because again, I get to talk on my own channel plenty. So, so Kara, what, what, what I, what idea would you like to sort of put in here of maybe a topic of conversation for this morning from one of those four areas? Okay. I was thinking about level of personal responsibility a lot this week in the sense that it makes us dangerous people in the moment when we shift the responsibility, I'm doing this because boss asked me, or I'm doing this atrocious thing because of idea that was not my own, but implanted into my head. I'm powerless against this idea. So that's the reason for my option. And I'm thinking, for example, about, let's take a example of a person who is firing 20% of the employees from the office and they don't, they shift the responsibility for their action as well. And I was thinking about being a tool in somebody else's hand in order to achieve something. So that was my idea. Did I get it right? I never participated in the, no, you're doing it right. You're basically, so what we're going to do is we're going to share these ideas and we have to listen very carefully to each other's ideas because in a minute, then we're going to go around again and you're going to tell us about one of the other ideas that you heard that you would, in a sense, you can't vote for your own idea because in a sense, in this round, you vote for your own idea. And then the next round, then we're going to sort of come to at least some consensus or a majority to say, okay, let's start here. And usually the conversation then goes and morphs and takes off from there. So, okay, good. Dolly, what's on your mind? I think the process of change and how people, but I like what Kara was talking about because I often think about, you know, a lot of us are very invested in the idea that people are able to change because otherwise we would have hung it up a long time ago. So, no, I kind of like, I like Kara's idea, but I also like how do we, how do we get to the point that we can start to make a change of any sort in our own lives? How do we affect, how do we affect other people making changes in their lives without robbing them of agency? And that's another one. Okay. Xander, what's on your mind of those four ideas? Well, what's been on my mind for like the past month has been a theory of everything. So I don't know if I want to talk about everything here, but I can narrow it down a bit. I think what I like to really talk about with you now is Christian formation and Christian conscience, because at the conference there was a lot of talk about consciousness and there was actually a very little talk about conscience. And I think that conscience in general has been abandoned not only by Christianity, but of the West. Like you look at like the cartoons from my childhood, we had the devil and the angel on the shoulder. And then the Pinocchio was all about the development of conscience. And I would actually argue that it's about Christian formation, that they have, they have Jiminy Cricket, who starts off as a very bad conscience and then conscience and then improves upon that. And I think this would, you know, tie, connect very much to Dalia's topic about change and actually how do we get change in people's lives? I think that like, because really there's there's there's two ways changes can go. And I think one of them is this positive change that we want is moving towards Christ. And I think we should have that conversation about Christian formation and conscience. OK, all right. Now we have we have we have live children in the at least their voices in the stream. He's going to he's going to have to deal with a deal with a small crisis now. Shane has is back in the room and Ivan, who is not an unfamiliar face in this little. Ivan, do you have the time for the next hour or so to devote to this? Not really. OK, so you should probably watch from on the live stream then instead of in here. So this is pretty much for people who can probably have the time. Sort of. OK, but kind of why don't you why don't you go for it if you can? Well, we'll see. Let's see how this goes. I guess one of the big things on my mind has just been how you locate tradition. You know, what is it? I mean, we talk about tradition. You always people tend to be thinking about one like the original source of whatever. But like I was having a conversation with a English and friend of mine, you know, it's got, you know, they're looking to do a church plant in the area and on the pastor of the church there that was there when the when the whole town was built, you know, by the time of a nation far younger. And so the question is, like, who has a traditional church there, the church that was there when the town was built, or the church that traces its history back to whatever, you know, whatever older tradition in that sense, you know, is it the traditional practices? Is it being part of the community for longer? What makes tradition tradition? That's what I've been wondering about. OK. Question. Good, Michael, what's what's on your mind? OK, so I think this would be an estuary framework, but, you know, I think that there are still a lot of vibrant churches and there's still a lot of people for whom church you know, I could say like evangelical church, it's working for them. But they're largely unaware of kind of, you know, this area and the things that are going on here. And I think it's it's necessary maybe to figure out how to integrate some of the stuff that's going on, like in our corner before those. You know, before those churches and even though they're working for now, before they become obsolete, I guess you can say. And how how to. I guess how to make the estuary bigger, really, you know, but especially from the side of the church, that's really unaware, keeping them from becoming too sheltered and cloistered. OK, all right. I'm going to let in I'm going to let in Antonio here. Antonio, do you do you have a sense of what we're doing? Can you hear me? Yes, we can hear you. Hi there. I was in the the Manchester estuary and I've just seen this live stream. So I thought I would come in and say hello. OK, do you have the time to stay or? Yeah, yeah, I've got I've got a couple of hours. Oh, perfect. All right. All right. You're in good. So for that, I'm just going to have Shane go. And now he dropped. I don't know what's going on with Shane's stream. Ivan, why don't you because you weren't in for the round of introductions, why don't you first introduce yourself and then give us an idea of the idea you'd like to put on the table or propose as a topic of conversation? OK, my name is Ivan. I'm from Argentina. I studied advertising. I decided I wanted to be a journalist or an artist, something like that. And I fell into this rabbit hole in the Internet around 2016 with a whole Peterson like a free speech debacle. And I fell in love with the intellectual part of it. I was in a spiritual search and Peterson led me to Paso. Now I'm an orthodox catechumen and like glory to God, man. The only thing I would like to discuss is, I don't know where you see this headed in a cultural sense, maybe in a more like engaged, revitalizing political sense, maybe. When you say this, what do you mean by this? Whatever this is, whatever this, I guess, shift of consciousness means. All right, Antonio, welcome. Why don't you introduce yourself a little bit? You've you've you've been in an estuary meeting before because because we met and we met in Manchester and and then you can you can bid and put your idea on the table. Yeah. So my name's Anthony. I I went and studied physics at university and I had a very materialist point of view. I was brought up with my grandparents as Jehovah's Witnesses. So being quite familiar with Christianity from that perspective, you know, you go to church three times a week for two hours. It was quite intense. But I struggled with a kind of science versus religion as a clash and came across Jordan Peterson as a very, very, very, very, very, on his first Joe Rogan appearance in 2016. And I really liked the the overlapping of science and religion there. So I'll I'll leave it at that. All right. And what idea would you like to put on the table? I don't really have one right now, I'll be honest. I'm enjoying listening. All right. Very good. Well, I think we have our I think we have our eight. So now in this round, I had actually been taking notes here, which is a little easier on the computer than in an estuary meeting where you really have to focus. But I also have to sort of manage the room here. What idea did you hear from someone else that caught your interest that you would, in a sense, like to vote for, at least for the initial topic of conversation for today's group? Eric, you can start. OK, I really like the Sanders idea of everything that he was rummaging on, and that was a kind of interesting scape idea. All right, Dolly, I like the Where is this all going? All right, Zan, what's your all right, Zander? Can I just have to be one? I think I can make them you can. And what happens is people in this round start taking two or three ideas and saying, well, there's some intersection or connection between them. So you can do that. Oh, oh, where did I'm missing the face of Manchester? I yeah, he just he just popped out, I think. Oh, OK. You know, with this with this platform, we're going to see how how people manage to do it. So, OK, so that was the he was he mentioned he was interested in the overlapping of science and religion, even though he didn't say that was his topic. And then Ivan said, where is this all going? Right. So and I think that you could sort of say where where is where is this overlapping of this overlap of science and religion? Where is where is it all going? And, you know, maybe tie into the change in consciousness stuff into that conversation as well. OK. Conscience stuff, sorry. OK. OK. All right. Yes. I got it. Oh, gosh. So much going on there. I mean, yeah, I wish I knew where it was all going to, you know, so it's self identification there. Oh, like. But yeah, I mean, how do we? I'm sorry, I like I'm trying to synthesize too many too many different points here. Yeah, yeah. Yeah. And Kara is sharing about agency and just like that. How do we know who we like? Calvinists like I mean, like how much do we really get to choose how to do anything? Gosh, which, you know, I was firmly against predestination until I had kids. Then I had kids and it completely changed. But the. But. But yeah, I got a question of agency, I think is a lot. It's a big one, too. OK. All right, Michael. Well, yeah, kids definitely bring out that total depravity thing, that's for sure. It starts really quick. I think, you know, but I would definitely say, you know, where is this? Where is this going is kind of, you know, I was I was approaching that question from the standpoint, from the standpoint of the church in instead of this little corner specifically. But I also think it really an important part of that discussion is some of what we kind of was saying about tradition, because when you have people converging from different groups, there's so many traditions. So that's a big part of how we make things work. Dealing with difference in tradition. All right, Ivan. Did you guys watch the last video that Peugeot made with this Orthodox priest where they talked about this idea of the Son of Man and they connected like Peugeot wanted to use this concept of the Son of Man to try to bridge the gap with the idea of like principalities being sort of servants of men and also being the rulers, like trying to not like make this relationship opaque to to like to allow synergy between man and God. Like that's that's the only thing like like I want to like know what you guys think regarding this like topic of consciousness and and because I think that like we aren't like even though spirits do like hide what they're really about in a sense, we couldn't be responsible for following them if we weren't like expected to know where they would lead eventually. Like there has to be like a like a a blindness that is not blindness in a sense. I don't know if it makes any sense. Would heliology be a good word? All right, Anthony, from the from the topics on the table, what what sounded interesting to you? So I've got a question when we said, where is this all going? What do we mean by this? Because there's there's a lot of different ways of taking that. If it's specifically estuary. I'm very interested in that. What's kind of the long term view of estuary? OK, well, I think I think a consensus has sort of emerged around where is this all going? But I think Anthony, you know, also nicely highlighted that there's there's a lot of question as to what this is. And I think that that does does connect a bit into Ivan's question of spirit. And so maybe it seems to me that we sort of have at least an initial consensus around that. So, yeah, let's let's start there. So where is this all going and what do we mean by this? So that's now now basically at this point in the conversation, we just open it right up for free flow conversation. So just unmute yourself and let's jump in. So the the this is we sort of said was was estuary, but I think that Ivan had something a little bit bigger than that in mind. And I just to bring it in, like what I've been writing about is the dialogos versus dialectic and talking about because because that really hit home, especially the last conversation that Viveki and Pajot had, where, you know, they they're talking about dialogos and comparing it to oppositional processing. And that really clicked for me because oppositional processing is how you how in and in artificial intelligence, we find the frame of a problem. So it's the ability to solve an irregular or or unusual and ill-defined problem like the mind being problem, the problem of meaning. And who am I? What should I do? This problem is an ill-defined problem. This problem is an ill-defined problem. And it's sort of the essence of of consciousness. And I think that Christianity is psychotechnology that allows us to solve that problem better. So what was so if I wanted to lately sort of coin, where is this all going? Is I think that this discovery of dialogos is what, you know, is fundamental to to estuary and what estuary is building is trying to build that dialogos. In fact, that dialogos effect and what dialogos allows us to do and why is it so keen is it's the process of discernment, right? It's a process of discerning, which is which is sort of like rational, but it's what we're built to do. It's it's it's it's praising God, right? It's that it's that worshiping effect where we're actually discerning what the good is. So to bring it back to dialogo, dialogos is the process of discernment between people so we can actually better understand ourselves. But understand the person as well and also understand the relationship between us. It builds this this the system of of of self regulation, right? I always talked about the opposition processing where we we find the frame of things and then we understand them. We understand how what they are and and what is the most meaningful for them to do. And if if there's if there's forces that block this, then we end up in a meaning crisis and an identity crisis. We end up anxious. We end up depressed and we end up in clown world, right? Because we're losing the frame of who we are and what we're doing. And all this irrelevant stuff pours in what Revecky calls BS, right? Pours into our frame. And then we don't know how to distinguish anything one thing from another. And we and our world fills up with the irrelevant because we've lost our frame of what is meaningful and what is essential to who we are. Right. So and I, you know, I've been doing a lot of Bible studies lately. And I think that, you know, Christ's message, fundamentally, I can make the argument was teaching people how to play dialogue. Dialogues, the the when they the the Jews, when they were expecting the Messiah, we're expecting him to free the Romans from with an army. And what what what does the Messiah do instead when he comes back? He he talks to people, right? He teaches them how to have meaningful conversations, how to discern the good, how to get the irrelevant, the irrelevant nonsense out of their lives, how to get the demons away from them, or how to how to how to hold on to what is good, what is beautiful and what is true. So where's this all going? I think that I would what is this? I would say it's the great remembering, right? That we're we're remembering, we're finally remembering what Christ taught us. And as Christians, we're coming back to that, you know, in a in a way, we we haven't for quite some time. So I think you put that very beautifully, Xander. And there's quite a lot to process there. I'm noticing a lot of his language. There was a lot of emphasis on Christianity. And so I really appreciate you bringing that. But I sometimes struggle to see things through a Christian perspective. I can appreciate it, but I don't know how much I see through that lens. All right. I could strip away some of the Jesus there and get more verveky if you want me to. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. OK. So going into the the the the meaning being problem, right? So Verbecky talks about us being in a meaning crisis, right? So finding what's meaningful, partly because he doesn't want to get into the whole meaning of of of life or meaning of of consciousness. He wants to talk about meaning in in life, right? But if we're if we're evolved, then we you know, there's there's sort of a telos to evolution. There's a purpose why why you have different things. So why do we have consciousness? Well, it's because we are these intelligent beings. And since we're intelligent, we can do all sorts of different things at a time. Right. And if I can just jump in one second. So my understanding for telos of evolution is quite reductionist, but it's kind of very focused on reproduction and just continuing things. Is there more to it than that? I yeah, we could say that. It doesn't really matter for this debate, right? Because we're talking I'm talking about specifically we have you could say it's just for reproduction and you have all these, you know, they have all these different features like you have birds develop wings for reproduction. Right. Well, you can also develop consciousness for for reproduction. Right. And let me let me jump in. The question is, what what is consciousness for? Like, what's the purpose of consciousness? Because this is the very it's a great thing that Pajol pointed out, which is once you make the consciousness look at itself, then something very weird happens where you start to try to define what the world is. And what what I see lacking in Verbeck is like like formulation is that he always like tries to define the higher from the lower. And in so doing, forgets the limitation of being a human being. And he expects nature to already like constrain those boundaries by themselves. But he doesn't realize that that's what modernity does constantly. It it it expects reality to reveal itself to you instead of you conform to reality in a way that is true, which is in a way the difference between pride and humility, because pride would would mean to say something like, I know what reality is and I'm going to define it. And humility does the opposite thing, which is I will try to receive reality as it discloses itself to me, but I will not try to define it before. Like, and I think that's why Jesus like invited Judas to the to the table. It's like, I'm not going to cast outside of of of the possibility of humans making mistakes, because that is inherent to what humanity is. But that doesn't mean that like we shouldn't try to do what's right. But it means that we are free in our perception to perceive something that is not true. And like that being part of the game we're we're trying to play, which is like. Let's aim for truth, let's aim for like like Adam being what he was supposed to be. And I'm sorry if I'm falling into like too much of a like a Christian frame, but that's like I think it's inevitable that anything you say, anything you do, any way you frame reality, you're already responsible for that. So the constraints are not going to come from the outside. Like if you think they're going to come from the outside, you're you're diluting yourself and you're imposing your view of reality onto reality. So that's what I think the postmoderns were writing, critiquing about modernity. It's like whenever you you you put up a frame, you you better make damn sure it's the right frame, because if not, you're always going to leave a margin that is going to destroy the system. Yeah, OK, let's let's let's let's swing back a little bit here. We started out with where is this all going? And we things got very abstract very quickly, which isn't a bad thing. But that that certainly is something about where this does go. So I want to bring in some more of the voices in this before we get too far afield from that, at least initial question. I just think that what I hear is a lot without a narrative and without a story. And I think that narrative is what people like Peugeot. And even in his own way, people like Peterson are reaching for. They aren't just describing the they aren't just describing scattershot points of data in the universe, and Peugeot specifically is trying to say, no, this is all part of a story. And so. That's where I start losing interest in what for Vicky has to say when you're talking to me about this sort of nature, and I want to say, no, no, no, hold on back What is the story that we're all what is the story that you're telling me? And how how do you relate? How do you relate to that story? What part are we all playing in this? Much better put than I could have said it, Dolly. I'm sitting here loonering. Is that short for nerds? Decidedly. Well, I mean, it's a precondition. Yeah. But like in a serious sense, you know, like, like, it's very easy for us to get kind of caught in our own sorts of echoed chambers, you know, just in the sense that, I mean, not even right wing, left wing. But, you know, if you're college educated, you hang around college educated people. There's a tendency for things like that. As I listen to all this, I think what Dolly pointed out in terms of way forward, like storytelling is something that can work at any level. Like, I cannot. I can really follow the needle play in his dialogues, and I certainly can't explain them to my friends who speak English as a second language and don't have a high school education. You know, and I do. I mean, there are some, you know, where I live, you know, in a very mixed community. I can't tell them stories. And so the power of story there is, I think, and the rest are really onto something with that, and I don't know how you try to. Well, I guess I mean, that's part of what the project is right now, right? It's trying to take all of these really complex ideas and telling the story that's, you know, that's actually harder than the complex ideas. Looking for a common language to do it. Yeah, looking for a common language. That's actually the challenge here, though, is like I sent that the language to do it in narrative is the Bible. Right. That's that's the that's the language. Christianity is doing the explanation of of of of the purpose of life, of of of of where we're where we're going with this, right through the Bible. But San Antonio challenged me to make it more verveci, which is going to make it more more abstract. But I mean, if you want to take it like where we can see dialogous, see how where does the heart of Christianity is is in the arrangement of the Trinity itself. Right. It's if you actually look at, you know, look at early images, maybe Paul could bring these up. But of of Christ, of of the Trinity and how and how it interacts with itself is you'll see it's it's a conversation between the father and the son. And the Holy Spirit is then the emanation that comes from that that that conversation, which is usually portrayed as a as a dove, right, a dove with the halo around it, that is, that projection is the connection of the Holy Spirit. So even like so at the core of Christianity, and I think I would argue the innovation of Christ fulfilling the law is that instead of having a static law, you have instead know the law is dynamic. It is this conversation between the father and the son and which creates the Holy Spirit, which which guides us. So is is the is the tell us of this thing, an image or a paragraph or a an arrangement and a pattern of living human beings doing something in incarnate space? The tell us of what, Paul? The tell us of well, in some ways, if you look at all the different topics that came on that came here, the the we've got a theory of everything. So that's whoosh. It's way big. Where is this going? This this little this little estuary thing or this little corner of the Internet or whatever it is that's been happening between Peterson and Peugeot and Vervecky and all the all the characters here in some ways. And then you get into the whole question of meaning in life. You know, John Vervecky wants to take it a step back, not talk about what is the meaning of life, which is sort of the biggest possible frame, but meaning in life, which sort of contains it within, let's say, a secular box. And so, you know, very quickly, you know, the talk, you know, what we were doing here. And I think this is partly a bias of the medium is things got abstract and thinky talky and then, you know, OK, well, let's let's just pause that. Let me kind of checked back down to narrative, which tends to then involve human beings and fabric and pens and these kinds of things in order to sort of put heaven and earth back together. And and so then then we have the Trinity. So I'm just following the conversation and also looking at some of the other topics that were put on the table level of personal responsibility in terms of is our other spirits, let's say, working through me or do I have the capacity to say, hey, wait a minute, I'm going to say no to that spirit and I'm going to do something else. But then you have the question of, well, what exactly is that something else that's coming in on me? Does that say another spirit coming up through me that I'm unaware of? So, you know, I'm just trying to sort of, you know, and then I think Anthony very much said, you know, OK, where is this going? And it could be this conversation. It could be the relationship that either of us that all of us have with each other. It can be it can be a lot of different elements there. I really liked what Dali said earlier about narratives and I hope it isn't too much of a tangent, but I think it's interesting. And it's more maybe it's more of a question, but what is the story of estuary and what's the story of where it's going? And there could be some very Christian perspective stories, but yeah. I think that people are on estuary because they are asking themselves the same sorts of questions, even if they are answering it, I guess you can think of it as people speaking all in their native languages and then everyone working together to try to find a common language in which to ask, who are we? What part of the story are we in? What's going on around me? How do I make sense of what's going on around me? What's real? And that's why people gather in this kind of place. And we think that Paul has something interesting and the people who gather around him have something interesting and they at the very least touch on something that we said, no, I think he has a point there. And what what he's saying, even from his experience, is reflected in what I see and what I take to be true. And here they are telling stories about this Jewish carpenter 2000 years ago, some of what they say has resonance. But I'm not sure if I can go with everything they said about that guy. But let's follow along and see to what extent it makes sense. I think that underneath all the human experiences, there is like actual basic human needs and the experiences and the languages and the frames and the stories, all of this are like filters which review the world from. And I like what Dali says, what is actually happening? Like if you would remove all the all the like filters, let's say from that are based on our stories or our previous experience, what is actually going on, where am I in that story, what exactly do I want? Like do I want to be? Yeah. So. If I could just add to that, when you said removing the filters, I think it's also interesting selecting the filters. And someone said earlier about the way that you're framing it is your responsibility and so being able to put on someone else's filter. Oh, OK. I'm now seeing things in a different way than what I'm used to. So as well as removing trying to start to interrupt. Yeah, no, no, no, you didn't. Actually, generally the most interesting ideas arrive not from people being in the same bubble, but receiving different opinions, contrary and even if I could jump in on that, it's because there's two key features to dialogs, right, and you can see them in in First Corinthians 13. Right. The first one is is it to be in the spirit of Christ, which means to be searching for the truth, right, searching for what is true, what is beautiful and and and what is good. The second is and this is this is the one that people get hung up on because they're not seeing it. It's an oppositional processing is that there has to be opposition, that you have to have different points of view, right. And that's that's that's key in oppositional processing. And then to put it abstract, it's key in discerning the truth as well, because if we agree on everything, there's nothing to talk about. If we are if we're not up, if we're we don't agree on anything, if we don't agree, there's no common ground and we become adversarial. We just end up fighting with each other. Right. We need to there needs to be there needs to be a some overlap, but not entirely overlap. So you have to. Yeah. So so so two perspectives, two tensions, right. Steel sharpening steel. But but also this idea of the spirit of charity where we're we're listening to each other, but we're also incorporating what we're also speaking as well. We're not we're unafraid to speak, but we're also unafraid to listen. And when you when you speak, I incorporate what you say into into what I'm doing. And that as that that's that process of shaving because it's not just bringing in new ideas, it's also as as Peterson talks about burning away the dead wood, right, fighting away, cutting down until you get to the truth. I am not aware what I stand for until I hear a contrarian idea. Actually, it's like a Rorschach test. It's like before that, the contrarian idea just doesn't exist in my head. But the moment I hear it, oh, I know what I stand for. I stand for the opposite of what you are just expressed. I mean, I don't mean specifically, but generally that's that that's how our imagine our brain is that thought you put different ideas and whatever comes out, the shape of it is who you are. Basically, but got a Michael. Yeah. How how committed are you to each position you take, especially knowing that you can change your position and what I would say is like I wouldn't identify myself with any single position I ever take in my life because I can always change. And there's more positions than there is really me. I would say that like the constraints are are more interesting in the sense that it's like looking for hierarchy in a sense, in a way it's looking for what I cannot change any longer for what what remains, what what will stop changing. And there you have a commitment which bumps into the reality of whatever you think is true, hoping that it's really true. And like what you were saying about identifying yourself with what you feel like it's right, I think that's a more romantic notion of of being like in a sense, it's true that you're giving yourself to that idea. But I would say if that were true, then I don't think we could ever change from our preconceived notions, so like we would be always repeating ourselves whenever we see something other to define ourselves against it. So it's like we already know who we are. And I would say, no, we fundamentally don't know who we are until we arrive to something which is true, which is outside of us. And I think that's the like that's the path that leads us to growth instead of like retreating into, no, I feel this, I feel that whenever I see that, because your feelings can change. True, true. I, Ivan, I'm not disagreeing with you more. I'm talking about the creative process, but in the process of growth, somebody joined or left. There was this absolutely fascinating interview between Jordan and Andrew Huberman. I'm a fan of both of them. I like I watch all of their podcasts. And Andrew talked about expectations and losing a piece of paper on the beach. And then he said the moment he lost that paper on the beach, his dopamine levels dropped and he went into a ringer of thinking, am I bad, am I old? Like he went through that entire thing and then it changed the moment he found the paper. He's like he immediately got redeemed. Yes, I'm actually good. And it's predestination. Everything depended on that one piece of paper, even though he's a neuroscientist and he knows that it has a chemical basis like and hormonal basis. Yet still it happened to him. He's a human being. And I do believe and to which Jordan replied, it's very important to judge locally. So, Ivan, I agree with you. It's very important to just locally whatever we receive in our cooker, cooker, whatever, and then we decide, yes, that's what what I am behind, that that is who I am. Those are my ideas. You have to remember it's locally to that particular day tomorrow. Everything might change. And I am behind it like today locally. If I hear something I disagree with today, I might change it tomorrow. That's absolutely true. The way I understood what Kara had said earlier might not be exactly what she'd said was sometimes I don't realize I'm within a perspective until I come across a different perspective. And that kind of makes me aware of, oh, like it even is a perspective that I'm within. Oh, OK. And maybe initially, you know, you're focused on, oh, well, this is why my perspective is correct. But, you know, over time, you question that tension between the two. You start to find a midpoint, maybe. And I really like this story. I think it's an Indian story of this five blind men. And they come across this weird object and they find, you know, one of them thinks it's like a tree, one of them thinks it's like a wall. And then someone comes along and goes, oh, no, it's an elephant. Right. And you've each just found a different part of it. But of course, the story only works if you know what an elephant is. Oh, yeah. But can you guys tell me? This is Richard and Richard wasn't in at the beginning, but I let Richard in. Richard's a pretty common person here. Richard is now a student at a Christian University in Southern California. And go ahead, Richard. I just wanted to give a little bit of background to who you are. Cool. So I guess my question at this point is when we when we enter into an estuary meeting, is the goal more refinement of our own perspective and our own views? Or is it synthesis? Because synthesis of our different views into something we can all inhabit, because we all come in with our worldview. And I grant you that the worldviews have to overlap somewhat for the conversation to occur, but is our goal to increase the overlap or is the goal to exchange and trade such that we can separate again and have better worldviews that are still distinct from one another? And I think that's a tension we're having with estuary. It's like what are we aiming for? As a Christian, I object to the word synthesis, because I think that's that is Hegelian, because we're not trying to synthesize something, right? We're not trying to create God. We are trying to discern God. God has a plan. Jesus has a plan for us. And the problem is that we're all full of sin and we need to find that plan. There is a hierarchy of being that is harmonious. So we're not just seeking. We're not just like we are refining ourselves, but we're also finding for the estuary, we're finding the estuaries of form. Christ planned for the estuaries. And we're not we're not putting something and building something together. We are we are we are bringing our different perspectives in. And because each of us has a piece of the good, each of us has a piece of what's beautiful and true, but it's all messed up with this goop, right? The sin. And we're burning. We're bringing it together to try and figure out, well, what is what is Christ actually plan for us here? Right. So it's not synthesis. Synthesis is what's getting into trouble. Yeah, I would say I would say that that very much depends on what Jesus Christ would have happened at this time anyway. And each of us can only come in with his own interest in trying to hue to what we each take to be the true and the good and the beautiful and what the tailors of this is. And then that to the extent. You know, I mean, everybody has his own plan for what's going to happen and then what happens happens. And you can only have come into it with sufficient softness of heart and sufficient humility. And maybe you're having a bad day that day, but somehow an alchemy happened that is beyond your own integrity and your own ability to express yourself. And what's happening above all of us. In the universe at any moment, and then if you can have tried your best. And it have come out better than your wild wildest expectations or totally crashed and burned because nobody mashed. So I think there's I think that there is agency in each of us. And then there is what's God's pleasure. That's how I would call it. Richard, if I may, like, I think it's both in a sense, they they don't they're not they're not mutually exclusive in the sense that, like, it's singularity and multiplicity joined together. And I think that is both within God and it's within man in the sense that we're limited. Like, I wanted to to to share a story because I think about stories a lot. Being a writer and one thing that struck me really, really deep is the way that medieval knights thought about Mary, because medieval knights are in a way we have a vision of them, of them being vicious, like thugs. And that was partially true. But what makes what makes a knight like this romanticized vision of what what man could be if they decided to be noble. And it's sort of like an interplay between like choosing the greatest challenge and also choosing the smallest challenge in the sense that the greatest challenge, you're not going to be able to to conquer it. And the smallest challenge is a place where you where you can find purchase for your love, like where you can actually live out the love that that you can manage. So in that sense, I would say, like, I think Mary is in a way an image for whatever, in a way, become can become opaque to to God's light and whatever can become transparent to God's light in that sense. Like, I think it's it's something that has to do in a sense with authority and in a sense with like, where are you within the hierarchy, where are you within the the the challenge that is presenting itself to you for you to be able to discern the challenge at its right level? So you're not always trying to do more. You're not trying to buy more than you can chew. And you're not doing less than you could. In a sense, I think that's where like singularity and multiplicity meet, because that's what you can offer and what's expected of you at the same time. I thought you were going to tell us a story. That was the story. That's not a story. I'm talking about a story. Everything was a story that there is a motion going on in this conversation. Right. So we were going from one direction. Ivan talked about multiplicity and singularity. Right. And so so there is a frame that we're trying to find when we have the motion between multiplicity and singularity. And I'm going to bring it back to remember I was talking about the conversation. Diologos is a conversation of the Trinity. But it also is a conversation has a back and forth motion, but also a beating heart has that motion, too, right, of of in and out, in and out, right. Concentrate, eccentric motion. Whereas the dialectic, right, the motion of Hegelianism is this spinning wheel, right, where it's this one going around and maybe it's somehow going through history, but usually I think it's stuck in the mud. But this motion of in and out is what we're looking for. Right. Because that is what if I get into the verveky before losing everyone again, is like, is your zooming, you think of it moving, moving in, you're looking, you're looking for Christ and we can zoom in and zoom out of that map to find him where he is in the map. Right. And that's that's what oppositional processing does, finds that ideal frame of where we should be with the resolution of zooming in and zooming out. Now, I would. Now, when we've used the word dialogos quite a few times and I think it's helpful to just pause and, you know, a little bit of Greek, so Dia. So Greeks have this preposition. If you sort of Google sort of the spatial and image of the spatial relationships of Greek prepositions, Dia is through. And Logos is well, what are we talking about with the Logos? Logos is now this is sort of this it's the logic. It's this another way, sort of a metaphor to get out. It's it's an it's a thread. It's an interpretive thread that moves through the seeming cacophony of disparate parts of reality as we're going through. And so when in first, John, the Logos becomes flesh, you know, now suddenly this rather abstract idea of a narrative thread that brings order out of chaos, then comes into human flesh. I mean, that's a that's just a that's just a mind blowing statement in and of itself. And then to make it about a historical human being is, you know, it's basically saying that Jesus Christ, this man is the interpretive key of all of existence. I mean, it's it's one astounding thing to say that no one would ever really dare say of great teachers, you know, nobody would ever say that, as C.S. Lewis pointed out of Mohammed or the Buddha. And so this process of the Logos is you've got some opponent processing. And I think, you know, I think Kara nicely noted that in many ways we often don't discover ourselves until we find something else. A friend of mine who is a Mormon homeless guy, his favorite line out of the Book of Mormon is there must be opposition in all things. And it's a really clever statement. And and so through, you know, through this deal, Logos, where we're with some opponent processing, we're sort of testing things as we go mentally so that, you know, our thoughts can die instead of the people around us, we're testing things mentally and we're we're looking for the threat. And so to come back to this question where we sort of started is where is this going, which is a pretty open ended question. We're looking for a thread that is going to be an interpretive key. And then we can ask, why are we looking for this thread? Usually we're getting a lot of fuzz from somebody. So if you're not talking yourself, just there we go. So we're looking for this interpretive thread. Why are we looking for this interpretive thread? We're looking for this interpretive thread in order to do a bunch of different things in order to participate, perhaps in order to control, in order to predict. We're we're we're trying all of that in order to in some ways meaningfully engage, participate in this massive thing that's going on. And and so so even a question like where is this all going? Very much asks questions of many of the other. I think that's part of the reason we sort of landed on it from the seven questions that were that were six questions that really put on the table about tradition, because tradition very much asks, what is the source that has brought us to this place about agency? Do I actually have can I actually achieve meaningful participation in this thread that is making that is bringing me a vision of order out of chaos? So, yeah, that's that's part of what I'm seeing in this. And we desire this. What I what I was going to say when you said you didn't tell a story was this is the story to me, it's like we're always trying to say the word, the right word, to say the word, that is enough to to to manifest Jesus to to every single person we meet, but we cannot control whether we do it or not. So like we cannot presuppose that we are giving the other Jesus that we're saying the right word, that we are like, speaking magic and like we're always still in our hearts trying to be good to the other. It's like we simply don't have a handle on it, like we cannot possess that ever. So it's like it's like a never it's like it's like the stairs, you know, the the ladder to heaven, it's like we're always trying to to reach and to speak and to manifest Christ the best we can. But in the end, like we're fallible human beings. And I think that's the meaning of the story of the Green Knight. Like the Green Knight is like this is supposed to be like a very virtuous knight. But in the end, he fails. Why does he fail? Because he's human, like he wants to remain alive. Like and that's like and in a sense that doesn't diminish him. It means he's not Christ himself. But like we can still see him try and strive for greatness. And strive for good. And that's enough. And that makes him like able to be a part of the of the rest of the Knights who take on his shame with him and it becomes glory. It becomes OK. Forgiveness. Like I forgive you. You tried your best and you failed. But like I see what you were doing, man. I think that there that there's actually like we're always we're always we're going to fail. We're always going to be imperfect while we're in this life. But we do have the gift of the Holy Spirit, which puts guardrails onto us. Like if we're connected to the Holy Spirit, we can do a much better job of of finding the good and the beautiful and true, not only in ourselves, in our actions, but in in in in our relationships with other people and helping other people as well. Right. So and that's because I mean, again, the the Holy Spirit manifests in two ways. It manifests like St. Michael zeal and faith, but it also manifests as Gabriel, right, as as as as hope and mercy. Right. And those and it if we we can use that as like a game of of like when we're connected to the Holy Spirit, we can use that as sort of a game of warm or colder. And and and of reading the situations and finding Christ's path. Right. So that actually becomes the indicator of how we find the truth. The beautiful is is like that game of warm or colder. In my in my do I need to be more hopeful? Do I need to open up to new possibilities to the multiplicity of things now? OK, or or is the Holy Spirit now pulling pulling me in the direction of, oh, I need to find what's I have to I have to cut back now, I have to have faith about what I'm doing and I have to move back towards unity and singularity, some some of this some of this stuff is that I'm following is false hope that has to go into the lake of fire or be shadows that need to be evaporated by the light of God. Right. Then that's what that's that pulling back that that that that contraction, right. The heart contracting and then the heart expanding is the whole heart expanding is the hope that that there's there's some possibilities that I've overlooked. Well, what you said was really beautiful, but what if I don't feel the Holy Spirit? Yes, that's the question. That's that's something that's what you have to that's what Christianity has to work and if you want to put in for Vecchi for Vecchi language and, you know, back to the meaning crisis, I'm not going to go deep into it. But he talks about being in the zone, right? He has a lot of time for it, right? But basically finding its own. That's that's that's a state of grace, right? That's have knowing like what you're what you need to do being on that that peripheral of knowing what you need to do and what the right action is to to connect and engage with people. And it's like just like those shamans that he talks about in his first couple of lectures, like we're still doing the same thing in Christianity, but in a much more sophisticated and powerful way that that we need to learn to tap into. I would push back against it because that sidesteps the question of whether this is something merely mental or internal or spiritual or if it does manifest through like more fleshly ways. Like I would say, is it only ever in our heads or is it really in our hierarchies, in our real lives, in our social lives? Like I would say that there's more grace in the Holy Spirit when I obey whatever my spiritual father says, without ever even thinking about this, rather than seeing if I'm feeling OK with whatever is happening, because I've felt the flow state doing really awful stuff, too, so it's not like like like I have to be honest. It's not just an internal thing. It's it's whether you can trust the other person to be Christ when you need them to be Christ, it's like and that's something that you have to let go of because you cannot ever know the other person fully. So in that sense, I would say there's more grace in you trusting and the other person like. I don't know, betraying you than in you evaluating their concepts and their ideas and seeing if they jive with you, because maybe you're jiving with something that is really bad for you, but you're not noticing it. And I'm not trying to say, like, just be obedient. I'm trying to say there's an interplay between authority and you. And sometimes people who are above you, like your parents are like going to make mistakes and you're going to have to step up. And the problem would be like, let's say your father is sick and you're going to have to step up and your father is going to have to take it. If they're too proud to accept your help, then that reflects that on them. It's not. But you're going to have to step up. And if you're not going to if you're not able to ever like shift your role, then you didn't love them. You're I think you can say if you're over overemphasized of solving the flow state and one problem, you're not doing it right. It's really you're lining up the hierarchy of being right. So if you're really moved by the Holy Spirit, you're going to be solving multiple problems at once. You're not just going to be solving one problem in your own life. You're going to be moving the entire world back into this harmony of being right. So it's it's it's yes, you could be in the whole thing, just one one aspect of your life, and that that can become an excess. But it's about moving everything back into into a harmonious hierarchy. So, Shane, what is talking about and Karen? Don't know. Yeah. Oh, no, I was going to say that what Ivan made me think of is that we Christians really should always have a conflict of interest. Disclaimer at the beginning of every conversation, because I think it's not possible for us with any kind of integrity to engage in these disembodied conversations about what is or whatever. Because at any given moment, I'm going to say, like if I'm talking to Antonio, I'm going to say, look, be honest with you, Antonio. I'm not I'm never going to I'm never going to be sneaky and and try to win you over to Christ ever. I'm just going to tell you this. This is this is the disclaimer I'm going to say. I'm going to say, Antonio, the best thing that I have to give to you, what I think is true is is Jesus Christ. We can talk about we can talk about how abstracted from that. I think that this is a water pitcher. And here are the ways that I that I know that it is a water pitcher. And what I think you should do with a water pitcher. And we can try to agree on criteria for that. I'm just going to let you know, my funding is coming from Jesus Christ, think. And that is where and that and so. And I will also be honest with you. I hope that someday that what the way that I the way that I relate to you, Antonio, shows something that you're interested in. And I'm going to say. Quite honestly, my secret sauce is that and I don't think I can come to it apart from that relationship. And so that is that is what I have to disclose with everything in all our interactions. I hope someday you're interested in that and not going to push it on you, but I hope that that I'm living in a way that puts you close enough to that to want what I have. And that's always going to be an ulterior motive in the back of my head. Thank you. I appreciate that. Yeah, I really appreciate that. Thank you. I think that was very well said. Shane, Shane was waving his hand. I don't know where to start because there's so many different rabbit trails here, but there seems to be this common desire to to capitalize on the richness of conversation that comes when there is a a pretext of trust and mutual respect. And yet that doesn't come readily to people who don't have a pretty solid foundation, a sense of their own durability. And so since the estuary space is familiar with it as I am, which isn't fantastic, is a challenge because like what Zander was talking about with this, like pulsing in and out to try to try to do that relevance realization, like what is possible for a group as they're discussing, like because we want to get at the things that are meaningful and those things are always connected to vulnerability, like exposing. So the challenge that I see is that there's so much time spent in the propositional space, and I think you talked about that with one of the one of the interviews that you just released, Paul, is that like the dominance of that propositional. And you are probably the most experienced of us here in the room, Paul, with regard to the role that other ways of knowing, like the non propositional ways can rightly and wrongly open people up to trusting one another, like in like spiritual ritual or whatever. I imagine that Peugeot's even got other techniques that are exclusive to his faith practice. But Jesus, being an example that we're all familiar with, came into his relationships with a it seems like almost a policy of staying as far from propositional interaction as he could get. He was going to very, you know, define that, could I ask you to define propositional interaction? I want to make making like, oh, goodness. Yeah, that's a great question, because I find it really hard to to say what he used examples that could be that were already known. He wasn't trying to educate people in an academic way. I think that like when he walked on the road after resurrection with the two dudes and he's trying to explain to them how the Old Testament had had foretold the things that he would do and how it matched what they had just been through. I think that that was something like academic education that he was giving them. And so maybe he maybe I can't impose on Jesus a rejection of propositional interaction, but the things that I see in the Bible are primarily him in acting like and like like we need to see the miracle, we need to feel the love and. I just imagine that that's terribly difficult in a room with such unknown capacity and experience. Where do we find common ground? And even once we do find common ground. We there's this there's this need to stay open to something emergent rather than driving toward a goal, like I know that there's this exception where I I appreciate the the podcasts or whatever the interviews where they're not just randomly talking about stuff, but they have a goal. I think for Vickie is really good at kind of keeping people on a topic. And even in this conversation, I'm like, oh, my God, what are these people talking about? It's just all over the place. So I have a story. I have a story that I think illustrates what you're trying to say. I started a book club and what I found is as much as you would like to get everyone to participate equally, that just doesn't happen. Even when I ask people each to come with a question and we've all read the same book and I ask people to come with a question, if I don't, if I don't solicit it. But then I have to prepare by having read the book. I have to prepare also by having solicited everybody's question. I have to have I have to have people coming to the table with a readiness to expose some part of themselves to a group they trust. And then I have to be committed to pulling from each person. The question that each person had, and then also I have to I end up interviewing people. If I don't do that. It gets into a lot of sort of paddling on to the surface and a lot of personal and then it just evolves into personal anecdote. So if you don't find the sort of the uniting thread that everyone can respond to in a different way and each from a different direction, then nothing, nothing happens. But then when we are able to find that thread and we are able to come with that openness, then all sorts of things are possible. I'm sorry, this is going to be super disgusting. But what even is a proposition? I've never seen a proposition ever. Like if somebody came to me and said to me, let's swap wives. I will not consider that as a proposition. It's like you're responsible. Every single proposition is incarnate in a sense. There are no abstract propositions. That's just modernity. Like telling you, you can look at things from an abstract universal plane. Like where is the proposition? If I tell you, let's have anal sex. It's just a proposition. And you and you beat the crap out of me. You are right. And I was wrong. It's not just a proposition. You see, so I just I want to bring it back to what Dahlia and Shane were saying. Yeah, I heard it from anal sex. So yeah, I'm bringing it back and I'm going to say and I'm going to tie into something Paul talked about earlier about dialogos, the meaning of dialogos. I think that dialogos, he's talking about the die meaning through. But there's also I think there's this sense of two as well. Right. And what we're talking about, the oppositional part of it. And if you look in Matthew 18 20, there is the verses when two or three are gathered in my name, I am among them. Now, this is often paraphrased as two or more in various situations. But I don't think Matthew is a guy that you should be paraphrasing. He was a tax collector. He was known for being very precise in his language. And when he says two or three, I think he really does mean two or three are gathered in my name. And so and that's because you need to get out of the cacophony. You need to get if the multiplicity is too big, then you end up in cacophony. And you and you know, you lose the sermon of the truth and you get into the situation that Shane's talking about is like, we're just all talking past each other because we can't we don't have the unity. We don't we can't as much as we want to engage in the spirit of charity, we can't possibly listen to a conversation being pulled apart in so many different directions. So you need to really have to have the dialogos to have the discernment, you need to be able to set things up and arrange them in in in a way where you have sort of two sides in opposition. Now, you can do that as an individual with you engaging with the word of God. And that's still that, too. You can do that having a conversation with a friend over coffee. You can maybe pull in the word of God and there's your three. But you can also do that in the in in the gathering in in in a mass or a service where you have the congregation and the pastor, right, where the congregation is acting as a one. And then you can also have that dialog. Or you can have it as we are now in estuary where all these steps that Paul has laid out is are trying to focus the conversation and find unity. So so even if you have a larger group than just two people, you can still participate in create dialogos. OK, let's let's Kara and Makana wanted to get in there. So both of them. OK, I will fight for my place. So my kind of although I kind of feel bad because I want to hear you out, too. I want to come to the YouTube chat. So chatting there was asking for a contrary opinion of bringing an atheist here. I'm not an atheist. But I'm half Muslim child, half Christian. So I got both in the credit both sides and both of my parents were in my house and what and half Christian. So I'm half Tatar and half Estonian kid. And my mom was Tatar, massively Muslim parents, and my dad was Estonian. And let's say like I will I will for the time being drop the association, the Soviet Union, which was a different indoctrination that I had at the time of growing up, let's talk religion. So in the 90s, half Muslim and half Christian was also indoctrinated into New Age thing, which is also my Harishi sect type of thing, so I had to learn everything about everything available at the time. And my opinion on Jesus and Christianity was the most comfortable feeling ever. Honestly, the flow state that Ivan talked about, I felt with the moon. So this pagan kind of thing where I would go out and see the moon and was like, oh, my God, flow state, I'm one with the moon and the child. I was a kid at the moment, so no drugs. But growing up more and knowing theosophy and really both religions pretty well, Muslim and Christian. When things went tough, I would actually go to Christian church and I would pray to Jesus, not to God, but Jesus. For some reason, I decided that that's my guy. And there is some something unspoken in our deep needs where the moment gets really tough. We actually choose who we believe in or what we believe in. And that's referring to theory of everything and openness. Theory first is spoken by Xander and openness by Ivan. I mean, like I'm like I'm I have a problem with being too open to everything, plus a lot of input. I haven't been indoctrinated into any religion so far. So in the YouTube chat, shout out Chad and Alexander and Grimm, like everybody who was asking me about it. Yes, I'm undecided. Yet I deeply researched all of them. And when the things get tough, I do tend to go to Christian church and I do tend to pray to Jesus. For some reason, I don't know why. Yeah, so McKenna. There you go, she set you up. Okay, Paul, Paul, you look so good, dude. I'm so scared. No. So just some thoughts about like. We choose, I mean, our choices are always kind of framed by what we've experienced. Right. And you hit on that earlier. You just like, oh, I didn't know I opposed this until I heard the idea. You know, I didn't I mean, you're choosing between Christianity and Islam because those are I mean, that's what you grew up in, you know, and I'm I'm a pastor like my dad was a pastor, you know, and I've got this sorted out in a way that only comes from the fact that I grew up with it. But so a lot of these are not like intellectual choices. And like after this, I'm going to go surfing. And when I go surfing, I'm going to be around a lot of people who surf and they enter into like it's a one hour block of flow state you have to understand or however long you're out, but them entering into that flow state community is not a religious community per se. But I mean, they got the service, have this hippie reputation for a reason, you know, and there will be people there who just come there every morning because they're retired and even if they don't paddle out, you know, they're sitting there around the beach talking story and what have you and the community forms around it and experience. And so. So it's good to sit. I mean, it's fine to be sitting here online having conversations. And I want to experience this. And so I'm not out surfing right now, but the dissimilar rather be surfing, you can say I'm holding out. I'm holding out. Because conversations are their own flow. Well, why go into that? I mean, get dig into that a little bit more, because I think that's a lot. I mean, we've got all the thinky talky stuff going on here. And, you know, even despite the references to anatomy that Ivan made, I think part of his point was about propositions that there's a reality. And when you're surfing in the community, something is happening there. Well, going back to like the road to Emmaus, you know, Luke, the researcher, you know, just says, oh, yeah, Jesus had this great argument for how all the old all the Bible together. I'm not going to tell you it. They walked in the eight. Take a moment to consider that. So if something that came from the conference when I was talking to Pajot, because I was hammering him on a bit on evil and the garden and we were talking about the grasp, the grasping. And he came up and I think he brought it into the final talk about the connecting the bronze serpent in numbers to concentric change and the green serpent in the garden and Eden in Genesis into eccentric change, right, and that there's two again. And I'm bringing in the motion of the heart, the beating heart, the back and forth of a conversation that both are necessary for discernment of Christ to find Christ. You have to go between hope and faith, hope and faith, hope and faith back and forth. And when you're what you're zeroing in on is is is is you need both. You need the surfer guys who are in the dream, right, who are in the in the shadowy garden, right, that are that are opening up to all the different possibilities. If you look at I'm not going to bring them the Bible verse this if they're opening up to all the different possibilities, but you also need the the the the people who are on the other side, who are, you know, are John the Baptist pulling you out of the water, break, you know, waking you up from the dream and saying, look, you know, Christ is coming, you know, prepare and and and are then like Saint Michael in spirit of casting the the the false hopes and the bad ideas. And it's the lake of fire, right? So you need that sort of you need that that period of expansion where you're opening up and looking for the new possibilities. That might be where Christ is hiding. And you also need to have that period of contraction where you're eliminating those possibilities, you're you're actually practicing the faith. You're actually doing the thing and not not just doing the theory, but you're doing the practice and testing it out against the world and seeing if it actually works, because the thing that you found in the garden, that that hope that baby in the unlikely baby in the manger is going to be, you know, is going to be what you're looking for if he survives the cross, if he survives the test of faith. Right. That's what the crucifixion is. It's the purest hope coming against the purest test of faith. Right. And then and the thing that emerges from that is what we're looking for. Right. The Holy Spirit, which is what which guides us and connects us. That's part of what Christ promises. And the second is his body and his body is the good, the finite, which is infinite, the good, the the the true and the beautiful that which sustains us, but also sustains our relationships, can sustain our families, can sustain our society. Sunder, but it's always there. They're always together. You're never separating the spirit from the body. The surfer dude is doing is living the life like the practice is always there. You're never not practicing. What I'm not saying is they're separate. I'm saying that there's two there, there are two different gifts. He gives it to him, gives you to him both. But one is this the Holy Spirit is about meaning. It's about actually find, you know, and it's the Holy Spirit is about meaning and the the the body of Christ is about being like Dahlia was asking about before, it's like, you know, finding the things to eat, finding the things that that allow us to exist. That's the the body of Christ. But the meaning is is is the Holy Spirit. All right, we got some others that want to get in on this. So go ahead, Mekanna or Shane to both of you. I can teach you to surf, Sunder. I would really love that. I spent five years living in Japan by the beach and I was like, I never learned to surf and it was one of my biggest life regrets because I was I was literally like 20 minutes away by bicycle. I can teach you to surf and I'm not sure how many people I can initiate into this conversation. And that's where my tension is. That I can there's a lot more that I can do with people, at least in person, than I'm capable of doing are capable of instructing, initiating into this conversation. And that's where my tension is, is how does this go out into the world? Well, we're not, I think, talking people. Well, here's how I do it with my kids, my son, just quickly. And I think turning the surface a good way to do it. But the way I'm doing it with my son is I'm I'm introducing him to prayer by playing catch with him every day for 10 minutes because it's like dialogs. It's like it's it's it's just as in the Trinity, the father and the son interact together, and that's what emerges the Holy Spirit. I engage with my son in a game of catch and we embody that. Right. And that is the form of prayer that I'm using to connect to him. And that's what I'm saying. And that's it's dialogs. It doesn't have to be thinky talky. In fact, a big part of it is is is is is the practice is the faith. And that's one of the reasons why I'm a Catholic is because there is so much richness in the way that we embody the faith with with with mass. We actually go through this enactment where it's not just words. It's actually physical things that we're doing. And we're actually taking the good, the true and the beautiful. And the priest is putting it on my tongue. OK, Shane, you wanted to get in there. Yeah, I was just recognizing and I want to really connect to say that I connected more with the last maybe three sentences you said, Xander, than anything else you said. It's kind of like listening to who's the patterns of my favorite. Yeah, man, that guy can talk for an hour. And I'm like, you just said a whole bunch of things that like as though they're facts and half of them are not even true. And so it wasn't until you said something that was connected to you, Xander, that I was able to connect with it at all until you said, I do this thing. I would have actually never imagined that you even even propositionally believed that doing the thing was to enact the prayerful, spiritual, soulful connection. Like, I'm I'm so like almost befuddled that you just said what you just said because it seemed so antithetical to the way you conducted yourself so far. And I don't mean that to be insulting. I mean it hopefully to be informative that that's what we want from you. That's what that's the only way that we know who you are. And I get that, like, yeah, and it's partly the engagement of the medium. Right. But I where I'm trying to keep it big intellectual. But yeah, no, I hear 100 percent because you're asking about stories and you're asking about problems. Yeah. Good Richard, Anthony and Dolly wants in this on this to go ahead and tell. So we had a question about where is this going? And there's been a lot of talk about propositional versus more embodied ways of doing things is the room in the estuary for other practices other than discourse. Obviously, it's very focused on discourse, but is the room for it to branch out into other things? I know Viveki has a meditation series. He talks about things like Tai Chi. What are the what are the kind of the constraints around estuary where? I don't know. Yeah, no, story for me is just a way to get people talking, but I've never I've never suggested that estuary is the be all and end all of anything. Yeah. And the way John Vendon talks about it is like he hopes that it can be a community for people who don't have a community. Community is not just talking. A community is go eating together, surfing together, playing board games together, reading the Bible together, doing or doing life together as as my evangelical teachers would say in my passion, doing life together. Right. But I I want to go back to what Chairman was saying about him being interested in the last three sentences. And I think we have to recognize the division of people, ideas and things. Right. That's a core division. And what interests people? Right. And so I'm not like him. I connected a lot more with everything before the three sentences because I'm just more interested in ideas. And I am interested in people, but I really enjoy ideas. Right. And so that's how you have to and I think to I forget who is making this point, but like we make those divisions, but they're always interconnected and they're always one, because every single person has to be somewhat interested in people, things and ideas. And because that's the reality, the groups we form, each has to be interested in people, things and ideas. Right. And here are ideas. Here are things. And people, bridges. Yeah. Ideas, things, people. I would actually sort of say it's not just things, it's ideas, theory and practice, too. Right. With that, ideas and things. Practice is people. Go ahead, Kara. I will go back to people again, again, again, again. So sorry, sorry, Dali. And there is a question from people on YouTube who are actually the supporters of this community, the people who watch the YouTube. And so one of the participants asked about Jesus. Would he actually come back as a sinner? Like I, my personal theory, he is a sinner. He's a sinner. Somebody come back as a sinner. Yes. My idea would be he can do whatever he likes and he can come back as a sinner even for 24 hours in order to understand others, because like one thing is to be above all of it, but the other thing is to understand everybody who sinned and then to be above all of it. It's like those are two different propositions. So that's a question from the actual chat room, shout out chat. And guys, I would say I would say, I mean, that's a that's a very interesting question. It's a complex question. And part of it, I think, is answered by the Book of Hebrews in terms of the part of the purpose of the incarnation was to address exactly that, because there's in the incarnation, we now know that God knows us in a sense. When you look at when you look at the story in Genesis 22, when God says to to Abraham, now I know in a sense the incarnation answers it in reverse, because now through Jesus, we can say to God, now I know, you know what it's like to be us. So that's how I would answer Chad's question. But I wanted to get Dolly in here, too. Go ahead, Dolly. Maybe the conversation went past what you wanted to jump in on, but I just want to make sure that there's a little bit of equity in terms of the time that we get. No, I'm going to let it float for a minute. OK. And what part of the points I mean, I love the way Richard sort of set it up. We've got ideas. We've got things. We've got people. It's very often the case that and John Van Dock and I actually talked about this quite a while. It's very often the case that we we we're we're uncertain as to whether an estuary meeting has sort of arrived. And this gets into the telos, which is rather hard to describe sometimes. But it's you can sort of feel it when people begin to get to the personal. We have the intellectual, which is usually a period of the contextual, which is here. And we have the estuario, which is kind of the usness, but the personal. When people get to a point of sharing something personal now in a way, they've got skin in the game because Xander, Xander let us know that he has a child and what he care and that he loves his child. He cares about his child and he's using catch as a vehicle to connect with his child. And Makana shared with us about surfing in the community around surfing. And it's when we get and even before the stream started, I was I was chatting with some of the people who gathered here initially. And, you know, Kara mentioned, well, you know, I do a lot of these live streams. It's very hard to know. How much to share personally about me and that's a and, you know, that's a sign of wisdom, because wisdom understands that there is to to sort of redeem our poor friend, Mark LeFavor, part of what part of Mark's agenda has been the intimacy crisis and part of what he's at with that intimacy question is that it is the personal because we come in in a sense, as Jesus does, we come in vulnerable. And because then that sets up that a narrative of, well, I am going to get vulnerable with you, which which sends you a message of trust. Now, you may violate my trust or you might earn greater levels of trust and therefore intimacy. But again, to come back all the way around to the question that we started, this group is where is this all going? And, you know, when I when I was listening to Xander, I part of me wanted to keep saying, OK, but now let's let's talk about the destination here, because so much of this destination that I think we want is we want intimacy. We want trust. We want community. We want to be we want to see and be seen. We want to love and be loved. And, you know, and people ask me about estuary often. I think people see it within a frame of the commercial where everything from razors to soap to skincare products are sort of taken up in these screens of light into tell us in themselves, you know, if only I could have that Apple product, then I will arrive. And that is that is a sort of a lying deception. And so what I really want is each other. So, yeah, I do want each other. And I just bring that back to not just ideally with with with with dialogos, though, right. And where this goes is that opposition is important because that oppositional resolution that we find you can you can see that also that isn't just on the individual level, but everything that exists, these institutions we make, these distributed cognition networks of distributed cognitions, I can get a little verveky. They they require being they have a being meaning crisis as well. That they have the being meaning problem that needs to be resolved. And we see that at the different levels at the family. We see the oppositional relationship between a loving husband and a wife resolves the being meaning problem for the family. Right. And if you jam that right, you throw in these adversarial Marxist relationships that make it, you know, then the masculine collective is against the female collective. And one is the oppressor and one is the oppressed. Then that makes that adversarial. It destroys the oppositional resolution, the frame finding, the dialogos that is required for the existence of the family. And what do we see? We see families falling apart like never before. Right. And the same thing at the with with communities and to find these dialogos as well. Churches need to find these dialogos between between the pastor and and and the congregation. Also, you see the dialogos between the right and left. Why? With all these different political systems we find, we always seem to find this emergence of this right and left is because we're finding this emergence of that conversation between hope and faith. Right. That oppositional relationship that's trying to resolve the society. And sorry, something that I'm recognizing is that you're you're presenting a whole lot of things that sound like solutions and I'm sure that you don't think you have everything all figured out, but at no point am I seeing a question. And perhaps that's not the destination that that that maybe that's not where we're heading, but it's certainly where I always want to go is where we can harness the perspectives and knowledge and capacity of a group to answer a question, to pursue a solution together. And when it when you're speaking, you're saying this is this, this is this, this is this. And that's how this interacts with this and this and this and this and this. And at no point do I feel like I'm invited into a problem solving process. I don't know. I don't know if that's just maybe that's unique to me. But yeah, I don't know what to do with that. But but so the cool part is, is that what you just did is what Zander is talking about. It's the same thing, right, because it's the tension between and I and I can't map it exactly onto Zander's hope and faith notion. But I and maybe you can do it, Zander, but like the tension between Paul's upper and lower lower register, the tension between grounding the abstract but also reflecting on what we're doing in on the ground so that we can self correct. Right. But we can't just do the abstract, of course, because then it's a total waste of time if we need to live our lives. All right. I'm going to I'm going to call time now because we're almost at the end of our time. And I want to thank all of you guys for giving a lot of your time this morning or this afternoon or this evening, depending on where you are. And what I want to do is we're going to go around another time and I want takeaways, just summations. Was this worth your time? What did you learn? Not big, long speeches, but just a few, few little little bullet points. OK, and if you if you're not ready, you can pass and I'll come back around to you because I'm just going to kind of wind through the order that I have here. So it's it's either your misfortune or your Anna, Kara, to get to go first. Just brief takeaways from our our little conversation today. OK, thank you, Paul. The best procrastination ever. I think I had a lot of fun and I also advertise and plugged my thing, by the way, guys, check it out. And Tally is next. I always like to come up with. A focusing question, I'm not sure that I did, but I do see that that. That you've all pointed out different things that contribute to conversation. And finding a finding a common locus. OK, OK, Ivan. I think we're all more interested in like the coming together of ideas and people and things than we are in separating them. But it's it's sometimes more difficult to break out of like Western frames of mind, because like we already start like separating them before we even begin. And I think that that it's very interesting the way like Sander and Shane interacted because they're both right in a sense and they're both wrong in expecting the other person to be different than who they are. It's like and that's part of the thing. Like nobody's going to be the ideal thing ever, ever. That's what I took from it. All right. Thanks, Ivan. Sander, something that I took away from the conference that was was big for me was was learning to love more and connecting, seeing that how dialoguus is the loving relationship, right, and it's really difficult in these conversations. And I feel like if I could just have a chance to sit down with Shane and listen to him and speak in his language, then we would be connecting much more. And I am recalled to like First Corinthians 13. If you take all of First Corinthians 13, it's a beautiful description of oppositional processing. I'd like you to bring that to Vervecky if you have the chance. But the first line of it is talking about what a conversation is like where there's no love and I think I just I hope that Shane understands that this is this is this is what I'm hearing from. This is this is where I am. And I understand it. If I speak in the tongues of mortals and angels, but I do not have love, that I'm a noisy gong or clanging symbol. And that's exactly and I understand that that's what I'm sounding like to Shane. And and I appreciate that. So very, very gracious, very lovely, Zander. Thank you. All right. I kind of well, this entire project, I mean, this moment here for the past couple of hours and the larger thing has been profoundly encouraging for me over the past couple of years, especially the image. I the imagery that is coming through my head as we were kind of discussing and kind of Antonio brought up like the the Indian proverb with the elephant. It feels a little bit like that, but more like we're unearthing a woolly mammoth skeleton or something and kind of digging and dusting off and just like, oh, guys, look, I found something here to help me dig. And someone's over there yelling, hey, I found something here. Help me dig and why? Just to kind of clear off something, you know, and ultimately trying to understand where the priorities are on this larger project are difficult. But it's also like just the shared excitement of it. It's hard not to get swept up in as well. Like we found something here. Come on, help me out. No, help me out. That's that's what I feel like the tension is right now. Awesome, awesome. Anthony. Hey, I, I really like the talk about tension, about things flowing back and forth, trying to integrate and differentiate different perspectives. I'm not sure that we came to a definite conclusion, but I think we're all seeing somewhat similar things. I'd really like to see a handshake or even a hug from between Xander and Shane at some point. And yeah, just just like Mekana said, very encouraging. It's been a pleasure. All right. Thank you. So here's my takeaway. My takeaway is that Mekana needs to teach both Xander and Shane how to serve at the same time. And that's the picture of this integrating of these like people, things that I do. That's right. Because we like that is what the world is made of. And if the estuary is going to be self-sustaining and it is going to be a place where people can live and do life together, we're going to need to integrate all of those things into it. OK, all right. OK, go ahead, Shane. You get the almost last word, I'm sure off to close it out. Yeah, I hope so. I don't want to be the last word on here, but I do very much as I as I'm thinking of the context of this conversation, this is sort of a public viewing of the chaos of what a first estuary meeting would be. And there's so much potential here because obviously, if we got to know each other a little bit, we would be able to care for each other in a more meaningful way. And yet in saying that, I'm also saying that that onboarding process is going to be fresh for every person. They're going to feel like an outsider. They're going to have to grind through figuring out the different personality adjustments that they need to make to care for each other. And yet the beauty here is that we were able to have a little bit of tension. We were able to sort of cohere as a group a little bit in very short time. I missed like the first half just trying to get in here correctly. And so I think it's very hopeful. I think, Paul, you deserve and you and Van Donk and everybody who has sort of helped to draw in personalities that can come with a level of vulnerability, even a willingness to sort of push buttons and say profane things to kind of get to the heart of matters. And knowledge, there's a whole bunch of knowledge here. So I can imagine if this was, you know, an estuary meeting, even in person, that I would want to come back, even though I didn't feel satisfied, like my appetite wasn't satiated here. I'm confident that it wouldn't take too many times of us getting together to to have very meaningful and even on some at some point, I can imagine all of us talking about like how to fix a very personal problem I'm having. Right. Like the the signals were sent that there there's potential here. And yeah, so there you go. Oh, great. Thanks. And that's that's true. I mean, this this for me this morning is is an experiment. I do a lot of experiments. I you know, I saw I saw Jacob using steam steam yard and thought that could be an interesting tool. I've had some I've had some frustrations with this court as a tool, especially getting people into it, because I've had some some frustrations with how text goes in discord and what that does with community. And I I do think that all of these electronic conveyances that were using these screen conveyances certainly have their purpose and they're powerful and they're useful. The points that a number of you made about the repetition, about the community, part of what happens in a body is especially a church body is that you is that let's say if Xander and Shane, who is a little conflict there, but that conflict, you know, conflict isn't a bad thing necessarily. You just get is it productive conflict? I think they're going to make them again. Pastors know this because I'll tell you, churches always have conflict. If you don't have any conflict in your church, it probably isn't alive. But then you need the riches of the world. Yeah, you come up with a with something that unites the two. Yep. Yep. Yep. Things in tension and keeps the conversation going. And then we begin to discover in some ways the utility of each other for community, the utility of Xander and his his really determined desire to put the theory together and have it work and see it and explore it and explain it. That's a super powerful thing. And then the demand of Shane saying, hey, man, I don't care what you think until I know how much you care. And yeah, because I know you. So I know whether I want to care about you. I don't know whether I want to care about your ideas before I know whether I want to care about you. Yeah. Yeah. I like to think that we're all especially as talky, thinky people love to think about how rational we are. And one of the things that I think life is teaching me every day is that that, you know, I forget who it is, who says this, I forget his name and I'm thinking of him. But he's a union. He's a union guy. And he says, you know, your your cognition is just the sheen. Is it's an oil slick on top of an ocean. And I think some of it, you know, I mean, some of it is like that kind of put up or shut up attitude, you know, just like, you know, I don't believe you until you tell you show me you can do it. But some of it's also I don't understand you until I see an example, you know, like both those things happen. And and I'm sure with surfing, you're going to have somebody who shows up, maybe they've got great gear or maybe they talked a big game. And it's like until I see you out there on that ocean, that's where I'm going to evaluate you as a surfer. I'm going to see it with my eyes. And I mean, life is a lot like that. It's it's it's got to connect. So anyway, I'm going to land the plane here and thank you all for everyone who viewed and especially thank all of you who sort of took a big risk and put your, you know, put your face out there in the world and put your voice in the world and put your ideas in the world again, estuary is designed to not be on screens like this necessarily. We can do this sort of ad hoc. And I think there's I'm really happy that all of you participated in this experiment, but I think, you know, as as we talked about the real payoff is in much more stable, regular human community that is connected and that's really where I mean, one of the questions that Dolly talked about, which is a terrific question, is basically can we change? How do we change? And I think it is through each other that we change. So anyway, so I'm going to end the broadcast. I think of all I've set up so that YouTube stream will then end. And if you want to take a few minutes still in this room and just say goodbye, that's cool, too. So. OK, take care, guys.