https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=dZmStSC0Gl0

 if you want a copy of it, I can send it to you. And as now has become, you know, standard, well, if you think I wanna share this with the world, then we'll share it with the world. But why don't you begin by telling me a little bit about yourself? All right, yes, I'll just start from the beginning. So yeah, I'm Trevor West. I'm a current senior undergraduate student at Senwell University, doing three majors, international relations and diplomacy, modern languages, which includes Chinese and Japanese, and also philosophy. But people often think like that's a lot because it's a triple major, but the first two kind of correspond because there's like a language requirement already in international relations. So that already covers most of that in the Chinese, Japanese, and then I'm in the honors program here. So the philosophy is basically, I can get a philosophy major, but it's basically a glorified minor. So it's basically the same minor requirements just about a little bit more. So it's basically a major and a half or two. So it's not as crazy as people usually think it. That sounds nuts. Yeah. How's the weather in New Jersey, my old home? Oh, it's been kind of a rainy here recently. It's starting to get cold finally. Yeah. The winter is coming, so. Yeah, yeah. Live out here in California, the land of summer. Oh yeah, yeah, yeah. I have two brothers who live there actually right in LA. Oh, wonderful. I'm in Northern California, so we don't have as good a weather as they have, but. Okay. I'll take it. So what's on your mind? What do you wanna talk about? Well, I just listened actually to your, I listened to a lot of your things on your podcast form, because often I'm moving around and stuff, but it was, I think it's called the smuggling cheap life robbing philosophies education. No. And I thought it was like C.S. Lewis, so it's like, I don't know, I found that's interesting. I've obviously been doing a lot of commentary on like Jordan Peterson and Sam Harris. I guess maybe starting with them, just have a conversation about that, because I find your views very interesting and elucidating as like an interesting third perspective, as sort of like an intermediary between, I guess, Peterson and Harris. I'm amazed you have time. I mean, grief. Yeah, recently it's been pretty busy, so I haven't been able to listen to everything, but. I don't expect anybody to listen to everything, because it's a lot of time, so. So what do you think? Oh, like my current views? Yeah. On like Peterson. Okay, so it seems to be that, I know it seems like, I guess, in like the Harrison Peterson debates, I guess Harris is kind of missing the point that Peterson's bringing to the table, and talking about meaning and kind of like, well, just that recent thing I listened from you, I don't know if that was from C.S. Lewis, but sort of like how we're always in like a paradigm, and obviously there's like Thomas Kuhn, and sort of like we're always coming into something with a given framework, and if it's not explicit, then it's implicit, so I think it's interesting right now, because it seems like the current framework that I think we all have a lot of experience with, even with like using this online communication and stuff, is like a sort of a materialism, so it's like a materialist framework, and I don't know if it was Kuhn, but I heard that, or maybe it was even Karl Marx, he was saying that the sort of the material framework that we have to work with, like the materials that we live with kind of help frame our perspective on things, so I was thinking about that, like how the brain, the human brain, is usually compared to like a computer, but obviously before the computer, yeah, so it's like we're always grappling with what we have to make sense of things, so in that sense, I'm pretty much fully in agreement with Jordan Peterson, and then with, I think like what Peterson was saying, like Sam Harris's goal to try and get a better version of morality, or at least whatever, it's a noble intention, but I don't know, it runs into obviously a lot of problems in knowing like what is right and whatnot. Well, you'll be interested in the video I just put out today on, I used some, I used, I just made it today, man, I can't think of what it is, on set Alzheimer's, it's Alistair McGrath, and he was going through a number of atheists in terms of this question, because it's a fascinating question to say, to hear Brett Weinstein and Sam Harris kind of critique evolution, let's say implicit morality within evolution, or implicit chimp morality, okay, where are you getting your standard to critique those things? Because obviously you have one. Yeah, yeah, yeah, I think, isn't that the problem of infinite regress, you know, it's just you're always, like the turtle's all the way down, it's like, no matter what, it's like you're always, you're always in a framework, like so. That's right, that's right, that's right. Yeah. And often I hear people thinking like, well, I left the church, and so now I'm out there without a framework, and it's like, no, no, no, you're just in another one, and you know, remember the movie's Matrix, he kind of leaves the, he's just always in the framework. Yeah. Because we can't live outside of a framework, we just can't function. Yeah, we go crazy. Well, if anything, that's actually what madness might be, because it's like people who are so disoriented that the world is just so much where even like sitting in a room, you know, you start going crazy, because I mean, it's almost like with categorizing things, like I think, because I've been reading Peter's Since Maps of Meaning, so I'm like a little, around two thirds through it, but he talked a lot about, and it wasn't him, other people have as well, but basically that, what is it, something that's normal or considered normal is like emotionally neutral, so then we can ignore it, because like if it's safe, then it just disappears from view, and that's why you could say like in the news, they usually focus on negative things, death, murder, all these things, because that's the thing that scares people that you really focus on, because it's the unknown, so. Yeah. That kind of ties into that. No, that's very true, that's very true, and I was actually, I'm listening to Maps of Meaning, and he was going through some of that stuff, and I thought that's really fascinating how I had never kind of put that together that way, and I was like, oh yeah, that's really true, that's really true, so interesting stuff. So how does this intersect with your studies? So I guess it's obviously more inclined towards philosophy, I guess, in a lot of it, because I feel like really a lot of these issues that Peterson and Harris are talking about are really like, a lot of them are, I guess, I mean, definitely like scientific as well, but are immoral and all that, but I think philosophy offers a good way of approaching this, because a lot of it is like a problem of framework, but also I was thinking about it in terms of like, you know, politics or international relations and stuff, how to move forward, is that, because there's this one book that some professors at Sien Hall, and actually at the UN helped co-author, it's called Crossing the Divide, so I've been reading that, and that's been talking about how moving forward, you know, different countries can better interact with each other, and it's interesting, I just felt like there's a lot of depth lacking in some of it, so I think your views and Peterson and Harris' sort of like, this debate is sort of like helping to shape, well, at least a better understanding of human nature and how better to act, so obviously on the international scale, or really any scale, whether it's the local level, with your friends or with acquaintances or coworkers or fellow students, or on the international level, I think, I mean, these sort of conversations are important, because especially when like, trying to understand other cultures, knowing that we're in our own framework becomes even more important, because obviously just from one individual to another in the same culture, who like the same things, can have vast differences, so if you're looking at people in different cultures, it can be like, you know, because I've seen it on Sienaul's campus, we have a lot of Chinese students, so there's a lot of like implicit things that a lot of Chinese students do, just because that's the culture they're from, because I did a study abroad in China and Japan two summers ago for a month each, and then three years ago, or four years ago, now I'm losing track, I did a two weeks homestay, where I had hosted a student for two weeks, and then I stayed with him for two weeks, so I've gotten some very personal interaction with like that sort of cultural barrier, not just the language barrier to that, of course too, but just sort of like being surprised at some things and getting used to this idea that, like what some people do as normal to other people, they would never think of doing it, but almost like, I guess on a theoretical level, I feel like at least a lot of the stuff that I've read in like the international relations field needs to be more like supplemented with like people like Peterson or other people who like are more digging into the issues, rather than it seems like a lot of the international relations field usually comes from a more left leaning political spectrum, which tends to just assume these things like human rights and stuff, and I feel like Peterson really digs in, and he's like, well, why, you know, questioning whether it's predicated in a sort of religious framework, and then that's interesting, because you look at like China doing their social media credit system, and the West is like, oh, well, that's not humane or whatever, and then it's like, well, what's their paradigm, what's ours, and it's like. What's their social media credit system? Explain that to me. So like, I haven't read a lot, a lot about it, but basically they're now integrating the same, well, they keep track of everyone, and like what you post online, and like you'll get a score, and if it's really low, then they can cut off like online services to you and public transport and stuff. Seriously? The government is making people post on Twitter and whatever? No, no, no, no, wait, wait, wait. It's not forcing you. I think, I haven't read a lot into it. I'm thinking it's mainly just to stop political, like bashing politicians and stuff, like sort of form of political control where, what is it? Yeah, basically it's because they have a lot of issues. It's like if people like publicly bash the government or whatever, like typically they've been pretty authoritarian with their arrest you and stuff. This credit system now, it's basically like, they're just making that more automized. Interesting. Fascinating, and that's, and you know, it's when you get to real world examples like this, that you begin to ask questions about, okay, what's with our culture? And I think implicit in our culture, if you have kind of a fragile government that can't be criticized, that culturally for us expresses weakness. But I would imagine, I'm guessing that in China, perhaps allowing criticism appears as weak, you know? Oh yeah, yeah, that's actually pretty much right on the head because in a lot of Eastern cultures, well, I'm basing this just like in Japan and China because that's my main focus, but there's this idea, in Japanese it's called omote, but it's basically like, the translation of that is like surface or front, but it's like there's the idea of saving face. So it's like, you never wanna do something to disrespect in public. So if you are to say something to someone that would be disrespecting in public, obviously you just will say it afterwards or in private or something. And that exists to some degree in the West, but not to the degree I think that it does in the East. Like obviously over here, obviously you probably don't wanna say something that like embarrassed your friend in front of everyone, but like in the East, it's like on a different level where it's like integrated in different cultural ways that don't really exist here, or if it does, it's pretty minimal. And just the development of these things is fascinating. One of the, you know, I did a talk with Peugeot and Greg Glyer about living overseas. And you know, when you're done with your degree, I mean, if you can find a way to live as long as you can in China or Japan to just learn that language and learn that culture, that's, there's no, you know, that's a terrific way to spend your 20s and just learn, learn, learn, cause you will learn, boy, you'll learn a lot. Yeah, yeah. Really deep down. Yeah, no, that's, I'm actually planning that cause I'm graduating early this December. So I'm planning on applying for a few different jobs and programs, but there's one hosted by the Japanese government called the JET program, the Japanese English teaching program. So that's at least at minimum a one year contract to work and live in Japan and help us teaching English and stuff. So, yeah, it's really cool. Yeah. But yeah, if not that something, cause I've been reading a lot actually on this one. I think the Buddhist sec is it's Tibet, it's from Tibetan, well, it's an official Tibetan Buddhist sec or whatever. It's called like Aero Tagir or whatever. And this one guy, David Chapman, he has a few of his own websites. Like one of them is meaningness.com. And it's interesting, cause I've been reading his perspective and he kind of comes out of perspective similar, well, not similar to you and Peterson, but sort of kind of a different way cause he's coming from like this Buddhist perspective. Yeah. But it's interesting cause he's framed a lot of the issues within this Buddhist framework. So like there's the idea, I don't know if you've heard of it of like non-duality. Yeah. Yeah. That's, I don't know much about it, but I've heard it. I've heard it. I've heard people put it forward. Okay. Yeah. Cause I'm, no, it's interesting. Cause he develops these different things and he talks about how basically, well, he talks about the current situation. I don't know if it's the world or just the West. He doesn't specify, but sort of like the way we view meaning now is like, it's fractured. Like it's a bunch of little tiny bits. And you can see this as all the things, you know, like there's with smartphones or the internet, there's always a billion things you could be doing. So it's almost like meaning is fragmented. And obviously this has had a lot of problems, but it's also interesting cause he's distinguished between like, I guess two or three main types of how you can interpret meaning. And he calls it meaningness, the quality of having meaning or not. Cause actually that term doesn't exist even though meaninglessness exists. Right, right. Meaningness. Yeah. Meaningness. But yeah, he talks about like eternalism where it's like trying to fixate meaning. So people do this a lot. Everyone kind of does it where it's like, in the sense he says in like theology, people fixate, you know, God is being infinite eternal, but people can do that in other things. So you could fixate like meaning on material things. So you could say, well, money will always make me happy or as long as I have this, I'll be happy, right? A physical thing. And then he says, obviously the opposite extreme of that is nihilism or nihilism. And then sort of like he's advocating for like a sort of a, what he calls like the complete stance. Cause he says there's a bunch of fragmented stances that he says it's like, was it like the materialist stance? Obviously there's like hedonism and other things. He has different terms for it, but I found his perspective on these things very interesting. Interesting. That is very interesting. So how do you find time to listen to videos when you've got these three, this three-headed, I mean, it's really four, cause Chinese and Japanese by the way, are not the same. Yeah. Yeah. It's like, just to learn one of them is insane. Yeah. I mean, I kind of cheated cause I had been starting to learn Japanese in high school. Okay. So I self-studied sophomore year and then I took it my junior and senior years at the high school level. Okay. And then took the AP test past that. And then, yeah. So by the time I was already coming to college, I was already like pretty good. So that I just kind of continued on that. Chinese, I started brand new freshman year. So that was kind of a struggle, but some of it still is a struggle cause at least Mandarin, it has four tones. So, for example, like if you're taking the syllable A, you could say, ah, ah, ah, ah. And those are the four tones. So there's like the flat, there's the inflect rising, there's the up and down, and then there's the falling. And then Cantonese is even crazier cause that has like eight tones or something. Like, yeah, I don't want to learn that. Oh, wow. But yeah. Do you feel like robbed because you learned English in that prime window of language learning? And English isn't easy, but I would dare bet these languages are tougher to learn than English. Yeah, I mean, I would say English, well, definitely English over Japanese cause I think actually in English learning, learning Japanese is easier cause there's only two pronunciations that are different. There's a special RL sound in Japanese that doesn't exist in English. And like, you know the word tsunami has a, in Japanese, it's like, it has like a special TSU sound that doesn't really exist in English. Like most people say tsunami, but it's tsunami. So it's, but other than that, that's it. But in Chinese, I say, I'm not sure. I don't know, maybe either or Chinese or English would have been good to learn in early life cause. You learned English, so. Yeah, yeah, so that's fine. Where did you grow up? I grew up in Illinois in a, yeah, Northwest suburbs from the city. Okay, okay. Yeah. And how did you wind up in Seton Hall? Yeah, so I was looking for like different programs related to international relations and Seton Hall's pretty close to New York City. So there's been a lot of good opportunities out here related to that, so. That's terrific, that's terrific. And what do you wanna do long-term with this thing? Um, long-term, I'm still trying to figure that out to be honest, cause I mean, short-term it's like, yeah, like work and live in China or Japan or other places. Kind of like, I guess I don't have a really long-term plan, at least set in stone right now, cause I kinda wanna work and live in Japan or China just for a little bit to see if I like living there. And then make future plans, cause I feel like, I don't know, I'm not really fixated right now exactly. Like I have vague things, I kinda wanna do research or I don't know, something maybe sociological, I don't know. Cause I've been reading a lot of like Jonathan Haidt stuff and I really like a lot of his work, so. I don't know if it'd be something like that, just like, at least when I'm in Japan, I guess, or in China, I can like start doing some preliminary research or interviewing people and stuff like that. But yeah, I'm not exactly sure right now. Now, what about other students in Jordan Peterson? Do you find other students listening to Peterson? I mean, is he popular and who's listening and what are they thinking? It's interesting. So I have talked to a few of my friends. It seems like, I mean, some people are interested and then, I don't know, I guess just, not everyone has heard of him, but it's interesting like, I guess some of my friends, I just mentioned, it's like, oh yeah, it's Peterson. So I think generally there's like, I guess a positive vibe. I'm not exactly too sure, cause I know, I forgot who was it. It was a controversy at some college with like a teaching assistant showing a Jordan Peterson clip and that was a whole. Lindsay Shepherd. Yeah, Lindsay Shepherd, yeah. That was a whole like rabbit hole. So I'm not sure beyond students. I think in some of my papers, I have referenced Jordan Peterson. So I don't know. Yeah, I'm not sure how teachers or faculty feel, but yeah. So what percentage of the people you hang out with know him and do you ever talk about stuff, his stuff with other students? Yeah, I would say maybe, I mean, of the people I hang out with frequently, maybe like half know about him. Okay. And then, yeah, I'll occasionally talk with people. Some of the friends I hang out with don't really like really dense topics. So it's like, let's try to find someone who can, I can go on a like, they're like, oh no, like here he goes again. He's gonna go on a rant forever. Cause it's like, I don't know. Some of these topics obviously can get really long winded. And what aspect of Peterson are those who know him interested in? I think from what I can assess, I guess his views, just, I think giving like a breath, a new breath of life on different perspectives. So like meaning and responsibility and stuff. Okay. Things would be the main thing. Cause I know there's like a key to the dome, which is interesting cause I know if you listen to him, he's like the, yeah. No, I've listened to with him and other people, I've been getting into like the chill wave and that's sort of like genre. And I think it's cool how he like remixes Peterson's things or other people saying things into like a song. Yeah. I guess there's like a pop culture, I guess in that too. But yeah. Oh, that's interesting. That's interesting. Yeah. Peterson's, Peterson, I just had a conversation with a guy and part of the question was, where's Peterson going? Is he gonna last? And this guy thought that, Peterson's gonna continue to grow. It'll be interesting because the penetration in college campuses marketers know this, that getting people young is key because brain plasticity stops and you get stuck on things and religions have known this for a long time too. So to the degree that Peterson penetrates the campuses, yeah, has, did you go, have you gone to any of his events? I did go to the one, let me think. I think it was like mid June, May is June 17th, 18th, actually in Wisconsin because I was back for the summer and I was coming back too late to get the one in Chicago. So yeah, I went with my mom to the one in Wisconsin. It was like an hour drive away, hour and a half drive. You went with your mom, what'd your mom think? She thought he was very interesting, but I know it was interesting. Yeah, yeah, cause it was like, yeah, I think the theater there, I forgot the theater. It was pretty full. It was great and he went over like a bunch of things about like the importance of writing well and like organizing your ideas well and just a bunch of his other experiences like that. But it was really surreal seeing him in person. It was really, no, it's strange though, cause it's like after like listening to his lectures and other things for like basically a year, cause I actually, I think it was 2016 I started listening to him, not a lot. When he exploded in 2017, I started listening to more, but I'd been exposed to him, I think from 2016 before Kathy Newman with his initial video with him like talking about pronouns and whatever. But yeah, it's been very interesting to see like all of this happen and it's kind of cool. How did you run across him? He just, the YouTube algorithm just bumped him up on your stream? I know, I think actually it was one of my friends and no, he wasn't, I don't think he was my roommate at that time, but yeah, one of my friends was like, hey, you should watch this, I was like, okay. Interesting, interesting. Cause this is, your descriptions here, these are, this is marketing gold. This is what people who wanna sell you stuff, that's what they long for, it's the word of mouth, the roommate giving you the link, it's like click on this. Yeah, I mean, it might've been in my suggestions cause I listened to a lot of like, well, there's like politically incorrect things and that sort of like on the comedic side as like the reactionary humor against the more extreme left. So it might've been on my feed, but I didn't watch it until he had suggested, I mean, I don't remember seeing it, but until he suggested it. Well, it's very interesting to me, the way people find Peterson and a lot of, cause at our meetups, that's usually one of the things that we do, we kind of go around and it's usually C16, some people call Pat, Joe Rogan, a fair number of people found him through Joe Rogan and then word of mouth and colleges are like this, this network that gets created. Yeah, yeah, yeah. And it becomes almost a hive mind and then that hive mind goes out into the world. Yeah, yeah, yeah, definitely. I mean, you're going way out into the world to the other side of the world, which I think is, which again, I think is terrific. And there are a few ways to better prepare yourself for almost anything than to go and live in another culture. Yeah. Because otherwise, if you only know one culture, you tend to be its prisoner. Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. One of my friends is actually, they're doing research on language and identity. And that's very interesting for me, cause well, my thesis, I'm specifically focusing on Peterson, Jonathan Haight and Carl Yoon. But specifically, I hadn't really considered too much. I talked with my friend on this a lot on how language affects identity. And obviously there's like the catch is I'm like, to learn a second language is to have a second soul or whatever, but there's actually a lot of research coming out to back that, or at least some that supports that claim that like, literally, I don't know if it was like, oh yeah, the way you think in one language is like, it's different. And I don't know the explicit literature, so I wasn't exactly sure. But I felt that like, if I think or speak in Japanese, it's just the way the language is set up is inhibited or like structured in such a way that like, you're just naturally probably more polite. Cause that's just how the language is built and like how people speak. So that's a cultural language aspect. So it's like, when I think in Japanese, it's just a different mode almost. Yep. Which is actually, I feel from my perspective, being raised as American, I feel like it's more constrictive. Cause if I think in Japanese, especially like if I'm interacting with other Japanese people, then I'm already thinking about, well, am I gonna say this the right way so that I'm properly polite and all that. That doesn't really cross my mind too much in English ever. I mean, obviously like, if it's a professor, like call them professor or doctor or whatever, but like, yeah, I don't know. It's interesting. So I had to learn Spanish and I worked in Spanish for a number of years. And Spanish continues as with many Latin language, you have the formal and then the informal. And so for a while, one of my daughters got into watching Korean soap operas and so kind of begged them on my wife and I. So we started watching some Korean soap operas. And I found that fascinating. I have a fair amount of contact with Koreans in my work because Korean immigrants, a number of Korean immigrants have come into the Christian Reformed Church. It's about a 10th of our denomination. So out here on the West Coast, when I start helping out other groups, often they are Korean groups. And I'm fascinated by the culture. And I picked up on a Korean soap opera how, I mean, the form of the language you use to address someone who is older than you is different from someone who is younger than you. Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. And I just thought. That's the thing in Japanese. Is it really? Yeah, yeah, it's the same. Wow. And I just thought, how does that, it's these subtle things that really have a cumulative effect in a culture. And our culture is so dismissive of age. Oh yeah, yeah, yeah, the West for sure. Oh, they're so dismissive of age, but in the East. So. It's the opposite. It's the opposite. Yeah, yeah. And what's the cumulative impact of that over population and generation? And I remember when I moved here to Sacramento, the church, there was some developers that had come into possession of the property just next to us. And they were quite interested in buying the church property, because then they would have had the whole frontage of the whole block. And I remember talking to one of the members of the church that had worked with these individuals. He was a lawyer and worked in real estate. And he said, you have to remember that these Chinese families, this was a Chinese family that owned this property, these Chinese families think very long-term. And they're not just thinking, we Americans are looking to cut a deal and get our best deal out of it now, but these Chinese are thinking generationally. And I saw the crazy rich Asian movie. Oh yeah, yeah, yeah. I might be watching that later this week. Yeah, and watching that movie, I'm wanting it was a very American movie in that, oh, okay, you're just dismissing centuries. And Chinese culture is cohesive historically, to a degree that most of us coming out of the blender of Western Europe just have no concept of. Yeah, 100 years. And this movie's like, oh, now we're all gonna become expressive individualists. Won't that be fun? And it's like, you really think that culture is gonna give up so easily? I doubt it. There's a few sleeping dragons there. That's right, I've watched these Koreans and then the Koreans come to America and the first generation immigrants, they're continuing the tradition and their churches are strong and their communities are cohesive and their families are cohesive. But then the children born here, they go to school and it's like. Yeah, they're used to this culture now, yeah. And Scott, you know who Scott Alexander is? I don't. He writes a blog, Slate Star Codex. I might, I've gotten that wrong. But he has this, he does a fair amount of writing sometimes on, I think he's got one of his blogs How the West Was One or something like that. And he talks about universal culture. And sometimes we call that Western culture. He says, it really isn't Western culture, it's universal culture. Why does Coca-Cola and why do Coca-Cola and McDonald's just kind of creep into a place? And then of course, there's some cultural assimilation but interesting, interesting stuff. Now you said your thesis, are you actually doing some work on Peterson and Jung and Height for a paper or something? Oh yeah, so far it's just been like, oh reading Peterson's book Maps of Meaning and Height's, well I'd finished Height's book, The Righteous Mind, which is very interesting. And then yeah, reading some of Jung's works. I'm not gonna be able to read all of it in this timeframe. I finished like the heavy tone that was the archetypes in the collective unconscious over the summer. And then yeah, I don't know, I might be able to read Height's other book, The Cartling of the American Mind. But basically, yeah, it's gonna be an attempt for me to reconcile my understanding of all these individuals and then try and kind of come to maybe a distillation of what can be said given these individuals views. But I don't know, it's more I guess, I think I was viewing it as a project now to get something built and then come back to it later. Because I feel like obviously these ideas and stuff are so heavy, I don't think. Because I don't think I'll be like, yeah, I'm just gonna solve everything in a few months or even a year. So but no, yeah, basically just I guess, like a comprehensive take at trying to summarize, give justice to what I think their views are and then trying to give justice to that and then make connections and see if they disagree in areas. Rather than Height's coddling of coddling book, I would recommend the, I haven't read the coddling book yet, I've just started it. But the happiness hypothesis, which was Height's first big book. And especially given your concentration on a lot of these Far East studies, because in the happiness hypothesis, Height basically is trying to synthesize ancient wisdom traditions with his taste buds of moral taste buds. And so that's, I read happiness hypothesis a number of years ago and I found it to be a good book. It was a helpful book and kind of like, oh, nobody has a maps of meaning. It's a tortured book. That's the best word I have for that. Yeah, tortured. And Jordan Peterson was working out as salvation in fear and trembling. Oh yeah, fear and trembling. I haven't really attempted to read one of Jung's bigger books yet. But happiness hypothesis, I think you would probably find helpful and likely productive. The intersectionality, of course, there's a lot of Jung in Peterson. Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. I mean, reading those two is kind of like this and Height is over to the side. Height is, he's not a squirrely. I mean, Peterson and Jung, I don't know if squirrely is the right word for Jung and just me saying that will offend some people, I know. But Jung is a religious figure. I mean, there is a religious community that Jung's work has spawned. Height is more kind of your well-mannered, courteous, academic, and public intellectual who, if you put him on, if you put a mic in front of him, he'll say coherent things nicely. He'll challenge things, but he'll do it nicely. And of course, Peterson is a wild man. Yeah, yeah, yeah. No, I read Carl Jung's autobiography over the summer and it was crazy. Oh, I finished it over the summer. I had started reading it last semester and I actually wrote a paper comparing Kierkegaard and Jung. Ooh, interesting. It was on, I don't know if I sent it to you. I may have. Oh, you might have, yeah. Yeah, I think it was my final paper for the class on Kierkegaard. It was like ethics, religion, and post-modernity. Yeah, yeah, yeah. And yeah, that paper I was talking about how kind of Jung's individuation was innately both a psychological and religious process, I think is what I said, where it's sort of like, there's this element of, well, psychological in the sense that you need to be smart about it, you need to willfully do this, but then there's this religious element where you're kind of at the whims of, well, the force is beyond, I guess, right? So it's sort of like the cultural forces, or you could say the gods, or God has to smile down on you, or otherwise you're, it's kind of game. I guess the idea of grace might be similar because it's sort of like, there's such powerful forces to think, kind of think, oh, I can change myself. That's just being kind of arrogant and kind of just being in the realm of just the psychological. But then the religious element is being in that humble state almost. And Jung talked about that in his autobiography because he was like, well, he talked about how he had a few religious visions almost that really were super powerful. So he had a very intimate religious experiences. So I mentioned that, and I mentioned how Jung had this good distinction where when he was doing scientific work, he wouldn't project, well, I would say project his metaphysical or religious beliefs. So he wouldn't say, well, God is this, he would use the term God image to say, because in a scientist, he knew he couldn't empirically prove God. So he said, we can't, however, prove that so many, like many people believe in God. So there's this image of God, right? Not to say that I can prove it. I think in his personal life, I don't know, maybe he wrote in his journal, I don't believe in God or whatever. But I think from his autobiography, it's assumable that he believed in God. I mean, to him, it was just very obvious that God exists in his way of interpretation. Right. And as we've seen in the Peterson-Harris thing, I mean, a really kind of lousy question, it's not lousy, but I mean, the question, Peterson is right to push back on this. Do you believe in God? And people, I know, get irritated that Peterson won't give them a binary response. They're looking. Yeah, a yes or no, yeah. Right, because Peterson, well, what do you mean by God? That's a far more interesting question because the question is not, as Peterson says, it's not self-evident. Well, what God are you talking about? And now you can then, you see, as a pastor, you get to play games, what do you mean, like Marduk? And if I bring that to someone, people will say, Mar, what's Marduk? Or the blind spaghetti monster. Right, so what does God mean to you? And then people then step back. But don't we, even the, I was thinking the other day about the fact that we have this, the fact that we use this word God so transactionally. And this is an old thing because, you know, if you read Hebrew, you know, you've got Elohim, you've got El. So they even had kind of a transactional word. You have it in Greek, Hothios, and, you know, in English we usually drop the definite article, but in New Testament it's almost always the God in Greek. And so we have this transactional word God, but now in our culture because God has such negative associations in some sense. People say the universe. Yeah, the universe, yeah, yeah. But that's like, I don't know if that's called naturalism, but no, I'm actually taking a course this semester on David Hume, and we're just focusing on his dialogues concerning natural religion, which is very fascinating. So just that book alone has like 20 different ways or 30, 40 different ways you can view God. So yeah, no, I think Peterson's totally justified. I think most people who are like, whatever, they just haven't thought about it very much, or so ingrained in this paradigm of thinking that God can only mean the Abrahamic faith, traditional sense, which is just go to another country. You know, yeah, it's not gonna be this, well, maybe another European country, no, but I mean, my experience in Japan, like I went to like the Shinto shrine and the Buddhist shrine, and that's like, I mean, it's definitely not Abrahamic, not at all, so it's a very different way of thinking. I guess in our language it'd be, I guess, considered more paganistic, because in Shintoism there's many different, it's almost like animism, it's like an evolved form of animism where not necessarily everything has a spirit or whatever, or has a spirit, but like every living thing has a spirit. So like trees, there can be like, maybe like if it's the biggest, oldest tree in the forest, maybe that's like the God of the forest or spirit of that forest, or I think usually though, they build shrines around or near wherever like, what they would consider maybe that spiritual source to be. That's interesting. Well, but I think you're right. So in the West, when we say God, there's all of this stuff underneath it that has come into it. And so when I got, was listening to Peterson and Harrison, came up with God one and God two, in some ways, and Sam can't recognize God one, and it's like, well, gosh, do you read anything ancient from the West because or even from the Near East, because just the way we talk exhibits this God. And of course, God two, which is the agent and the person. So I thought Peterson handled that part of the debate beautifully, but I think it's, I don't think Harris is in a position where he can concede anything, which would become an uninteresting conversation partner in there. Yeah, no, because actually, we just finished the dialogues with Hume, just this last class, and he ends it basically saying how, the difference between what he distinguishes between like a dogmatic believer and a hypocritical atheist is semantics. So it's actually the implicit thing is the same for both of them. They're just not willing to concede in the word game. So that's why I think in the East, it's really clever, at least with like Taoism, is that you're actually not, you can't talk about it. You can't say it in that sense, because I mean, at least implicitly, it seemed like Taoism is very aware that you run into these problems or feel like, well, I don't believe that. Well, what do you mean by that? And that's the whole problem. But if you never, if you say, well, let's just agree, we can't agree on how to define that, okay. Well, you can obviously make guideposts and wayposts to try and get closer to what that seems to be, which I think is the work of theology, religion, and maybe philosophy. But to say absolutely, this is that, I think that's the dogmatic believer that Hume critiques where they just blindly says, well, I have faith. Well, the problem of faith without reason is that, well, you could have faith for anything, right? You could just be taken in by a charlatan who wants to con you out of everything. And well, you have faith in him, but I mean, it's kind of on a bad foundation. Well, and that's right. I mean, and to a certain degree, the language game, what you mean, and in religious communities, so to say, so to affirm the profession of your religious community. All right, so what are you doing with that profession? Well, in a sense, you're affirming your place within the community. And as long as you're not being disingenuous, this lines up then with who you are in that community. And now as a group of people, you actually have orientation and you have cohesion. And as Jonathan Haidt points out, that is a powerful, powerful thing. And people will naturally do that. And what we've sort of arrived in the West is this, we have these pseudo religions out there that people, well, they watched, It's a Wonderful Life. And so every time a bell rings, an angel gets wings, and that becomes part of their, you know, some screenwriter who plucked this up. Well, here we go. And we got a little bit of mythology here. Ding, ding, ding, iron says his wings. And so then in a culture, people start to construct this. And of course, celebrity atheists will look at that and say, ah, everything is just that construction. And you say, well, those constructions are certainly around, but you don't really know that everything is that construction. You're just, you want it to be that way because you've got your own construction over here you're promoting. So, and then do I agree with them? Okay, well, let's use reason as a coherence, a consistency checking tool to see, you know, to talk about this. And then you get into the sociological layer. I mean, let's have this conversation like civil human beings and let's really listen to each other. And let's see if you are actually, if you're actually moving towards having some openness to new ideas, you know, we'll be open to each other. And that makes the conversation more fun. And, but this is, you know, there are levels of incredible complexity to this whole thing that we have so adapted and learned implicitly, can hardly articulate it, that we can actually play these games together. And that's a really wild thing. Yeah, going off of that, it seems like kind of what you were talking about and with Jonathan Haidt and Carl Jung actually, there's this idea of what Jung calls the archetypes. And now evolutionary psychology seems very similar to what they call modules. Or I think Haidt in The Righteous Mind said it was like innately prepared idea, or maybe I'm getting the exact term wrong, but it's something like that. It's basically, you know, from birth, or it's just sort of like an instinct or something. And have you read about like Haidt's idea of the idea of modularity or like modules? He talked about it. Wait, did you say you read The Righteous Mind or do you have it? I did read The Righteous Mind, but that was a few years ago. And so it's not working well. I probably read it and forgot it, never learned it. Okay, okay. No, he talks about it. Obviously there's like the elephant and the rider. But that's like the first metaphor that we're intuitive, that goes into a social intuitionism. But his second main idea is the moral foundation theory. So like basically there's like careness, careness, fairness, authority, liberty, something else. And then basic, so those are like the modules. Those are like, yeah, that's what he's saying are like the innately prepared ideas. So like based on how you're raised, based on what actions you choose to do, those can change, right, to a degree. But it's sort of, it seemed very similar to me to Carl Jung's idea of the archetypes. And then I was wondering, when Jonathan Haidt was talking about these modules, it feels to me like Haidt is taking a very sociological approach or behaviorist approach, where he's saying like, this is what it seems to be. This is how we can categorize them in a useful sort of detached sense. It seems like Carl Jung is saying like, what are these things as we experience them? And I don't know if that's when he's talking about the archetypes and the images and like, you know, dreams or see these demons or angels or mythical figures as maybe unconscious emissaries or representations of the modules that like Haidt is talking about. Like sort of like how we can see these modules represented in a metaphoric form. Like as, you know, like if you look at demons or angels, like the representations maybe of the absolute vices or virtues of these forms, right? So like the forever giving angel or benevolent angel would be like the ultimate virtue of caring, the caring foundation or module or whatever. I don't know if that's it. I mean, that's one of the things I'm- But that's an interesting question to try and relate those, the archetypes to these modules. That's an interesting question. Or about out of time. So any last things you wanted, last licks you wanted to get in or? I don't know. Nothing's coming to mind right now. I think in my original scene, what was it? I wanted to talk about, I think it was like phenomenology or whatever. Cause it's interesting. What was it? Well, there's been a few visiting professors who talked on like phenomenology and that as a basis for, well, as a different way of viewing, I guess, religious experience or whatever. Yep, yep, yep. Like, I guess maybe briefly I could talk on my own religious background. I don't know, it's kind of a, it's probably be too long for this timeframe, but I don't know. That'd be okay, I guess. Yeah, we got about five minutes and it gives me a break until the next conversation. So on Monday afternoons, I kind of line them up. Okay. So yeah, I guess I'll start out. So I was raised in the Mormon faith. Oh, okay. Yeah. So yeah. So basically that was pretty interesting. My experience with that, I sort of been my, I guess, undertone a lot of my religious experiences. It felt like a lot of people in the Mormon faith or whatever are like really good people and there's a lot of good teachings, but I guess there's a lot of hypocrisy. I mean, I guess in a lot of religions there are. I mean, obviously- To be a human being is to be a hypocrite. It's pretty much part of the package. Yeah. I mean, that wasn't my main issues, I guess, with the religion is that it was theologically or philosophically kind of, well, to me, from what I found bankrupt, like there wasn't a lot there when I pushed. So I was like, you know, pushing on the questions of what they said God was like or all this stuff, and just kind of fell apart, at least for me. And then I went through, it's interesting because I went through sort of maybe a lot of people are still in this state or whatever, like being like an angry atheist where now, because I thought Mormonism was wrong and at least theologically, philosophically bad, then well, all religions bad. And I kind of bought into like the Richard Dawkins, like what was it? Like what did he write? Like the selfish, well, selfish gene. Selfish gene. He wrote something on God as well. I'm forgetting it right now, but I kind of bought into that. So that's why when I'm reading Hape now, it's very interesting because he's describing the new atheist. And I have this like personal, like I was there like sympathizing with them like now like six or seven years ago, and then kind of like that faded away. And now I'm like, I guess agnostic or whatever. I don't know. I don't really subscribe to anything. I don't know, but. The difficulty with the, well, the difficulty with the LDS faith is that it's so new. Now they want to make the argument that it's a re. Yeah, yeah, a renovation like a. A renovation of Christianity, but to the degree that I understand it, it's a pretty radical renovation. And it's, you know, that you have the question, okay, if it's a renovation, how well will it stand up to scrutiny with respect to a lot of the other testing that's been done on the Old and New Testament, the canonical Bible. That's happened over the centuries. And what happened, you know, in upstate New York at the time that the LDS formed and Jehovah's Witness formed, it was a millennial, it was a millennial age in this burned over area and just whole groups of religions that had similar traits kind of grew out of that area. But I personally have a lot of respect and I live in California. So there's a, in the West, the Mormon population, I didn't know many LDS people when, you know, I grew up out East, but came West, obviously, they're all over, even a. Yeah, Utah. Poor homeless addict that used to sleep literally against my door for five years here. He was, you know, he was a deeply religious Mormon and that's hard to do if you're also a terribly, if you're a really brutal alcoholic and drug user. But, you know, at the same time, a lot of respect for the community, how the values that they hold, the way that they keep their families together. And I do have, I have tremendous respect for the Mormon community and how they live. And so it's an interesting, to me, it's a very interesting, it's a very interesting study in religion. That this particular turns they've made. Now, one of the guiding lights of my denomination, Richard Mao, who was a philosophy teacher at Calvin College, went on to become the president of Fuller Seminary. He reached out and built a lot of good connections to academics in the Mormon community. Took a lot of heat from that, from evangelicals that were being too soft. What, you're gonna be jerks to these people? That helps what cause exactly? But he's had a lot of very interesting conversations with other LDS academics at, I think, at Brigham Young and some of the other colleges. So to me, it's a fascinating faith. I'm actually quite interested in it. And the way, the particular turns that they took with respect to, you know, because Christianity has this huge history, and here this sect comes out and they make particular turns and they, in a sense, want a degree of respect from Christians for them, but also want the liberty to kind of carve out their own trail. And the couple of times I visited Salt Lake City and went down to the temple and the museum and all of that, my impression was this is like the most American of all religions within this certain ethos. Yeah, yeah. Pioneering and fascinating, fascinating religion to me. So, interesting. But thanks for sharing that. Yeah, we are about out of time. So if we talk again, maybe we can go further into that because it's- Yeah, for sure. And it's a fascinating religion. And now on the top of it, now your studies of Chinese and Japanese. Yeah, yeah, I have a few frameworks that, it's interesting, yeah, because my religious framework typically is in that, so the traditional Christian framework with like the Trinity and stuff is actually like, it's like a new idea to me rather than being like, oh, that's just- Right. So it's interesting, because then I'm like coming kind of as an outsider, kind of not, because I'm still raised in this culture, but I don't know. Fascinating. Well, it was great talking to you, Trevor. Yeah, it was great talking with you, Paul. And study hard and do well. Yep, thank you again. Take care. Have a good night. Yep, bye-bye.