https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=SNfv51SVB0k

 Well, how are you doing Jeff? Jeff, we've talked before. Yeah, we talked about Job last time and this time maybe we'll just talk more about kind of your project and what's going on because I've been watching your videos and I don't know if I can add anything to it but. No, it's, it's, well and I think the, I think the Job, I think the Job conversation went very well. I think a lot of people really enjoyed it. Yeah, I think so too. I was happy with all the comments. Everyone seemed to be jiving with it. I didn't really get any negative feedback at all. I had a conversation with a guy who didn't want to be recorded who I hope, you know, I, I, I, you know, I always say I want to record it because after you have the conversation and it's like, even if you don't share it, you just have a record of it and it was a really, so he also, he and I also talked about Job for a long time and that part I think he really would wanted to have shared and I don't have it. So right after doing all of that. Yeah, he, he was a mathematician from England and had some really good, really interesting perspectives on math and Job and really interesting stuff and I don't have a record of it because I didn't record it because, you know, people have legitimate reasons to not be recorded and I want to honor that but sometimes it's like, dude, you're killing me. We have this great conversation and it's gone. Right. It's just like it never happened. No, no. So, so I think I will talk to him again and I, and I think we will get some of that stuff up. So, okay, cool. But I, but people really enjoyed your perspective on Job and I'm, you know, I'm really grateful. It was, it was really good. So yeah, thanks for doing that. That was a lot of fun. I don't know. So, so, so what, so what are you thinking about for today? Where do you want to start? Well, I was kind of inspired. Like I was like, I got to talk to Paul again after you posted the Paul Maxwell stuff. And so I started going through a few of his videos and he's really good. And then you also mentioned Peter Rollins. Someone had sent the video to you. Yeah. And did you ever get a chance to watch that? Yeah, I started in fact chopping it up and really starting to process it. But then the, the Heinz style video came out and then a few other videos came out and it just kind of got, you know, so it's still there in my head. I want to do a video on that because it's an interesting conversation. I've been following Rollins for like 10 years now. Really? And well, I mean, the last few years have been shaky because I haven't been, I got disillusioned with his project because it was, I mean, well, let me just. Before I get going on Rollins, maybe I can just tell you where, like where I came from and how I got to Peterson and found you and all this. And Rollins plays a key, like a key role in my story. So I grew up evangelical. Well, I mean, I grew up in a Nazarene church. My parents got saved when I was about eight and we started going to church regularly. So I basically just grew up in the church. My parents, I can't go into too much details with them because of what they do, but they basically, my dad was a professor at the University of Idaho. He taught electrical engineering and he quit his job to do basic like ministry work. My mom and him are still teaching to this day, like overseas teaching English, stuff like that. Okay. So they like, they took seriously the idea that God wanted them to serve. And so during my childhood and stuff, we would go on different serving opportunities overseas and whatnot. So when I graduated high school, I was looking for an opportunity like that. So I found an organization called Youth with a Mission. You know Youth with a Mission? Yeah. Yeah. So for the next, I guess it's four or five years after high school, I was in Youth with a Mission doing missions work with short-term outreaches and stuff and spent a lot of time in Asia. Went to Costa Rica and Mexico, took lots of youth groups places and stuff like that. And so I was root, like one of the key things in Youth with a Mission was just that like you had to seek the voice of God and try and follow God and for yourself. Like not only like the mission was there to provide some sort of structure, but Youth with a Mission is very loose structurally. And it's just like everyone can do what they feel called to, which is good because you can do what you feel called to, but it's bad because everyone's just doing what they feel called to. So it's a very open and wild kind of, or it can be. Some places, like they have places all over the world. Anyway, don't get too far off track. Anyway, so I was going to try to be a missionary and I was really trying to act out what I believe was the highest value and the highest, you know I'm putting this in Petersonian terms. So I was trying to really act this out and it was I wanted God to tell me what to do and I wanted to do it. And I figured the best thing and the hardest thing and the most important thing to do would be to try to go somewhere difficult and preach the gospel or help people or do that. The problem was is that I could never get it to happen. So I would always try to set something up and I'm young too, so I don't know what I'm doing anyway. And so I started going to school for business to try to get a business degree because there's a lot of guys I knew that were doing, opening up coffee shops or small factories or whatever and then proceeding to do ministry out of those locations as well as just provide jobs and do good stuff. And I had kind of a crisis when I was 22, 23. And I hated my business classes. I didn't know for sure if God wanted me to go overseas or not. And people would get up and they would say God called me to Tibet or God called me to this specific people group. And I had on my heart, I wanted to go to North Korea. I was like, I'm going to go to the hardest place it's impossible to get to. And you're probably going to be killed. Right, right. But I even had like, like at that point, I had like a margarine complex of some sort where I envisioned me sacrificing my life. I'm not going to live until I'm 30. You know, you know, that kind of thing. So I but but I can never see I can never make it happen or God wouldn't make it happen or I don't know what was going wrong. And so I was like, I came to this crisis point. I was just like, God, if you want me to go somewhere and do something, just tell me and I'll go do it. I just and it was. It was like a plea because I needed I needed that I couldn't. Keep going without having a clear direction. And so. I was just I was pleading with God because I was like, I don't like these business classes, I don't know what I'm doing right now, I got to have the direction, just tell me whatever it is, I don't even care, I'll do it. And and he just said to me, he was like, what do you want to do? And I thought my answer would be. I thought it would be, you know, I want to do missions, I want to do it, but it wasn't I wanted to play music and I had been in a building and immediately God said, just we'll go do that. And technically, I wanted to produce music, and so I was like, I already knew what the plan was, I already had like kind of been thinking about it, whatever. And so like I had kind of an uncalling experience where I got up in front of everyone in the in the mission during like we had a prayer and fasting day on a Friday. And so we were having just worship music and prayer and fasting. And people would get up and they would either pray spontaneously or or confess something or secure something on the heart. So I got up and I told everyone that I wasn't called anymore. Hilarious. I was going to go do music production and it was like this. It was like the antithesis of what normally happens when someone gets up and like I'm probably the Tibet. Everyone was extremely supportive, like they couldn't have gone better. They totally didn't hear where I was going from. So anyway, I leave and I go to an audio engineering school in Arizona. And and I you know, it reminds me of when when Peterson talks about Abraham leaving his tent and he immediately falls into a famine and then a tyranny. And and like school was great. You know, nothing nothing terrible happened. But I went I had to do a mandatory internship in New York City. So I was like, here I go. God's going with me. I'm going to do it. And I spent six months doing my internship. I worked for free. I was just struggling, struggling, struggling. And there was just this endless wave of interns coming into New York City. And there was no job in sight. And I had money and I was just like, what am I going to do? So my brother was working in Omaha, Nebraska. And he's like, he he had me come out or his boss had me come out to help set up a project. It had to do with some video editing or whatever. And I knew about that. And so I did that. He's like, you ever need a job? Just let me know. I was like, yeah. I was like, I need a job. So I left New York City and I moved to Omaha, Nebraska. And it was. It was. It was the worst. I mean. Omaha, I mean, there's good people in Omaha, but it was it was not good. And it was just like soul crushing because I was I was like, I was going to go live my dream and I was going to go do something great. You know, God's with me. And it was just like, no, nothing, nothing's working. You were going to go overseas and suffer for the Lord in North Korea. Not that he made you suffer in New York and Nebraska. You didn't like anything about suffering for the Lord. Hey, you know what? It's still suffering. I know. Amazing thing was, when I'm on the move to Omaha, I met my wife. And so we ended up talking long distance and we ended up getting married and started family life. We moved to Kansas City and then. Had had my first son and life started. And during this whole point from. New York and this, let's see, when did I leave New York? I left New York in 2004, got married in 2005. And so the next. The next 10 years, what I was, I never really. Fell away from God, but I I was struggling to figure out what God was, because I knew God. It was involved in missions, but I didn't know God that was in the world. OK, I didn't. I didn't know how he worked, so I was just trying to. Figure all that out, so about the time I came in contact with Rob Bell. And started listening to his stuff, and then that's how I came in contact with Peter Rawlins, and he wrote a book in 2008 or 2009 called How Not to Speak of God, and he's got he's got his PhD. I think it post structure was in yourself. And so it's very postmodern deconstruction type of. Type of work, and so his thing, he would just it was almost just sort of a game in that book where he would just have a posing concept, so just be like atheist, atheist. Maybe like when you know God, you don't know it. And when you don't know God, you know it. And kind of these just concepts coming out of the evangelical world. I was just like it finally was like unlocking stuff that I had kind of like just tightly gripped, you know, that I was just like, OK, I can just let this go and not have to try to, you know, control my faith so much. So it was a very. In in in like the Facebook groups and message boards around Rollins work, it's a lot of talk about deconstruction. It's not technically what what was it there to meant by deconstruction, but but people just talk about their faith being deconstructed. So that's kind of what was going on was I was just breaking everything down. I never really let go of God. And we kept going to church and stuff. My wife was always a strong believer, but I was always kind of flirting with. You know, atheist thinkers and just all these thoughts, and I'm high in openness to you, so I'm just going through everything I could find that hits my interest. So. Where to go next? Yes, so I guess I guess. Yeah, what was happening is I went through this deconstruction. So evangelicalism was a very tightly constrained system. And so this just opened all that up. But it came to a point where it was just like the nihilism and the hopelessness started to creep in. And you're like, OK, what's the game plan for this part? Like, what's the solution here? And I kept holding on to Rollins work and and but. Nothing was happening like you just kept doing these things, just kind of pulling things apart and whatever. Which is helpful if you were like, I think you think about it in Petersonian terms as it's the order and chaos like. If you're in too much order, you need some chaos and chaos is good for you. So that's what Rollins was for me. But after a while, it just started getting too much. And I'm like, where's you know, I had this. I was like, where's the word? And then to make it worse. Is just that huge disconnection in the materialist world between my faith and then science. And and I could never just deny either God or evolution. And so this this is like. I was. I was waiting for someone to just make the connection, and no one was talking about it. The atheists were just dismissing this side and the in all the Christians with this dismissing evolution and science. And I was like, I don't I don't know where to go. Like, I was just I didn't have the time or the ability or the resources to think about it. So. So when Peterson came along, I immediately it was the Joe Rogan podcast and was first on. I was like, oh, this is it. You know. That you just did it. And. And. I don't know. In a way, it saved my faith. But it was more than that, because he I mean. For me, he just saved the whole world. You know, I'm not trying to be too dramatic about Peterson, but it really impacted me. And I was telling my friend once about, man, sorry for crying. That's okay. Don't worry about it. But it was like, I was like, because we were talking about Peterson and like a lot of my friends, like I was like, isn't this amazing? And they're like, I guess. I have a couple of friends that, like they were, they're still disappointed in me. They're my good friends. I still talk to them. They're still good friends, but they're very disappointed in me. Oh, join the club on that score. I got a lot of people disappointed in me. But I was telling my one friend when I was explaining like why this was such a big deal, I was like, well, cause the God I wanted was a God of the whole world. He wasn't just the God of one area or another. So it was, it was this huge, huge deal for me. So anyway, so, but, so I've stayed in contact with Peter Rollins work and I've been trying to make sense of it. And I was watching before Peterson, as I was trying to piece things together, I got into Marxism just like trying to figure it out intellectually. So I was listening to lecture after lecture after lecture, you know, college level lecture on Marxism, trying to figure it out. And it was a good critique of capitalism or whatever. And then I was listening to a lot of Zee Jack who influences Rollins a lot. So I've listened to hundreds of hours of Zee Jack and Zee Jack's really, he's, I like him a lot. I think he's really good. And, you know, he's, he's a Marxist or self-proclaimed Marxist or whatever, but he's not like the, he's not the ones that, you know, sometimes when Peterson goes off about postmodernism and Marxist, I'm like, well, that's not Zee Jack. Zee Jack's doing something a little more interesting. And well, anyway, Peter Rollins never comes back to this, never establishes any sort of order. He leaves that just totally unspoken. And he just is kind of in the realm of deconstructing things, which is super helpful from everyone coming from the religious background. And so in that video, he talks about that instinct versus desire. I like what he had to say about Peterson. He, he had a good summary of Peterson that I thought was, I thought it was interesting how, what he grabbed onto and how he phrased it and how he said that Peterson wants balance and harmony. And I think that's pretty good. I think that the Jungian, world seeks balance and harmony. I think it's not so simple as Rollins put it because there is the individual in Christ that bridges the gap. No, I thought Rollins in that video was very fair to Peterson. I thought he was very accurate. Yeah, I wasn't a little bit surprised. Yeah, no, it was very good. Yeah. So he, and so he goes off onto this thing about that it's instinct versus drive. And then I was just thinking about that and that was kind of like the core, at least one of the major parts of what he had to say. And I was like, how, or instinct versus desire, did I say drive? Yeah. Like how do you differentiate between instinct and desire? Right. Like that's the, like, I feel like the whole thing just falls apart immediately. Right. Because he's like, he's like instincts, basically pragmatism and utilitarianism where it, where is the desire goes beyond somehow. And I get what he's saying. Yeah. But, and you can see how that's useful if you're talking to someone who's trapped in an order, in an ordered world. Yep. But it, it's almost like Rollins is embedded within the Peter Sonnenworld. Rollins isn't outside it. And so his, his major, his critique is just like, like I think he has a point about, you know, some of, some of the things like where he talks about desire being fueled, not by just the object, but the not having the object, the gap, the lack. Like, I think that's really nice. Like, I think that's really nicely done. So, so it's not just, it's not just the object that possesses you. It's also not having the object or not being able to get it. And, and like, for an evangelical and for me, when I was like trapped in like, trying to reach out to God, it's like, it's like, maybe you don't, you're not exactly addicted to God. You're addicted to not getting him. And then you like, I think that's super helpful to be like, okay, what am I actually doing? Like, what's my motivation? Um, I don't know. Did you, do you have any thoughts so far on? I do. I do. I, without giving away your videos. Well, it's okay. I give it away. I give it every, I give it all away. Okay. But what's it? So, so he's got instinct and his point that, you know, by instinct we eat, but we only eat enough desire. He's really talking about addiction where in a sense we are, well, what's the addiction is very complicated. One, one side of addiction is I eat food because I'm longing to fill, fulfill a desire that food can't actually satisfy. Right. And so I eat more than I need. So there's instinct and then there's desire and see at the same time, well, you got it in my last long video that I did when I went to Peter Kreeft and the argument from desire. Yeah, I was thinking about that because CS Lewis's point is that, and Peter Kreeft develops this then is that we have a desire for that which we cannot lay our hands on. And, and, and I liked the, even though I said some critical things and people, people kind of got upset that I said, not a or this guy that rebel wisdom had who talked about addiction. And I'd like to watch, I need, I need about 10 times more time than I have now. I can't do everything, but I want to watch more of that guy. And I want to read his book cause he really grabbed my attention. And, but, but there's this connection with addiction that, that we are, we are longing for something that we cannot satisfy with the things at hand in this world. And that's at the basis of CS Lewis's argument that he puts forth in, in mere Christianity and a number of other places that, that, that Peter Kreeft lays out that this is, this is part of what's going on in us. And, and so when I was listening to Peter Rowlands, I was thinking, yeah, but here's the problem. Here's the problem that I have with, with, with the idea. Here's the problem that I have with the, with the idea of, of romantic Marxism that people can somehow employ this and bring about justice, equity, all of these things. You're, you're going to, you're talking to the addicts here. They, they are already misusing food or substances or control in other people's lives or sex or whatever. And now you're saying, Oh, well, just, just all be fair. And it's like, have you met it? Have you met an addict? Have you met a person, you know, Oh, just talk to them and tell them and they'll do it. I'm a pastor. It's my job to stand in front of people and talk to them. And so I, I've said this before. I love it when people come to me, pastor, why don't you tell the people to do this? And it's like, yeah, that's going to change them. Really? Have you ever seen that happen? You know, there's the old story of the pastor who gets up and preaches the same sermon he preached last week. And then he repeats it like three or four times. And everybody's like, pastor, why are you repeating the same sermon? I'm going to keep repeating it until you do it. People don't work that way. And so this idea that, you know, at least capitalism tries to harness our disease in order to bring something about, you know, that's not just Ayn Rand, that idea is out there much broader than that. So, so there are a lot of ideas in that. And I also think there's a, there's a parasitism to certain kinds of leftism that I noticed, you know, even when the left just keeps winning the social conflicts, they are, they're always posturing themselves as the victim and they're always losing. And it's like, Oh, what war haven't you won? And, and so then at some point you have to ask them, Oh, so what, with what will you be satisfied? And now I'm asking who's doing instinct and who's doing addiction because, okay, so here's this frontier, here's this frontier, here's this frontier. What, what boundary don't you cross until you just run out of boundaries? And then you begin to realize you're just addicted to crossing boundaries at what cost. So, you know, I, it was so funny because he talks about, you know, he's very right on some things you want to, you want to get to know what homeless is about. Talk to a homeless person. Peterson actually says that in his question and answer video, I talked to plenty of homeless people and it's like, I learned tons from them, but I also recognize the misery. I mean, I had, I had this homeless man. He literally slept against my door for five years and I'd be here in here at night working in my office because I'd split shift cause I'd homeschool and all the people are going to like the language I'm about to use, but this is what he, all he would do. He would lean against that door. He was bipolar. And he would just be fuck, fuck, fuck, fuck. Want to die? Want to die? Want to die? Want to die? Want to die? I hate to live. He would do this for, he would do this for hours. And you know, I couldn't, I couldn't move the guy and you know, and I, you know, I'd feed him, I'd help him. I drive him to the high, I do all kinds of things for him, but I'd be sitting in my office and you would just have a front row seat to what it was like for him to live. And it's like, all right, are the whole, is this guy your model of what life is supposed to be? I've seen it up close. You know, it's really complicated, but no, I don't, I don't wish this on anyone. So I, you know, I appreciate, I think there's a dynamic going on where I think you're right. And I think Peterson's chaos order is a helpful framework to work through some of this stuff, but I don't find a there there with, with, with, with what I hear from that crowd often, you, you keep deconstructing until you're sitting with a floor full of Legos. Yeah. He, he, like he deconstructs stuff and then he leaves the results kind of unspoken. So he's like, if you just deconstruct it, the natural thing will just happen. And he doesn't, he wants to be very hands off with it because I mean, just like he grew up in Northern Ireland or at least Ireland during the troubles. Right. And so like these, this, these are ordered factions, you know, in conflict with each other. So he wants to get rid of like whatever that is that's ordered and also conflicting. So, so, um, but I lost my train of thought. Um, well, and I think, and that's often what I see is they're like, well, here it is. And it's like, what do I do with it? You know, okay. What do I do with it? I, I need a path to live on. And the thing that often strikes me too about, and I've seen this in other groups, they, all right. So you're always pushing against the man. You're always pushing against the institution. You're always pushing against the establishment, but you know what? You draw a salary, you have medical benefits, you ride on planes, you, you ride in cars. You might not own one. Good for you. You still ride in them. You take the bus. I mean, we all live on this infrastructure and we live off it. And if, and I, you know, so one of the things that if you live in a very chaotic space, one of the things you learn is you hunger for order, you know, live in the Dominican Republic where the lights are always going off or whole hosts of endless reasons. And what do you come back to the United States? And it's like, they plug clocks in. But I, yeah, but what's weird is he leaves all of that unspoken, but it's not weird if you think about like in evangelical Protestant culture or, or just cult church culture, you, you talk about the order and you leave all the doubts unspoken, right? You can't talk about doubts. Right. Like, like, so when I was going through this Rollins really opened something up. This is cause I could vocalize doubt and I wouldn't be judged. In fact, in Rollins framework, vocalizing doubt actually brings you closer to God than if you don't. So, so it's, it's almost like a mirror image of the evangelicalism that I grew up in. Like here you don't speak about doubt and here you don't speak about belief. Yep. Well, and, and, and, you know, I, I don't know, I, I won't, I won't mention his name, but a guy I conversed with a lot on Twitter, who was one of the guys that sent that, that video to me. I mean, what you just said, he said to me, you know, we didn't post our conversation, you know, but that's very, very true is, and you see that's, that's, I always find that funny because that's not the church I grew up in. My father's church was, you know, we had heroin addicts and, and we had poor black folks living in all kinds of ugly, difficult chaos. But then we also had Dutch reformed folks who were pretty high on order. And so in terms of where I grew up and the faith that was instilled on me, it always had order chaos and they always live next to each other. And so when I would go to really high order places that didn't have that chaos, yeah, I get that. I get people, people busting out. Well, my, my father's church was, so it was a, it was a black church with Dutch, some Dutch reformed, children of the Dutch reformed community in it. And, and I think both groups were both the African Americans who were coming to the church and the Dutch reform people who were coming to church. And this was in the sixties and seventies. So there's a lot of order chaos stuff going on, you know? And so that church Northside chapel in Patterson became a place where both sides, sorry, I got this cold. Both sides were dealing with, I mean, the black folks were looking for some order. The white folks were looking for some chaos and they found it together and it was a really beautiful thing. And that's the history of this church that I'm pastoring now too. So I think you're very right. What do you just don't know? I, and I watch a lot of, cause you know, there's this whole progressive evangelical movement that's going on now, the, you know, kind of the tail end of the emergent movement. And I watch, I watch these people who grew up in highly ordered places and they're going out and they're deconstructing and right. And I'm just like, eh, I'll wait. I'll wait. Yeah. I'm in these Peter Rollins Facebook groups and stuff. He has his own kind of theology name called pyro theology. So it's the theology that continuously burns anyway, but, but like these younger guys, so I'm 39. And so there's these younger guys coming in there like 20, 25, and they're going through their deconstruction after growing up in it. And they're like, and I'm like, Oh, everyone's going through this. And I just like, can't get involved. Like you try to be like, no, you got to value the order. Yeah. Save your breath. They'll find it. I don't even engage. I go through the, there was one, there was one Facebook group I was a part of called the liturgist. It's, it's some podcasts and they talk about deconstruction. It's this whole thing. Yep. And I had to leave that group cause I could like just read all those posts. I was like getting anxious. I was like, Oh man, they're just going through it. Yeah. Well take, take some of those people and, and well, often what'll happen is, okay, have a baby. Right. Because you can, if you're, if you're young and single or even married without, I mean, you can, and you're from a high order place and you've already got that order internalized with you. Right. You know, yeah, you kept your passport. When you went overseas, you protected it. You, you kept your money and you're able actually to leave the country when, I mean a lot of people who grew up in high order cultures don't realize those are achievements. Right. So crossover on the other side and yeah, get a load of that chaos, baby. You'll be, you'll be looking for some order pretty darn quick, especially when you bring a child into the world. And then suddenly it's like, Oh crap. Right. Well, a lot of them, like when they have kids, they were like, they're like, how do you guys deal with this when you like, Oh, you're, you're about to figure out that like some rules are good and you're going to want to cling to that for sure. That's right. That's right. Yeah. You let that little kid be a, you see how that goes, not taking care of the kid or giving the kid no boundaries. Some of them are actually trying to raise their kids in like this freer environment. I'm like, I'm going to grow up and he's going to want to wear a suit and a tie and he's going to want to work in an office. And that's going to like fuel his soul because his parents were just too crazy. Talk to the children of hippies, baby. The children of alcoholics talk to the children of drug addicts, talk to the children of neglect. Boy, they'll take to order faster than you can imagine. And some of them will get really rigid with their order fast because okay, instinct and desire. What are, what shalom, what heavenly country are they looking for? And they're doing it through order. Well, the others are doing it through chaos. It's, it's an old story. Yeah. What's, what's funny. I was thinking about Lewis's desire. So he had that, who was it that you played on that last video? Yeah. Peter Kreef talked about that the argument from desire was actually a negative version of God. It was, it was, or it was, how did I forget how he phrased it? It was the, it was an interesting phrase to use. This isn't actually like a negative argument, like the lack of something proves that there's something there. Right. But in Peter Rawlins work, um, he, he posits that lack, that desire. And then he says, instead of going where Lewis said, said, is like, this is the proof of God. He's like, that's what we need to undermine. Right. So when Peter Rawlins work, he's trying to undermine that to, um, obviously like if that's an addiction or something, you want to get under that or whatever. And that's where the psychoanalysis comes in and the Lacan and, um, all those guys that I don't even understand. I can't even, but, And I think if you really want to mine that vein, look to the ancient Greek, cynics. Oh, really? Because all the cynics, I mean, at some point, so, so you're going to sit there and tell me, well, well, what implicit in the practice of deconstructing is in fact a whole degree of higher order. You know, a cynic might just pull the, oh, you've invited me here to instruct you. I'll pull down my pants and take a dump on your stage. There's a learning lesson. You know, really, I mean, let's, let's, let's deconstruct. Let's not play around with, you know, Yeah. There's those crazy avant-garde artists that would push all those limits. And that's exactly what they're trying to do. To break all those barriers. That's right. And then this is, you know, we've culturally, we've been doing this for a while, but you're exactly right. You've got, you've got super high order kids who've grown up in super high order. And, you know, but that was the, you know, so I mentioned George Marsden's book, the Twilight of the American Enlightenment. I mean, he runs through that in the fifties. It's very interesting because, you know, well, what did it take for America to win the second world war? I mean, the whole country had to buckle down and suffer. And this was right after the depression and we're going to buckle down and suffer in this existential crisis. And we're going to, we're going to, we're going to beat Germany and Japan. And well, then the fifties, the fifties has all of this angst in it about order. And, and, and what then was the company man today would be the non-player character. And so Marsden's book nicely goes through all of that. And that really gives birth to the sixties and the sixties. It's like, you know, screw order, you know, let's, let's let's be out there. Look, all right, go for it. Be out there. How's that go? That's, it's a heck of a lot of fun until, you know, unless you're the baby that's being handed around the commune, right? Maybe to go, okay, maybe it won't. It's why you pick babysitters. Right. Yeah. The Manson family kind of ended that whole. I'm old enough to remember the seventies. I was born in 79. Yeah. Yeah. The seventies, you know, it's, it's, it's when the seventies is the end of the sixties party when, you know, it's Vietnam. It's, and then of course, who comes on stage, but Reagan, you know, so, so Jimmy Carter is the end of the seventies and he's telling America, we've got an oil crisis put on a sweater. Reagan comes in and new conservatism. It's the bright show, you know, let's get rid of all this negatism. And it's, oh, Reagan is in a sense, he's a new synthesis. He's a, he's a Hollywood actor, a divorced president who comes in with a bright, shiny new day. And so, you know, we've been processing this stuff for a long time. Yeah. Well, I wanted to bring up one more thing before we go. Yep. It was just like, Paul Maxwell, he had a, had a video called the was it the entire history of philosophy? Did you, did you ever see that one? Someone else sent that video to me. Mary did Mary. Who had a conversation with, she said, Oh, you gotta watch this video. Yeah, it was good. I like how he broke down into metaphysics. He's like, there's three major branches. So it's metaphysics, epistemology, knowledge, and then axiology. And I like how he at the very end when he's like postmodernism is all about axiology. It's about values, degrees. It's, it's not, it's about aesthetics. And I was like, Oh, that's it. That's exactly it. And he's like, they're, they're front loading aesthetics instead of front loading knowledge or, or the metaphysics. And that also, of course I sent you a video. You probably get a billion videos, but it's Phyllis Tickle. Yeah. Yeah. Did you ever watch that? I watched, I watched some of it. Yeah. Very interesting. The first part's good. The last part isn't as good. I heard the idea before though. But she talked about how, how the church is always going through these authority crisis every 500 years. So in, it was in 1000, it was the, the Pope was instated or something. I'm going to get it wrong. Anyway, 1500 was the reformation. And the question was, where's the authority? Because the Pope wasn't reliable as an authority. So the, yeah, the word. And you could see the move from metaphysics to epistemology at that point, because now the text, the knowledge became the authority. And then she's, she was saying that right now we're going through another one of these 500 year cycles, whatever it is. But I think it's interesting that it would correspond with the spirit. So it's the age of the spirit and it corresponds with aesthetics and this axiology that, that it's no longer grounded in knowledge or metaphysics. It's grounded in, I don't know, whatever the postmodern thing is, where you're concerned with ethics primarily. It doesn't matter. Like you can see clearly how it's working because it doesn't matter what the ramifications are. You just have to treat everybody fairly all the time and make sure the systems do all that. And so, you know, yeah, I just thought that was really interesting. It is. It's good video. It's a good video. It's an, he walks through it quite, he's got a real gift for, for laying things out. Yeah. And then at the very end he said, said the key to it is the metaphysical has to reach out and touch them. And I was like, oh yeah, that's it. He's like, that's really good. Then didn't complete the cycle. No, he's, he's interesting and I'll have to talk to him one of these days. There's just so many videos, so many books and videos. And there's so, there's so little me. Well, anymore I just watch your videos and get caught up on everything. Cause you like just go through everything. I'm like, I don't even need to watch this next Peterson video, whatever. But the more, the more you go through, the more you realize is out there. And, and you know, and I know it's, Oh, it's been great. I shouldn't complain. I have absolutely nothing to complain about. This has been, this has been tremendously fun. Made a video where you just complained about, you're like, this is Paul and I'm going to set the record straight. No, that would be miserable. That would be the, some people would like it. I mean, it's amazing that whatever you put out there, somebody's going to, it's going to, it's going to, it's going to hit somebody's sweet spot and other body, but somebody's going to hate it. Just consider it like an experiment in postmodern aesthetics. It's about that time. Yeah. Well, thank you, Jess. This has been fun. Yeah. Thanks Paul. It's really great. And thanks for sharing your story. I think, Yeah, sorry I cried. I break down for you. Don't, don't be sorry. What's, what's the base? Sorry about, nothing to be sorry about is just, I gotta say it for some reason that, well, you know, if, if, if it were manipulative, there was one, I won't mention his name, but there was one, um, celebrity pastor that I was going to a conference with a friend of mine and he said, you just wait, he'll cry, you know, and, and, and, but, but my friend's point was it's manipulative, you know, and pastors, you know, bring it to this point and you know, it's, but there wasn't manipulative. So, okay. Well, thanks. Should I share, should I share this? Um, Yeah, I think so. I think everything's all right. Okay. I can send it to you first if you'd rather. No, it's good. Okay. All right. Well, thank you so much, Jess. Thanks for talking with me, Paul. All right. Take care. Bye. See you later. Bye. Bye.