https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=OOlJIorgTH4

 Yeah, it's like kind of an awkward start. Don't worry about it. As I'm sure all of these are. That's exactly right. It's rather strange because, you know, it's perfectly understandable psychologically. You get used to seeing someone in a, you know, I'm talking and then suddenly I'm talking back and it's your brain kind of like. I remember, you know, when I talked to Peterson, I had exactly the same thing. It was kind of like, oh yeah, I just met him the other night. Oh yeah. Last maybe two weeks ago. Okay. In Rochester. And yeah, it was, it was a wreck. I met, I actually, I went to a carving retreat with Jonathan Peugeot. Oh wow. I talked about that, but everything else on my list that I was like, I got to tell him thank you for this and like what I've learned and none of it came out. I'm sure he knows, you know, through everyone else. Yeah, he gets it. He gets it all the time. So yeah, that's, that's, that's, you know, you shouldn't feel embarrassed by it. It's just the way it is. Yeah. No big deal. Well, what's, why don't, so you live in Rochester and you sent, you know, I'll tell you, I haven't, we haven't done the Freddie and Paul show because Freddie's been in the hospital and he. Oh no. Yeah. He, he, I don't want to get into too much in case we publicize it, but he, you know, he basically slipped into pretty severe depression and he's, he's just, he's just really depressed right now and so doesn't want to talk on the phone, doesn't want visitors. Yeah. So people have been writing and said, well, you haven't done the Freddie and Paul show for a while and, and you're the, the backtrack that you made for him. He just, he just loved it. And he. Oh good. He's used it so often. I get tired of hearing it. Sure. But it's, it's. That's rough because he brings so much joy to, at least to me. Yeah. And to a lot of people. I mean, he, his mother, you know, his mother, who's also a member of the church and she shows up on the show fairly regularly. You know, she, you know, she's pretty, she's impressed by, you know, oh, for these people really connect with Freddie and they do. And so it's, you know, I continue to pray that Freddie, that this, I think it'll, it'll be a temporary thing. It's happened before and he's come out of it before. So, but it's, you know, part of it is, you know, mental illness, stigma. Freddie doesn't have an easy life anyway. He, he really doesn't. And the show, the show that we do is the show that we do. And then him singing on Sunday mornings is one of the real highlights for him of his week. And this is why we started doing the show. Cause he says to me one day, he says, you and I ought to do a TV show. I'm afraid anybody's going to put us on TV. I can, you know, what YouTube's for. That's right. That's what YouTube's for. Why don't we do, I'll just use my cell phone. We'll do little five minute shows and I'll post it on YouTube. And I never, you know, that was before Jordan Peterson or anything. I never, nobody ever watched them. And you know, we had 20, you know, 10, 15 people would watch them, mostly church and family and friends. And then of course this happened and Freddie's just been, he's loving it. Oh yeah, I bet. So yeah, you know, he's really depressed when he's, he's got no interest in making shows or making rap. So, so right. That's what's up with Freddie. Well, I hope it turns around for him. Yeah, I, I, I think it will. Yeah. I think in the past probably will again, but it's, you know, as, you know, Peterson's talked about this too, and I've seen it in so many other people, depression is just brutal. It's just brutal because so many things that cause pain, you can maybe escape, but you can't escape, you can't escape your own head. Can't escape your own thoughts. Right. So you got to find ways to cope and remember those. Yeah. Well, tell me a little bit about yourself. You live in Rochester? Yeah. I, yeah, I live in Rochester, New York, right near Lake Ontario. I have two dogs sitting over here. Go to school for business, but needed a creative aspect to that. So I'm in the process of, there's a pretty competitive welding program school around me and I, so I went to a near you for that. Fingers crossed that'll be kind of supplement to, that'll probably be the primary focus of my career. And then the business will kind of allow me to move into supervisory roles or something like that. Yeah. I have a cousin who's a welder and it's been a good vocation. He welded for years for other people and then basically went, figured he had enough reputation in the community. He lives in a small town in Massachusetts and went out on his own and he's not a mogul or anything, but he's been able to make a living for himself and his family and it's been a great trade. Yeah. And the workforce is aging, so it's a good time, I think. Well, that's true for a lot of the trades. As a culture, I don't think we have valued them sufficiently. We try to push everyone into college, but not everyone should go to college. It's a niche that we have elevated. Yeah. It took me a while to figure out, you know, enough is enough. This is not, I'm not a business guy. I don't want to work in an office. I want to work with my hands. So, yep. Yep. Oh, and thank you for the carving you sent me. Yeah. Yeah. It's cool. I've got it up on my shelf and sometimes people come in and say, what's that? It's the lobster and then that's the serpent eating itself. It's infinity and chaos and oh. Yeah. That's probably hard to explain. Well, there's a lot of me that's hard to explain. So, physical to look at and just know you're doing the right thing, I think. Thank you. Thank you. So, what's on your mind? What do you want to talk about? Yeah. I just thought I'd tell you a little bit about my journey. Yeah. In faith and that kind of dimension, I guess. I, well, recently I was in the Navy. I had a brain injury and was medically discharged. And then after that was maybe a year or two after that, I started getting into Peterson. And from something that happened in the Navy, I don't want to get into that, but I was agoraphobic. And so, Peterson helped me. Like, after I had been able to leave the house and go out during the daytime and stuff like that, he helped me understand why I was feeling like that. So that helped in that aspect. And then he started doing the biblical lectures and really got into that. I'd been an atheist since 14, 15, and at that point, 25 or 26, maybe 20, I don't know. Were you raised in? Were your parents Christians? Yeah, I was raised Lutheran. And then when my mom remarried, we went to a Presbyterian church. But by then I hadn't, I had really, I wasn't there. I had no faith, didn't find it compelling or interesting or any of that. So the biblical lectures kind of brought me around to being open to the idea of God. And then I needed to forgive a parent I hadn't talked to in two years. And that whole side of the family hadn't spoken with them or seen them in those two years. And I knew I wanted to forgive, but I was finding it really difficult. I felt justified in all the anger I was still holding onto. So I think at one point in his lectures, Peterson talked about viewing God as the kind of perfect father. And so I was able to just kind of say to myself, well, God said I should, so I will. And really worked towards, spent a few years in therapy. I had been in therapy by the time I watched those videos, but that kind of kicked it into high gear. So then I started going to this Jewish temple, reformed temple, with the idea that I wanted a more disciplined religion. And I was pretty resentful still of the church. So I thought, you know, Orthodox Judaism is very strict. There's, you know, you do this, you do this. And it was a lot like the military in my eyes, just keeping yourself in the straight and narrow. But the reform Jews are very accepting of converts. And it's more of a like, you do you, you are Jewish the way no one can tell you how to be Jewish. I think their philosophy. And I'm probably butchering that. So I spent a year there and got to be a part of that community, helping out, set up. And I still play guitar there maybe once a month. And then through your videos on CS Lewis's miracles, I don't remember exactly what it is, but what it was. But I was able to accept Christ as my Lord and Savior, you know, the whole. Wow. Yeah. I am so far down the rabbit hole now that I don't even matter how it started. And so at that point, I really started to move away from Peterson stuff because I had been in all of his classes and the big old lectures. And got really into Jonathan Peugeot and his channel. And so I decided I would check out an Orthodox Church, looked at a few in my area and was having some trouble connecting over the phone with one. So I Googled another one and it was all in English. So that's great. Way better than half Russian. So I called the priest and he called me back in a half an hour and went to service that I think it was that night. Give me a big bear hug. And just and there was another convert there waiting for me to like, Introduce me to the service that Wednesday night and you know, what is Vespers and here's the layout and here's what you do. And it was it was a really, really good experience. So I've been going there ever since I'm being I have my chrismation like confirmation into the church on Sunday. Wow. Congratulations. Thank you. Yeah. And that process kind of was pushed forward by I just sold my house and had some money left over paid my car off and then Jonathan and I went to the church and we went to the church. Yeah. And that process kind of was pushed forward by I just sold my house and had some money left over paid my car off and then Jonathan puts up this thing at the end of his one of his videos about the carving retreat in Connecticut, which is, you know, five hour drive for me. So that's the timing is perfect. Like I, I have the money for it. And so sign up for it and probably is probably one of the most impactful experiences I've had in my whole life. Wow. Wow. What made it so impactful? Just being well leading up to it. I thought, you know, well, it'll be a great experience for me. And then just kind of exponentially got got me even closer. But but while I was there, it was, it was at a Catholic seminary. So I could go down to the chapel whenever I wanted and pray and beautiful art everywhere. And just, I don't know, it was calm and we had a lot of great discussion. So there were four people in the carving class. There's painting class in the carving class with Jonathan was obviously the carving class. And we had this guy who is a 3D sculptor on on the computer for video games and was kind of in the St. Peterson, Joe track. And there was a union psychologist who interpreted dreams and like had a degree from Munich. So she had a lot of interesting things to say. And then there was a pastor who who led a homeless shelter for his whole career with lots of great stories. You get a lot of stories. Yeah. Yeah. Oh, it's intense. But yeah, it's just a great discussion. Great environment. There was a little drama with where we were, but I won't get to that. But it was eventful for sure. There's always drama. Just going to try and get out of the sun. Right. There's always drama in one way or another. This way. Yeah. We're redoing. I've got kids. I've got kids going to college. And so we're redoing rooms and waiting on a mattress delivery. So that's why I'm not in my office working from home today. Right. OK. I didn't realize they were that old. So was the yeah. Yeah. I've got I've got five oldest is. Oldest is 27 and the youngest is 18. Great. So the youngest is going off to college for the first time. Exciting. Yeah. Yeah. Kind of kind of traumatic. Lots of feelings. Yeah. Lots of feelings. My wife usually has those feelings for me, but I was watching him pack the other day and it's like, oh, but now this was this was this. Was this a thing that Jonathan did by himself or was he part of a larger thing? Yeah, it was. I don't know how to pronounce it. Hexam. Hexam. Aaron. Is an orthodox teaching organization. So they there's there's this guy, Merrick, who does the painting class, who's who's more overseas at more. OK. And lives in that in that area of Connecticut. And then he does the South Carolina one, too. I think Jonathan might still be out right now. OK. But yeah, so it's put on by them. And then the seminary is just the venue. OK. OK. OK. Wow. So you have been on a journey. Oh, yeah. It's like I'm constantly like. Every once in a while, it's just like, what the heck am I doing? This is crazy. Fourteen year old Adam would slap me across the face. And then I got it. He's only 14. What does he know? Yeah. But it's never like, you know, a crisis of faith or anything. Like, wow, I'm really going down this path. Yeah. So so when you so it sounds like you're very much tooled for, you know, doing stuff with your hands. You're looking at welding. You did a you did a carving thing. What did the what did you what did you carve and what did you work on and what are you working on? Yeah. I actually put it here. So I don't have to get up. But this is this is what we carve. Oh, wow. Oh, wow. In the shadow. But yeah, that's not, you know, that's Jonathan and his help. Beautiful. Jonathan helped a lot. And then I have. Out of reach. Angel Gabriel. I did. And then I gave one to Jordan of St. Nick. And he's he has a sword in one hand and the church in the other. OK. Yes. In order seems appropriate to give him. Yeah. I can't I cannot imagine all the gifts and books and things that he's given to me. When he's doing these things every night, because I saw people. Yeah, I saw people giving him stuff when he was in Sacramento. It's like, OK, this is just Sacramento. He's doing this. And the first round, he did like 45 cities in 60 days. Now he's doing a whole new it's like, dude, you're going to need a storage unit for all the stuff. He's going to have to take some some communist properties. Some communist propaganda. Yeah, another guy who is I was like when I was waiting in line for the picture. I was holding this little wooden icon like, oh, my God, I feel like an idiot. What are you going to do with this? And then a guy in front of me had painted a portrait of them. Wow. I was like, all right. I'm not the only one that's puts a lot of you know, it takes a lot of pressure off of me. Yeah. Yeah. So. No, I'm not really. Go ahead. I'm not really concerned about what he does with it. I just. You know. Why not? I completely agree. I was thinking, you know, he he's given so many books. Sure, he's got duplicates. I'm sure I'm sure everybody's given him because when I first when I first listened to him, I thought, oh, gosh, I know this guy's got to read C.S. Lewis. I mean, why? How is he not? How is he not talking about C.S. Lewis when he's dealing with the intersectionality between myth and faith? And and so that's for my first thought was I got to fire off. You know, I'm going to I'm going to, you know, get on Amazon and send him a book. And then I thought, now, wait a minute. And then I the more I began to appreciate the size of his following, I thought. And then the nature of his following. And then in this the San Francisco event I went to early on, you know, I met a bunch of people who were given in books and it's like, well, shoot, you know. Yeah. He'll never get around to it. No, unless he wants to. Well, that's exactly it. And people will often I mean, people send me all kinds of books. All kinds of book recommendations and video recommendations. And I can't I can't read it all. I can't keep up with it all. But then I watch myself seeing which things I pick up. And now as a Christian, I think, well, this is, you know, this is God at work in my life. And I often find that. What's that? The Holy Spirit's helping you out. That's right. And these things are, boy, this is really timely and how wonderful this person sent this to me. And it was just at the right time. And if you're an agnostic, you're going to say, well, that's just your subconscious. Well, OK. But I don't know if you're if you believe in God, you believe. Yeah. And stuff, at least if you're not a deist. When everything seems to time up perfectly, it's hard not to. It's hard to maintain that idea that it's just. You know, neurons. And. Well, I was years ago when I was I've always been thinking about books to write and I never get around to it just because way too ADHD. I was thinking, you know, I was thinking I was going to title a book, you know, you can get there from here because so so often my sermons are so all around the place and and you can get almost anywhere from anywhere. And. You know, was that just us projecting structure onto chaos or is in fact as God, in fact, made the world in such a way that there are deep connections beneath things. And, you know, obviously, all things then come to fruition in him. So, yeah, like like Jonathan says, everything's pointing to the same thing. Yeah, to that end. Some sense. So you with your welding, are you going to. I mean, are you going to start first with someone else or are you going to try and go it on your own at first or. Well, there is I try to keep it open ended. I don't think I would immediately start like freelance work. Yeah. But there is a metal artist in Rochester, who's pretty famous. And has a team of welders. And I think that would be like right up my alley to to work with him, even though it's it's abstract. So it's not as not as appealing, but still art. So, yeah, but but the more realistic thing would would be to find a company and then branch off at some point. How was how was Rochester doing? I mean, the the the fall of Kodak has to be just devastating for a community like that. Well, so both of my grandfathers were engineers at Kodak. My parents met at Kodak and a similar job. Yeah. Yeah. And my I think my great uncle was at Kodak. So it's everybody has someone who worked at Kodak and their family. My uncle worked at Kodak for a number of years before he was laid off. But the interesting thing is everyone was so worried about layoffs and all that. You were kind of insulated from the recession because no one was buying houses at that point. So in some some way, it kind of smooths that out, I think. Or at least I've heard. But it's some. It's hard to tell because I feel like every city like that would say, oh, we're bouncing back. And it does seem like that to me. Towns are expanding and there's more stuff to do and there's lots of events. There's a lot. I mean, the Jazz Fest is huge in Rochester. There's a Puerto Rican fest. Puerto Rican. I don't know. But festival in in Rochester and arts are big. So doing all right. My parents lived in I was just going to Google Google over here to Google Maps. My parents lived in Baldwin's Ville. OK. Out in the sticks. Yeah. Yeah. Let's see how far that is from. Yeah, that's oh yeah, it's quite a bit further east. Northwest of Syracuse. Oh, OK. And my father, that was the my father spent 36 years in Patterson and then wanted to have at least one other church. Church experience before retired. So he took the call to a little church in Baldwin's Ville, just northwest of Syracuse. And of course, loved it. He just he loved ministry. He loved loved churches. He loved people and but a lot of a lot of snow. Oh, man. Yeah. A lot of cold. My brother-in-law weren't so tied to to Rochester's family. And I think we would all head south. My little sister is very intent on on trying to get us all to move somewhere warmer. Yeah. Yeah. Well, there's a lot of warmer places that you guys have a brutal winter. Yeah. Well, we were spoiled, too. I think. So Sarah, my little sister, was born in California. We lived in Yorba Linda, which is kind of near San Diego. Oh, yeah. It's gorgeous. Yeah. OK. So, you know, yeah. Yeah. Yeah. It's so when from when I was two to second grade, we lived out there. And then and then the Rochester. Oh, back to Rochester weather. Yeah. That's painful. Mm hmm. It's funny because all the kids, they graduate high school here in Northern California. Where do you want to go to school? San Diego. I'm sure. Yeah. Perfect weather right by the coast. Gorgeous. Gorgeous. Until they. Oh, I want to live by San Diego. Oh, yeah. You're going to buy a house. Good luck. Yeah. Right. As soon as you're done with college, you're not going to be living there. No, you can get a lot of houses cheap in Rochester. Oh, yeah. It's great here. You know. Yeah. That's true. That's true. So you're you're you're making your way into the Orthodox Church and you're and you're settling in. That's that's beautiful. That's beautiful. Yeah. And I think I don't know. I think what people misunderstand about churches is it's not for you. Like if you if you're going to church to try and get something out of it, you're wrong. You will. But if that's your aim, I don't think you're going to accomplish it. Yeah, I think being active in the community and interacting with people, especially people you would not interact with normally. I take this guy grocery shopping twice a month. You're 62. When would I ever hang out with someone that age? Yeah. But he's great to talk to. And we have a great time. And and there's another guy who is who's blind and learning disabled. I'm not sure specifically, but we go to this burger burger joint in our area and and just talk and help. I we were doing some renovations in the basement of the church. So they took out all the the gross drop drop ceiling and made kind of an industrial look and replaced the ductwork with round ones and LED lighting and painted walls. We put tapestries up and icons around the borders and and just made it a nice welcoming place for blood drives and like women's groups in the area and single mothers. And and just whatever happens to to be what we want to do, I guess. But that process was great. I got to know so many great people who came to help out and mop and clean up after the construction crew and kind of rearrange the storage and and all this stuff. It's just been really rewarding and and And I think I don't think I ever felt that way in my other church, who is it was bigger. This one's really tiny. It's in the city. So the community is a lot closer. Everyone knows each other. And I think it's important to find a welcoming welcoming place. First of all, Small churches can be hard to get into, but they they they very much become a family. Yeah, well help out and everybody will be able to help out. That's right. That's right. You can't really push someone out or tell them they're not welcome if you're grabbing them up and That's right. That's right. But yeah, I think I think more people in my position, you know, in in the community, I just like to see more more people going to church. Yeah. And experiencing that kind of joy. Yeah. Because it's so grim without, you know, like I was just super nihilistic and before all this and was trying to kind of find a framework for living my life. And it's not always clear what's what's what what you should do. And I think that's the thing about the church. It's not always clear what's what's what what you should do and also know your limits of how you can help people. And so I was looking at, you know, I ran that got rid of that pretty quickly. And then I there is this 12 rules of life kind of book by Gary Johnson. It's like 10 rules for good government or something. And I got one thing out of that said, if someone ought to know something, tell them and tell them immediately. And that was kind of connected with some regret he had after his his wife had passed. But it was just coming up short. And then, you know, obviously, why not use the book that people have been using for centuries and the tradition and all that. And I feel like I'm going on a tangent here, but no, it's not a tangent. Yeah. And I've just been having a lot of a lot of fun reading the early church fathers. So Jonathan Peugeot had a had a talk. You probably may have seen on the life of Moses by Gregory of Mesa. No, I haven't seen that one. OK, that's a good one. I don't I don't know the title of it, but that book was blew my mind. You know, he goes through the life of Moses just as a summary in the first first book. And then the second book is what it all means kind of pragmatically. So Moses ascends the mountain because as you go up a mountain, you can see more. You have a wider perspective and that kind of I don't want to. You know, I don't have that firm grasp on these things, but it was great. And then I just started reading. I don't know a lot, a lot of saints. And my priest has been feeding me books and. It's been reading like mad. Having a lot of fun. Wonderful, wonderful. Oh, that's that's terrific. Now your your story encourages me. Good. It's it's good. It's good. It's good. And I was wondering if I can quote you. You quote me. OK. There is something that I just it. I found so useful. I clipped it out and put it on my Instagram. As kind of a way to remember it. But it was the end of one of your sermons, one of the practice ones. So it's kind of long, but I'll read it back to you. You said he does the heavy lifting, but in a sense like a father does to his son. If the father is, let's say, working on the car and the son comes along and says, I want to help it is this to this father and the son's glory that the son gets to participate. And that is it. And that is in a sense, sorry, my handwriting is terrible. And that is, in a sense, what we do. And so then the question is, even if we're laughing like Abraham, even if we're on our face laughing, we're doing worship, but we hardly believe what we're doing. And there are pieces of our heart saying God's never going to come through. We will be lost. We will be cut off. I'll never have a son. We will never come to pass. Yet I will worship still. Yet I will love my neighbor as I love myself. Yet I will do this even if everything fails. And at that moment, we begin to understand what faith is. Like, oh man, I teared up the first time. It's just been so useful to go back and whenever I'm like, what am I doing here? And then I remember, you know, all right, just do it. Read another book. And I read another book and I'm like invigorated again. Or I go to pick up service during the week. Because the Orthodox have crazy amounts of service. Like my church is tiny and we still have, we have a service on Sunday. There's a morning matins, 730 on Wednesday, and then a night vespers at five on Wednesday. And then there's a noon service called the acathist on Fridays. And then if it's a feast day for something, sometimes there's Thursdays, sometimes there's Saturdays. So I think it's, it kind of brings me back to the seminary. Where I could just go whenever I wanted to worship or pray or just sit there. So I think that access is really beneficial to me. It's a beautiful faithfulness where even the holding of the service is not contingent upon getting a whole bunch of people. That they are finally really there for God. And just like you began saying, the church really isn't about you. And when you, it's called a worship service. And yeah, you're serving the people, but you're really serving the Lord. And so even if just a few saints show up in the morning, and I would imagine with a small church with that many services, you've always got a few saints that show up whenever the door is open. Often retired people or something of that nature. But even if you're gathering with two or three, you're there for God. And that kind of self-giving, you know, it's the irony is that people talk about love. Oh, it's about love. But okay, well, what do you mean by love? And it's usually that people express love to me. But Jesus said, and he's right, it's more blessed to give than to receive. It's a different thing. But that is the joy in many ways. That is the joy of love. It's always nice to feel love. And if you give love, there is a power and a joy in that, that in some ways this world can't comprehend. Because you don't comprehend it unless you do it. And it's not natural to do. Often. Sometimes it is, but often it isn't. And I think that's the way to go up to that little church. And I'm sure that you showing up encourages everyone who is there. But none of you are there for yourselves. You're there for God. It's hard to, it's not something easily sold to a consumerist society. It's one thing that no one can do anything about. No one can take that away from you. God's not going to reject it. And you're not giving it to anyone that's able to reject it. It's more solid than, I don't know. That's true. Well, my mattress is a few minutes away. So anything you want to touch on before we land the plane. Let me take a look. I think we covered everything I wanted to talk about. Yeah, and then just on the inclusivity and welcoming. Well, I don't know. It's not relevant. One thing we do in the Orthodox Church is there's closed communion. So I've like until Sunday, I haven't participated in that yet. But it's great because as everyone comes up, there's the bread and the wine that are in the cup. You get a little bit of bread and some wine and a spoon. And then as they come around, the leftover bread is in a bowl. And it is bread. There's the body of Christ and then there's the bread. So they take the bread and their little cubes. And then people just come up to me. I'll be sitting in the pew because I have nothing to do at that point. So all sorts of people. I almost have a full stomach by the end of it because people just come up and give me bread. And it's like you're not chrismated, but we appreciate you here and welcome. I think that's a beautiful thing. Yeah, yeah. That's beautiful. That gives me much joy. Well, and good for you to stick with this process. I mean, people are like, I think I'll be Orthodox. I'm thinking, do you have any idea what that's going to take from you? This is not Lucy Goosey Church where you walk in and say, I want to be a member. Okay, into the tank you go. No, that's not how they roll at all. But there's a power in the cherishing, in the time and the seriousness that many churches miss out on in their haste. And many would-be members miss out on in their haste. So again, it's just a beautiful story. Thank you. Well, I have recorded this and I will send it to you. And it's up to you what you'd like to do with it. And I talked about Freddie a little bit and I still haven't quite decided what I want to do with that announcement because there's stigma and such associated with things like that. But I so enjoyed hearing your story. And it's beautiful. And I like doing these talks because you and I have swapped messages back and forth a little bit. But seeing your face and hearing your story and knowing more about you, it just to me shows the richness of God's good earth and what he does in the world and it encourages me. So I appreciate it. Well, you've done a lot to help me out. I wouldn't be here if it weren't for your videos. My faith would not be as strong, I think. Well, thank you. Thank you. Well, you take care and congratulations on, I don't know if they take pictures in the Orthodox Church when you... What's that? I'll tag you in the video if you want. Okay. They do a live stream. All right. Take care, Adam. Okay, you too. Bye. Thanks for talking. Bye-bye.