https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=IjnT381YT9o

 Hi, this is Paul and this is Rough Draft for Sunday where I run through the current status of my Sunday sermon. Last week we looked at the anger of impatience at our frustration and really the rather mysterious assumption that this world shouldn't be filled with pain and violence and injustice. Not that this is a bad demand, but on what basis do we make this demand? Who of us have ever known a world that isn't full of pain and injustice and brutality and suffering yet we are hoping that God would rend the heavens and we have the hope of longing, we have the hope of waiting, we hope that our God will come, that all things will be set right, that justice will be done. We started with Isaiah 64, Oh that you would rend the heavens and come down, that the mountains would tremble before you as when fire sets twigs ablaze and causes water to boil, come down and make your name known to your enemies and cause the nations to quake before you. I can't watch the second Lord of the Rings movie, The Two Towers, and at that end of the battle of Helm's Deep in the movie where Gandalf comes at the last minute to save those who are shut up in the in the citadel at Helm's Deep, assuming that they they have nothing left and and that there is no hope for them and Gandalf shows up and Tolkien is riffing on the book of Revelation there. Why won't our hero come to our rescue? Now as the lockdowns tighten and reports come out that we've got mayors and governors who are announcing and clamping down ever further and harder to to stop the virus while they're in Cabo or or having fancy having fancy lunches with with with with others in the government and make the citizens make the citizens locked down, close the restaurants, put the put the bite on the small business owners while you feel no pain. And that's not alone. That's not that's not unusual. We know that. We know this and we value those leaders that that lead from the front. The Book of Isaiah, I spent a fair amount of time this week thinking about the Book of Isaiah. What an important and strange book it is. The book opens with these these these acclamations. Hear me you heavens. Listen earth for the Lord has spoken. I reared children and brought them up. But when but they read they have rebelled against me. The ox knows its master the donkey its owner's manger but Israel does not know my people do not understand. So the book starts and remember before Advent we were looking at Exodus and talking about about God bringing them out and it seems they never learned. They never got it. They never believed. They never obeyed. They it was when they did it was always halfway when when the wolf was at the door and then suddenly maybe they believed. This week there was an interesting conversation between a couple of YouTubers Jonathan Peugeot and Adam Friend did and I've spoken with both of them and have the kind of YouTube friendships that you can have over YouTube. But one is a Christian and one not and trying to sort out what is religion. And Adam says I you know religion is an ethical system and Jonathan Peugeot says no it's not an ethical system. It's a it's a it's a frame. It's a whole way of seeing the world. You won't understand why they built tabernacles and the ark and the temple. Well why did they build those things because they had they they God was leading them to inhabit to inhabit a whole new world. The law of Moses with its clean and unclean it was it was all to to train Israel to inhabit a whole new way of thinking a whole new approach to life a whole new way of being human and unique you Israel was to uniquely address not just the religious operations that the surrounding nations had in order to somehow get goods out of begrudging God but but to begin living within that God's kingdom. And so the the temple and the practices all of those serve to reinforce the the way of God in the world and it didn't take. In Isaiah five we have this lament this the whole summary of the story of Israel is put here I will sing for the one I love a song about his vineyard. My loved one had a vineyard on a fertile hillside. He dug it up and cleared it of stones and planted it with choices finds. He built a tower in it and cut out a wine press as well. Then he looked for a crop of good grapes but it yielded only bad fruit. He afforded it the furnishings that gave it he gave it everything he needed. He's the lover of the one who listens to the story. Now dwellers in Jerusalem and people of Judah judge between me and my vineyard. If you're so angry at the way things are judge between me and my vineyard. What more could have been done to my vineyard than what I have done for it. When I look for good grapes why did it yield only bad. Now I will tell you what I'm going to do to my vineyard. I will take down its hedge and it will be destroyed. I will break down its wall and it will be trampled. I will make it a wasteland neither pruned nor cultivated and briars and thorns will grow there. You can hear Exodus or Genesis 3 just echoing in here. I will command the clouds not to rain on it. The vineyard of the Lord Almighty is the nation of Israel and the people of Judah are the vines he delighted in. He looked for justice but saw bloodshed for righteousness but heard cries of distress. This week I had an opportunity to talk to someone I had spoken with a couple of years ago. He lives in the Bay Area and about four years ago or so he's a young man. Contracted a form of cancer and has been basically fighting for his life for the last three and a half years. He told me out of 31 doctors he's had only only one has really been humble. And with all the power and the expertise of the of the medical establishment. Well he watched the battle of he he's not impressed. He watched the battle of Berkeley a few months ago and watched the press and watched the press coverage and watched the government. And he's not impressed. He he lives upon institutions that he depends upon. But he understands how much do they really know him. Do they really have his best interest at heart. Is he seen as an individual. How do you survive. And so we were talking about this and I asked him how do you survive being dependent upon institutions that have failed you. And just softly he says one word he says God. I noticed in the last two years you could just tell how much he had grown. Couple of years ago he was full of questions about God and wondering and he had he had had some near death experiences and he wasn't at all. He wasn't at all unsure about the reality of God and the reality of of the of the truth of the life to come. But but now the reading and and how he's grown in the last couple of years he he slowly learned to rely on God. But at such a cost this is some ways is Israel's story. The hedge is removed. The wine press is destroyed. The nations come in and and all of the centuries of tabernacle and temple and law and priests and sacrifices and prophets on and on and on. It swept away in the Babylonian defeat. Chapter thirty nine has King has a Kaia showing these these emissaries from a place that seems far off Babylon and showing him his treasures. Not knowing that not too many years later they will swoop in and they will destroy and the temple which is sort of the epicenter of God's connection between heaven and earth is destroyed. And the people imagine that here we are lost. Some go into exile in Babylon but in some ways the whole earth goes into exile because the presence of the Lord is gone. And his people are like sheep without a shepherd. We build it. It oppresses it tyrannizes it neglects it falls. And to that a voice comes comfort comfort my people says your God. Now this is a very familiar passage and what I didn't really see very much as one of my favorite chapters in the entirety of the Bible. What I never saw so much was was how the God is speaking with his emissaries and sending them to his people and saying help is on the way. Comfort comfort my people says your God speak tenderly to Jerusalem who God's emissaries his messengers speak tenderly to Jerusalem and proclaim to her that her hard service has been completed. That her sin has been paid for that she has received from the Lord's hand double for all her sins. A voice calling in a voice of one calling. Who is this voice one of God's emissaries in the wilderness prepare the way for the Lord make straight in the desert a highway for our God. Every valley shall be raised up every mountain and hill made low. The rough ground shall become level. The rough places a plane and the glory of the Lord will be revealed and all people will see it together for the mouth of the Lord has spoken. They received the promise and Isaiah 40 after the exile a remnant returns. They rebuild the temple but it's not like before. And they remain in exile in their in their home country subjects to to greater pagan empires to Persia to Greece to Rome. A voice says cry out and I say what shall I cry. All people are like grass and all their faithfulness is like the flowers of the field. I'll cry out to people and and can they respond. Can they save. Can they rescue. Can they pull themselves up by their own bootstraps. The grass withers and the flowers fall because the breath of the Lord blows on them. Surely the people are grass. The grass withers and the flowers fall. But the word of our God endures forever. And they're fully cognizant that God brought Babylon to to to clean out Israel. And in the late Second Temple period when when we find Jesus coming John the Baptist imagines that the breath of God will blow and blow away all of the wrong and all of the wobbly. But the word of the God the word of our God endures forever. Will he come. You who bring good news design another emissary another messenger of God you who bring good news design. What is good news. Good news is that a battle has been won in a faraway place and the city will be spared. Go up on a high mountain. You who bring good news to Jerusalem lift up your voice with a shout. Lift it up and do not be afraid. Say to the towns of Judah. Here is your God. Will he come. John the Baptist wonders is this is this God's emissary is this. Who is this that comes. See the sovereign Lord comes with power. That's what we're waiting for. And he rules with a mighty hand with a mighty arm. See his reward is with him and his recompense accompanies him. He will give out reward and he will meet out judgment. This is this is Isaiah 40. He tends his flock like a shepherd. He gathers the lambs in his arms. He carries them close to his heart. So that the distant king. This is one who brings his people tight into him close to him and they feel him and they hear his heartbeat. He gently leads those that have young. The second temple will come down in 70 A.D. the Romans will come down responding to a yet another rebellion and they will crush it and the second temple will be destroyed. Never to have another one built. As we saw last week. There's a transformation. Jesus curses the fig tree. Jesus is up on trial and they say he said three days he said destroy this temple in three days. I will raise it up. What did Jesus mean. The glory of the Lord is no longer concentrated in the building. But in the son of man. The glory of the Lord is no longer concentrated in a building in the temple. But in the son of man. As you come to him the living stone rejected by humans but chosen by God and precious to him. You also like living stones are being built into a spiritual house to be a holy priesthood offering spiritual sacrifices acceptable to God. Through Jesus Christ. The movement in the story is from infrastructure into lives. That movement is was always implicit. But it but it gets explicit. The book of Jeremiah the temple of the Lord God will never never do this. We hold the building hostage and God says don't think you can manipulate me or control me by a building even a temple that I prescribe. I desire obedience not sacrifices. It gets explicit in the crucifixion and the resurrection this movement from from in the story from infrastructure to lives. Jesus is crucified and the and the and the veil of the temple is torn in two. Destroy this house and I'll rebuild it in three days. It goes out into the world in the lives of the renewed and people wonder where is the temple. Where is the temple. It's here. It's here in the community in the lives of the believers. One living stones too many living stones together. We understand the anger of impatience and the hope of longing. Because we still wait. We're still waiting. He's come once. He will come again. The anger of impatience the hope of longing waiting for him to come on the night he was betrayed by one of his chosen twelve. He took bread and broke it. And he said do this in remembrance of me. As long as you do this. Keep doing this until I come again. In remembrance of me.