https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=cnkLVxqNWwI

 All right. Good morning, everyone. This is something a little bit different. The Senate is impacting my work life, and so I don't know if we're going to have any, I don't know if we're going to have any questions and answers this summer. There's the bomb drop. We might not have any questions and answers until after Thunder Bay. So, but this morning I wanted to do something a little bit different. St. Manuel, also known as Iron Root, had been asking me for some time for a while, and he's been in a lot of time on the Discord, so I wanted to do something a little different. So for the first hour this morning, he and I are going to have a conversation. I'm not quite sure what we're going to talk about. And then for the second hour, maybe I'll, we'll see if anybody wants to engage in the conversation that we have in the first hour from the chat room, or if people don't want to do that, then we'll just switch and I'll just mop up the few questions and answers, the few questions that are in the room. So let's start with a little bit of introduction, because those of you on the Discord server know this guy. He's got his own, what's the name of your channel? You got your own YouTube channel now. I have a YouTube channel called Agopic Orientation. Agopic Orientation. Interviews with people. Okay. And the interviews are trying to highlight the virtues and values of people, how they relate to them in their life in the context of a specific subject. And hear Manuel at all. You can't hear Manuel? No, don't see your stream either. Where's the YouTube stream? I don't see the YouTube stream. Yeah, YouTube stream is up. It was up a little bit late. YouTube stream. Am I audible there? Can anyone hear Manuel yet on the YouTube stream? I'm talking right now. I can hear him now. Okay. Now I hear him. Okay. I love this part of the show. Yeah, we've got everything dialed in this morning. We've done a couple of things like this, but we haven't done many. And vMix can do it, so it just takes a little extra setup. And so here we are. Well, let's start with the old days when you were iron root and practically living on the server. What was that about? Yeah, I was in a bad space in my life. I think that was the point where I cut off all contact with the mental health support that was potentially there for me. I was really disappointed. I was trying to get myself back together. I was like, I need to relate to people. So I just hung out. Well, I don't do that anymore, actually. But I just hung out with giving the opportunity for people to participate with me. And also trying to get myself out of the patterns that I was stuck in. I don't know. I think I was still gaming back then. Right. So I'd rather do something constructive than game. How much were you gaming? Depending on the periods. I had periods where I just was gaming all day and then there's periods where I just didn't do it. It was like an addiction, but it was too. To fill a hole inside of me more so than for the pleasure of the gaming. I have these two ideas where you have a positive reason to do a thing. You want to achieve something or you're running away from something. All the time I was just running away. So whether it was gaming or doing other things, I was trying not to deal with something else. Well, we were going to talk about nihilism today. How does that figure into your thoughts on nihilism? One of the things I realized back in the early days when I was having a lot of Randall's conversations with people who were watching Jordan Peterson, that was about 2018. And one of the things I realized is that a lot of the people I was talking to had been experiencing, is depression the right word? It looks like depression, but let's talk about it this way. What are the symptoms of this nihilism that people seem to be trying to banish from their lives? Well, so the nihilism in the way that I experienced it was the inability to find purpose in what I'm doing. That was literally the way I described my state of being. I was able to do things and I had capacity to do things, but I didn't know what to do. I didn't know a way to find the things that were meaningful to me to participate in. And so it was a problem with the positive formulation, like I want to do this for this reason. A different way to describe that is I didn't have a container to participate in. I didn't have this higher purpose, but I did have a sense of the higher purpose being there. I did look for it, I knew it was missing, but I didn't know how it was missing, whatever. I was 17 and I said I would love to believe in God because then my life would be a lot easier, but I can't. I saw the value in having God give you meaning in life, but I didn't see a path to that and I didn't see a way of participating. So it wasn't an option for me. So if Favek talks about you can't go back, I think he's talking about that tension there, but I think I got back, so I disagree. Let's first talk about this word container. You do a lot of things with Mark and Mark has this channel called Navigating Patterns. I don't know if that's a really great name for a channel, but that's the one he picked. Did you give him that name? Yeah, but he put it up on his channel, so he's the one to blame. We're just going to troll into these people here. You and Mark often talk about the positive and the negative, and you just talked about a container. I thought it was a really terrific conversation this week with Rick Rapetti. I remember when he was telling his story, I included that in the part that I clipped from Verveki, and I remember Mark jumping in and saying, well, he doesn't have a container, and you just used that word, and you just used that word in terms of yourself. What do you mean by a container? Right. So there's a couple ways to think about it, because you can make them big and smaller, so you can have a real big container, which is that in which your life exists. That contains your life in the way that you understand things, so that's a world view. But you can have smaller containers, like this conversation contains, it constrains what we're doing. There's this spiritual aspect in which we're participating, and that allows us to employ manners. We're mannered towards each other. We're participating through certain patterns, and we're not transgressing those because we somehow recognize that they're there, even though we never communicated them. Yeah, so I'm going through my notes because I have this idea of a body. So in a sense, the conversation is a body of which we are parts, and even the audience is a part of the body, because I can include them in the way that I'm thinking, and you're including them because you want to have me speak in a certain way and explain certain things that you wouldn't ask me if it was a one-on-one conversation. So there's all of these aspects, and there's also like, oh, we're on the internet, so that's also giving aspects to the body that would be different in real life. And so this body is giving me an identity. It's telling me something about who I am if I'm rightfully participating in the conversation. And so you can look at that as a container. You and I see the same thing or somewhat like the same thing, unless we don't, and then the conversation goes wrong. And so we're in the same container. We're sharing the same space. How does your container relate to what Vervecky is talking about when he talks about the arena? Yeah, that is a good question because I've had a lot of discussions about arena with Mark, and one way to think about an arena is something that you construct. So if I think I want to get a drink, my room organizes itself in a certain way that I can interact with. There's a different way that you can think about the arena. It's like all the ways that I can organize my room. There's these different levels where you're like, oh, is this the arena I participate with or is the potential arena that's afforded to me by the world? And the problem with the arena is that I don't have to share it with you. The purpose of the container is that it's a shared arena in some sense. Okay. So now you related this container to God or an idea of God, and you related that in some ways to nihilism. A lot of people that are in this space right now would articulate something similar to what you just did in terms of you're lacking a container. Let me ask you this. What does that container afford you? Yeah, so if we share a container, we can have agreement about our identity. So I know who I have to be in relation to you, and you know who you can be in relation to me, and as long as we share that, we can work together. We can cooperate. And also, if I share a container with you, and I can see the things that you're seeing, that allows for intimacy between us. And if the more of the containers that we share, the more intimate we can become without having to attune to each other. Because we're already sharing this as a pre-existing condition of being a Christian, for example. If you're a Christian, you're sharing things with other Christians, and so you don't have to reestablish that when you're meeting other people. And I think the problem is that if you're not having this shared container, which is what's happening in society, we're selling these containers like race or whatever, and how do I participate in that container? I don't want to participate in that container, because I don't think that's a good container. And so what does that do is you label yourself in a certain way, and you're saying, well, I'm in this container, and the container has a hierarchy as well. And that allows me to cooperate with you in a specific way. But the problem with all of these specific containers that don't hold the option for potential, like to step out of the specific hierarchy into a new one, all of these containers, they are effectively tyrannical. Either you participate in the way that I want you to participate, or we cannot cooperate at all. There's no capacity to have intimacy. I think a lot of people listening to this will hear container, and that sounds, you know, now you having explained it a little bit, I think I have a pretty good mental picture of it. But that's going to be a new word for a lot of people. And before you use the word God, how does God function as a container? Right. So a different way of conceiving of a container or something that's close to a container, right? Like I would say it's maybe the point of emanation that creates the container is a body, right? So the church is a body, right? So participating in the body is participating in that specific container, right? So God is by definition the container of being, right? Like he has to be. And so, and then a family is also a container, right? And a church is also a container, right? Like whereas there's a shared space, there's a shared history, right? Like there's a shared culture, there's a shared understanding that affords intimacy between the members, independent of them attuning them to each other individually, because they have a shared experience. Okay. A shared experience, a shared narrative. I mean that the containers are in many ways constructed over time, correct? Right. Okay. Now you keep talking about intimacy. What do you mean by intimacy in that context? I mean, pastors always pastors sometimes get, you know, lose their jobs because of certain kinds of intimacy. You know, what do you mean by that word? Well, intimacy, I think is best conceivable as the quality of a relationship, right? So the quality is maybe conceived of as dimensions of the relationship, right? So I can relate to you to words, right? But I can relate to you to words and tone. I can relate to you to words, tone and gesture, right? Like, and when I do all these things, right? And they can do certain patterns in my speech, right? And when I do these things, and you're able to understand or relate to them, at least, they give an extra level of intimacy, right? Like they give an extra level of understanding. They give an extra level of you participating with me, right? Like you can get into it, and you can use that or you can use all of these things to get a better picture of what I'm trying to communicate, right? So the more channels of shared reality that we have open, the more intimacy there is between us. Okay, so intimacy is the multiplication of relational connections between us. Well, that's better. Intimacy is just a, it's not a measure, but it's, yeah, the levels of relationship. So, you know, if I, you know, let's say I have levels of intimacy, now this is going to sound strange, but I have levels of intimacy with Rick. Rick just gave me a look, like, no, that's because of course the way the word intimacy is used, but Rick and I meet every Friday, we run this Q&A, Rick and I text during the week, Rick and I meet on Sunday, Rick and I enjoy talking about technology, Rick and I have a bunch of projects around church that we're working on, security cameras, fence, networking, live streaming, this channel. I mean, Rick and I have all these points of contact, and what all of those points of contact actually create are levels of intimacy. Now there are levels of intimacy that I have, and this will, this will, you know, put Rick a little bit more at ease in this conversation. There are levels of intimacy I have with my wife that I do not have with Rick. And vice versa. Like, you have intimacy levels with Rick that you don't have with your wife, right? And that's true too, because sometimes, go ahead. Well, I think a different way to conceive of the intimacy is how can Rick anticipate you? Right? Like, his capacity to, in a sense, if you're able to extend your body, right, or your will, through him, without having to articulate it, although even if you do articulate it, there's also a level of intimacy, right? But like, it's better to conceive of it as a non-verbal aspect, right? Like, if you're able to communicate your will to the other person, right, like that requires intimacy, right? And when you start participating with other people without having to communicate this, because you're in the same body, right, like you're doing the same dance, then magic can happen, right? Like, then new levels of participation open up. Is that what you mean by magic? I mean, you use that, you use that word. Magic can happen. What do you mean by magic can happen? Oh, I'm sorry, miracles. Well, what do you mean by miracles? Well, a miracle is something that you didn't perceive as possible, right? Like, so a different way is, it's a level of intelligibility that wasn't accessible before, right? And that you can start participating in it. So, think of it as a kitchen, right? There's two people in a kitchen. And if they work as individuals, they might produce something, right? But if they start anticipating each other's behavior, right, their efficiency goes up, they might be able to make more complicated recipes, right? And who knows how high that can go, depending on the amount of people and the attunement between the people. Well, I think I was actually, last week, Saturday, my son Jared and I were working on this little problem we had of, we have to run some conduit from the building down under a sidewalk, and then out to the, what's going to be the pad where the automatic gate opener and closer is. And in order to do this, we had, he had been sort of making a hole under the cement and he, we had a hole this way. And so I had my hand in one hole and he was pushing a piece of rod through another hole. And we're, you know, trying to connect so we could make this thing happen. I was thinking about the fact that what you just described too is also another word that I've been using often is spirit, that we are in some ways participating in a spirit. And you might say that that, that project, addressing that problem in some ways created a container. And so by virtue of that, we, you know, we were talking to each other, we were looking at each other. I was feeling the ground as he was pushing things and we're trying to figure out exactly where the pipe is. I mean, we're, we're doing all of this stuff to, to achieve this. And, and I want to, you know, I want to connect it now to purpose because I think a lot of what we're talking about, we're talking about what, what Vervecky calls a meaning crisis. I think part of the difficulty people have in participating in this conversation and getting intimate in this conversation is, is this struggle with language. And so container, when I hear container, I think of something that I put my leftovers in. Like I've, I've eaten a meal and I've got leftovers and I might eat them tomorrow for my meal. So I'm going to put them in a container and I'm going to put it in, and I'm going to put it in my fridge. So, you know, when we use this language, there's, there's sort of a, actually using new words for something is also a, the, the development of containers, as you would say. And I, you and Mark have worked quite a bit on this stuff. You've talked quite a bit on this stuff. You and Mark have in some ways created a lot of new containers and you've got a language, which is fitted to address this meaning crisis. Oh gosh. See, this is why I never look at the live chat when I'm, when I'm talking, cause it just, I get, just get distracted. I'm gonna have to look at Rick. You're going to make me look at something else. Aren't you? Yeah. Okay. Oh, that doesn't work either. Just adjusting my stuff here. So, you know, part of what I want to do in this conversation is, is do a little bit of translating because, you know, in your story, I mean, there's, there's a level of container that people share by virtue of their stories. And when, you know, when you talk about, you know, some of the journey that you've been on over the last four years, I think it very much fits this meaning crisis conversation, doesn't it? Oh yeah, definitely. Right. Like I was talking about not having meaning in my life, right? So, yeah. So yeah, like the, the meaning crisis conversation is definitely a problem. And the reason that we got into this, or at least the subject that got brought up is I said to you, nihilism means that you can't construct your own narrative. Right. And so I see the narrative as the higher level, right? Like it's not the story, but it's the structure of the story, right? Like it's something that you can participate in while the story is, is, is the actual expression, right? Like it's, it's, it's the manifestation of the narrative in relation to you as, as the individual. Right. And so, so if, if you don't have a narrative, right, or, or you could see the content, it as a container, but the narrative is, is, is, is something that allows you to contextualize yourself, right? Like it allows you to say, well, I'm, I'm going to school because I want to be a doctor. Right. Then you have to want to be a doctor. Right. Like you have to have the conviction, right. Or, or, or different words. It's a belief, right? Like I want to be a doctor is a statement of belief. Right. And then when you go study to be a doctor, right, like you need to have faith that you want to be a doctor. And, and that faith allows you to keep participating in, in that story, in that narrative, right. Or, or in the body that you construct, right. Like, and, and so if you lose faith, you will stop putting in the effort, right. Like, like it will dissolve. It's, it will stop to exist for you. Right. And if you re regain faith, you will re engage with the narrative that you're in. Right. So I think faith is, is, is really well conceived as, as the capacity to participate in something. Right. Like, and, and as long as, as, as, as you're, and it's, it's something is a body, right. Like it, it, it is a coming together of things that makes the sum as bigger than the whole, that's bigger than the sum of the part. Right. Like that's what you're participating, but you're participating as, as an individual with the external world. Right. And you're combining that and you're in the combination, you're also creating the spirit, right. Like, so you get that language back, but I think the spirit is something that manifests, right. So, so the faith allows you to manifest the spirit in, in, in what you're doing. And if, if you lose faith, you lose the spirit and, and you lose the capacity to participate. And I think that's what happened to me. Right. So I, I did have belief in myself, right. Like I believed that I was capable, but without the meaning, I couldn't live in faith. Like I wasn't able to do that. You know, it's, it seems to me that one of the containers we're dealing with in this is individualism and there are assumptions in there. And it seems to me that this loss of, see a lot of these words, I think get sort of slippery because I really like how you brought the word faith in at this point. And I think it's, I think it's the right, I think it's a good way to bring it in because the, the, the, the, the pit of nihilism that you fell into. Well, let's, let's talk about that a little bit. What's it, I mean, surely you must've had, surely there must've been a point in your life where, and I don't mean in this sense necessarily Christian faith, although that's obviously not disconnected, but at some point in your life, you lost something. And nihilism got its grip on you. What, what was that? And I have no idea. What, what I mean, he lost meaning. Right. Well, I don't know if I ever had it. Right. Like I just did. That's interesting. Right. Like I just did. Right. Like things happen. You just do them. Right. Like that's how you get into life. I think meaning is, is something that, that you construct later. Right. Like I don't think a baby has meaning. Like, like I don't think it's capable of having me. I think it's a higher level concept. And, and I distinctly remember that I was, I was having a day and I just squandered my day or something. And the next day I was like, it doesn't matter. Right. Like I'm in the next day, like I can make new choices again. Right. Like there's, it's, it's like a reset. Right. Like obviously that's not completely true because if you do that a lot, then you suffer consequences over time. Right. You can't, you can't just keep doing that. But, but in, in some sense, like I got convinced that whatever the exact implementation that I did the day before didn't affect me the day later. Right. Like, and it wasn't in the sense that, oh, like if I cut myself, then like next day I wouldn't have to cut, but it was like, it didn't change my life. Right. Like I could have, I might as well not have had the experience. That was the sense that, that I had. Right. That's interesting. So, so in other words, there's almost, so before, before this meaning crisis, you just did, you went to school because you were told to go to school, you ate because you were hungry. You, you know, went to work because, you know, you, you just, you didn't have a level of, of self-consciousness. And, and so in some ways that the meaning crisis was the result of a, of a certain awakening. Is, is that kind of what I hear? Yes. Right. So I, I identified a hole inside of myself. Right. And I, I knew it needed to be filled. Right. And it's the whole of meaning. Right. Or different ways is it's the whole of intimacy. Right. Like, like I wanted to have intimacy with, well, you'd say God, right. But like you can make lesser versions, right. Like the people around me, the world as such, right. Like, I wasn't able to, to instantiate that intimacy. Right. And so, so, and, and this is in my nose, I think if, if you don't have the capacity to, to fill that intimacy, what do you do? You use a hierarchy, right. You participate in a hierarchy and the hierarchy will fill the, the intimacy. Right. Because, because you can, through the hierarchy, you can get intimacy. Right. So if, if the hierarchy is participating in school, right. Like, because that's what you do, you get up at this stage, right. Like you just have the structure and you participate in it. And it's the structure is effectively given by above, but above is the school now, right. Like, it's not something, something higher, right. Like you, you can remain the capacity to function. But you have to, well, I had to, I had a deep sense that I had to replace that with true intimacy. Right. And, and I was, I was trying to achieve that. And I, I did not like the, I didn't have the capacity and I don't think my environment had the capacity to fulfill that need for me. Interesting. So does this have anything to do with sort of the loss of public Christianity in the West, do you think? Yeah, yes. Right. So, so one, I've been raised secular, right. Like I think both of my parents were baptized, but they weren't practicing Christians, right. Like they just effectively ignored it and they weren't disrespectful towards it or any of these things. Right. Like, but it was just a non-thing. Like it just was not an issue. It's like, oh yeah, like, like that's a church and that's a castle, right. And they didn't make a good distinction between those two. Whereas like, okay, yeah, the church is this religious thing and the castle is this military thing. And, and it's history and it's cool. Right. Like that was more the attitude towards it. And, and so, so the whole spiritual dimension was literally missing from, from the home I grew up. Like, like it just didn't exist. Like it's like, it still doesn't exist because my parents cannot participate in that. Like, like I've tried, like I tried a lot and like sometimes I can get them to have glimpses, but like I, they can't, they can't participate in that level. And, and I can tell for me, right, like I've been doing this now for what, like three years and I've undergone this transformation, but like I had to work hard for this, right. Like I meditate twice a day. I, I did yoga twice a day for two years. And, and I'm, I'm, I'm starting to open up, right. Like the third eye or whatever, right. Like the ability to, to see the spiritual is, is a thing that I'm slowly developing, right. But, but I'm definitely not there. And like I'm, I'm seeing also how hard it is for anyone else to get to, right. Cause you have to have that commitment, right. You have to even see that there's something to be seen, right. Like, like knowing that there's something to be seen. And I think this is what Mark is talking about all the time, right. Like knowing that there's something to be seen is a step that's so big, right. Like that we, we don't even have to talk about what there is to see. Like, like that's not even on the table, right. Like just knowing that there's something to see is, is already too much for people. And, and that's, that's what I've been encountering on, on the disk. Like I've, I've seen people, I've, I've talked to people, I've I've learned approaches to people to confront them with the aspect that the material domain isn't sufficient to, to explain everything and, and how to get beyond that. But like it's, it's just a really, really hard message to, to get people to engage. Is this, is this the kind of thing that is sort of diminishes, recedes and is lost over successive generation, then forcing individuals to have to do a lot of hard work to reclaim it. For example, something analogous to the fact that now we have this internet and the internet is built on these, you know, right now we have these coaxial cables or fiber optic cables and, and they're connected to server farms and all of this is connected into an electrical grid and there are roads that help the people. In other words, there's this enormous communal infrastructure that affords what to us is at this point so ubiquitous, such as messaging or texting or watching YouTube. All of this is sort of afforded by this massive infrastructure in that we have in urban areas in the developed world where we can do all these things. It almost sounds like there was in our civilization, a container as it were, sort of a massive infrastructure that deployed a sense of meaning to people who didn't, you know, maybe they had to do little things to maintain their connection to the network. For example, at my home or here at the church, I don't have to, I don't have to reconstruct the internet every day. Rick and I don't have to keep running lines and mucking with switches and stuff. For the most part, I just pay AT&T a little bit every month and I get to participate in this vast fiber optic network and we get to connect to the internet. It almost sounds like in the West, successive generations were participating in this large container which slowly just sort of receded and, and your parents, let's say, you know, they didn't have a meaning crisis but they weren't necessarily, you know, they do, they do. Okay. But they didn't have, but again, but they didn't have the symptomology of it that you did. They got depressed and they, like, they framed it differently for themselves, so the way that they related to it was different. So I really knew what it was meaning, right? Like, and in some sense, they cheated because they had me, right? So they had me and, no, but I told you about the screw giving me the structure, right? Like, I gave them the structure, right? Like, I gave them a sense of meaning that, like, I don't have a kid, right? So there's, and like, I'm looking for a wife because I know that if I get a wife, then, like, you hear that ladies, he's looking for a wife. Yes, ladies. That will provide me the structure to participate in, right? And that will provide me with a purpose, right? Like, it's clear, right? Like, but like, I, for some reason, I can't be my own purpose. I don't know what's going on there, but like, I can't get there. Like, I can't be my own justification. Yeah, maybe I should think more about that, but it's fascinating that aspect. Well, I know, I think you're exactly right. You can't be your own purpose. You can't be your own justification. And I see messages in our society trying to inspire, but underneath that attempt at inspiration, there's an admonishment and in some ways an implicit fault finding that everyone has to be their own justification. But I think you're exactly right that you can't. And in fact, I like your container language. Now that I understand it better now, after you've sort of fleshed it out, that, I don't know if I'd use, I'd choose that word container, but we'll use it because that's what we have been using in this conversation. That which contains, right? Like, yeah, that's what a container is. It's terribly, it's terribly abstract and it's not terribly evocative. Well, okay. So let's go back to the example with the infrastructure, because I think we need to flesh that out a bit more, because I think it's good. So I think if you're looking at it as what is there to do for a human being, right? Like, what do you participate? Well, in the past, what there was to participate in was really direct, right? Like, so it's basically the four seasons, right? And the imposition of the world upon you and like maybe there was a war sometimes or whatever, right? What happened with all this technology is there just was more to participate in. Like, there was just more, right? And Peugeot says the world is attention, right? So there's more to attend to, right? So if we look up, right, like there's a certain time we look up, right? And like if as a society you spend less and less time looking up and you spend more time looking sideways, then at a certain point, the pool that the up has starts to dissipate, right? So now you have to have structures that, and I think that's what the church is, right? The structure is, the church is structured or that reinforces you to go and look back up every so often, right? Like that's what you do. But like you said, right, like you can either go to the pub or to the church, right? So now there's competition, right? Like the pub makes you look down and the church makes you look up. Look down and the church makes you look up. And sometimes it makes you fall down. Both can make you fall down, depends on the church. Yeah, yeah, yeah. So I noticed that Rick Rapati said that he got taught this silly idea about babies going to heaven or not. And I was like, why is the church teaching this, right? Like, why is this relevant? Like, is that really what you want to teach kids? Like shame on you, but whatever. So I think they failed horribly, right? Like that's not teaching people to look up. Like telling whether babies go to heaven when they die or not. Like you don't get people to look up that way. Like that's just horrible. And apparently that's what the religious people thought was an important message to people, right? Like it's like, oh, we do the fire and brimstone message, right? Like you need to be baptized and you need to stand in line. But that's, yeah, that's not a good message. And that I don't think that's what's in the Bible, but I should read it more. Well, part of, part of I think what we're, you know, I have an understanding of why Rick got some of the messages that he did from church. I think part of what the church has struggled with is the, you know, so we've, we started out talking about using this word container here. And, you know, I, I very, I sort of wanted to push on you to define and contextualize and translate that word because it's, you know, it's not a bad word for what we're talking about, but again, someone just stumbling onto this live stream, hearing all this talk about containers might think of Tupperware or a garbage can. And, you know, whereas Tupperware or a garbage can, I don't know if you know what Tupperware is. It's just basically plastic containers that you put your, your leftovers in. Part of, part of what this church struggles with is the continual, the continual movement. And over the last couple hundred years, the accelerating development of culture and the obvious increasing competition. In some ways, the church wrestles with the affluence and success in many respects of our cultures to at least afford the experience of meaning. Sometimes in, you know, sometimes in less productive modes. For example, I mean, so we talked about video games a little bit. You know, there's, in my opinion, generally speaking, there's absolutely nothing wrong with video games. I, there's really one video game that I play. I play civilization, maybe about every three or four months. I, I think, Oh, I want to play some more civilization. And I play civilization for two or three weeks, not continually, but within that span of two or three weeks, I play some civilization. And then by the end of it, I'm kind of done with it. And I don't touch it again for a few months. And I don't often after I play civilization for two or three or four hours, I get to the end of it. And I asked myself, was that really the best way for me to have spent this last four hours? You know, I'm not getting any younger. I've got limited time in this world. But part of what civil is, it's part of what that video game does for me, or that computer game does for me is afford me a sense of meaning. You know, I, I start out with little units, and then I establish a city, and then I build more cities and a network of cities. And, and, and that feels very meaningful. Yeah, it can. And it's a way more fun. You can also optimize it. And if you just optimize it, and you just do all the efficiency things, then it's, it's a task, right? Like, like, your relationship to the game defines what the game means to you, right? So if, if, if you find the game a way to connect to your son, right, because I heard you play together, right? I play with my son. That's way more meaningful when I play with my son. Right. So, so, but it's also like, oh, like, I want to test myself, right? I did this map last year, and I want to see if I can do better, right? Like, okay, like, you can find meaning in that, right? Like, like, yes, right. And, and, yeah, I want to say a little bit more over container. So, so you wanted to connect container to spirit, right? And the thing that we do in this thing that we do on the Faveki server is Lectio Divina, right? So what we do in Lectio Divina is we set the container, right? So we set a way in which we're going to participate, right? So, so when, when you're like going to the computer game, you're implicitly setting, oh, like, I want to go do this, right? But Christians also set containers, right? So if you pray before dinner, right, like, you're setting a way in which you're going to relate to the food that's provided to you, right? And that's really, really important, right? Because when you're saying, well, oh, church is giving ways to, to be intimate, right? Or to have meaning, right? Like, being highlighting the way of participation is the magic, right? Like, like, it doesn't mean that you can participate with gratitude for the dinner, because maybe you don't, but making that available, right? And cultivating that over time is super, super important. And like, when you throw away all these minor aspects that contextualize, right, or contain your experience, then you just get an individual experience, right? Like, now you've become, your experience isn't the same as the person next to you, because like, they might be thinking about their computer game, and you might be thinking about whatever is happening at school, and you're not living in the same reality anymore. So, so then the container, the heightened awareness of the container, the attention to the container, then brings, you know, in church, and we do a lot of things to sort of bring the attention in. And even as a, as a minister, one of the things that I do is I preach a sermon. And one of the challenges that I have homiletically with sermons is to gain attention, hold attention, direct attention, and have that attention direction, then get into people's lives, into their behaviors, into their thoughts. I mean, that's really what a, what sort of a sermon is designed to do. And what we- And for Vakies, Awakening from the Meaning Crisis also had that aspect, right, where he's like, slamming the table, right? Like, he's embodying all of these aspects, right, where it's like, he's giving you ways to participate with what he's teaching. And I think that's the magic, right? Like, that's one of the things that I really, really liked about Vakies Awakening from the Meaning Crisis, like, holy cow, he's giving a different way to engage with all of this stuff. Because when I was in university, right, like they said, well, like, you have this list of amino acids, and you're just gonna have to learn all of their quality. Or, what is it, quality is whatever, right? Like, their attributes, right? So, like, why do I want to do that? Like, that's just a total waste of my time, and it's demeaning, and it's useless because I have a computer, right? So it's- In other words, but that sort of comes back to the whole change bit, because the educational regime was designed for a world in which you didn't have a computer, and you didn't have Google, and you didn't have the internet. And so, therefore, you had lecture, textbook, rote memorization, regurgitation onto a test to demonstrate that you could hold that information in your head about the amino acids, and you got to a point where you said- Well, I'm gonna object here. Like, university wasn't made for that. Like, that wasn't what university was for. Like, university was there to educate, right? Like, in Plato's way, right? Like, to bring you into the light. And so, no, the purpose of university was to participate with the bright minds, and they gave you a container in which to participate to develop yourself. Like, that's the purpose of university. Not this, like, oh, get into this place and do this thing and read this thing. Like, that's fairly modern. Like, that's not what a university was. Well, we could have a long historical conversation about that, but what you just set up, let's say, a comparison between two realities, and maybe one of the ways to describe that would be one has magic and the other does not. Right. Because what you said in terms of what you think the university is for is to seek truth in a meaningful manner. And sort of the mug jug, as my seminary education prof used to say, you know, from, you can either have it from my mug to your jug or from my jug to your mug. That kind of memorizing information as such, it isn't even really information, it's data. But again, this is something that has been disrupted, reformed, disrupted, reformed, because, I mean, when you talk about Plato, you're talking about this academy. I mean, there have been all sorts of iterations of, let's call them formation institutions. The modern universities very much grew out of the church. And a lot of the, as I mentioned in my Rick Rapetti conversation, a lot of the transformations in modern university have actually happened quite recently, because, you know, at the beginning, the modern university was a very, very, very modern university. And I think that's something that's been happening quite recently, because, you know, at the beginning of the 19th century, all major, you know, at least universities in America tended to be run by religious, tend to be owned and run by churches, and their design was to train clergy and at some point teachers. And then, of course, you had the for the most part, vocation formation. Yeah, farms, farms. Well, I'm keeping my eye on the time here and we have five more minutes before the hour. So I don't know if you wanted to interject anything, if not otherwise, we'll go to the broader chat room, voice chat room and see if people have questions for us or they want to weigh in on what we've sort of put out there so far. Yeah, I wanted to blow more minds. So there's faith and then there's hope and then there's love, right? So I wanted to put those three in relation to bodies, right? So faith is your capacity to participate within the body, right, whatever body you created. And then hope is the ability or whatever, the process of recognizing new potential bodies to participate in. And then love is the maintaining and growing of the body. I like that you're using, I like that you're appropriating Christian nomenclature and of course that trio comes from 1 Corinthians 13, faith, hope and love and the greatest of these is love, the apostle Paul says in 1 Corinthians 13. So I don't know if you grabbed those three intentionally from 1 Corinthians 13 or there's another reason why that triplet sort of grabbed you. Well, yeah, this triplet is what I am more opposed to logic, reason and rationality, right? So logic, reason and rationality is what relates to the material world, right? Like we're trying to structure the material world around us with these aspects and then the faith, hope and love is something analogous into the spiritual world, right? Like so that's our relationship to the spiritual dimension of being. And so yeah, I have a bunch more, right? But you can have faith through the material, right? Which is faith in emergence, right? And then you can have faith in the emanation, right? And those are different ways of participating. If you just participate with the emergence, right? Like if you only participate with what already has manifested effectively, right? Then the potential is locked, right? Like you're in a closed world. You can only participate with what is already there. Well, when you have faith in the emanation, right? Like you, the world opens up, right? Like the potential opens up. So yeah, like I wanted to put in materialism and spirituality there and have the upper register and the lower register be in context of faith as well. Well, you do have a YouTube channel so you can always make a video and maybe if someone asks you a question along these lines, you can elaborate. So let's open up. Now, if someone on the YouTube chat, do you have the YouTube chat in front of you too? No, I can't get it. Oh, because it's interesting because Bazzani followed up a little earlier on something what you said. So if you have a question on the YouTube chat that you wanna put to Mark and I, you can go ahead and put that in the YouTube chat. Or if you're in the Bridges of Meaning voice channel for this, if you wanna put a question to us, the line is open. So, or if you wanna make a point connected with one of the points that we made, or if you just wanna make a comment about the language, go for it. So, all right, we're waiting. Okay. I was wondering what's been the benefit of, the greater benefit of having the language of container and developing that. Yeah, so the purpose that we have for container is in relation to this likelihood of you know, practice, right? So we're like, okay. Why don't you explain L'Ectio Divina a little bit more. Right, so L'Ectio Divina is where someone reads a text and we start with a poem, which is like poetic, right? Like it's opening up. And so the person lets himself get inspired by the poem and the poem then will create a world for that person, where they will envision a world as a consequence of the poem that they try to envision. And when they have this world and vision, and the world is supposed to be ideal, right, like it's supposed to relate to an ideal or a virtue. The person is supposed to see how they can participate in that world. So how can I be a part of that world? And then when they do that, they try and envision what they need to change and then how they can manifest that change in their lives, right? So it's a process of seeing what the text brings alive for you and then trying to become the thing that's important, right? So it's a practice of getting an aspiration and then finding ways to enact that aspiration. And we made it a group practice, right? So we do two texts and then we create two worlds and then from the two worlds, we try to create a third world, right? So we're trying to give as much space to the potential to manifest as we can, right? Like the third world is no longer contained in the text, right, like it's coming from your participation, right? That's the important part, right? And so what you're doing is you're drawing something out of you, right, like something you find important and then in that importance, you try to find how you can enact that, right? Like how you can participate with that. And I think that's a really valuable practice. And we do it together on every Wednesday and people can participate, they can find their own awakening of the meaning of crisis discourse. But we've developed that practice, right? Like we've done this a lot of times, right? We based it on John Favekis' version of it, which is an individual one, we do it in a group. And what we needed to do is we needed to find a way for people to participate, right? Because you wanna be there, but you wanna get from it what you need to get from it, right? Like how do you do that? Like, because that's an amazingly difficult question, right? Like you can put it into church, right? Like how do you pay attention in the right way at church? Like what does that even mean, right? So you need to have a set of constraints, right? You need to have, and the thing that we do is we set an intention at the start, right? But you also have to have the set of constraints that the container provides in which you can enact your intention, right? So we've been wrestling with, okay, how does that work, how can we do this correctly? And this idea of a container is magical for us because what we see John doing and all these other books or whatever, right? Like they give you a procedure, right? Like do A, B, and then C, right? But that's not helpful, right? Like if you just have A, B, C, like everybody's, every individual is gonna enact that differently, right? And so especially if you wanna participate in a group, it's important that you somehow make a translation from a procedure to something that can be participated with. And I think the magic to resolve that is the container. Chad, did that answer your question? Yeah, so okay, here's another question to add to that then. What would be, what kind of trouble have you ran into if any while utilizing and developing the language of container and the other kind of seemingly insular language that you're using? Well, with the container aspect and trying to implement the container aspect, it's you're relying on people's skills, right? Like you're relying on the participant's capacity and effectively your ability to invoke their ability to participate in the right spirit, right? If they don't have the capacity, you cannot have them participate in the way that you want. Like that's impossible, right? And then it's like, okay, so maybe the who do have the capacity, right? But the language that I'm using isn't connecting in the right way to invoke what I want, right? So now you need to have a way to communicate, to give a sense of the spirit, right? That you want to the other person so that instead of giving them the structure to be in, you inspire them to participate in the right way, right? So and language is what we're limited to, to manifest that. But yeah, you wanna do this magic thing again, right? Like where you're appealing to the right things in the person. Okay, all right. So say we all wants to know about what the best beard oil is. Do you use any beard oil, Manuel? I actually do use beard oil, but I am not an expert. And I only use it because my parents gave it to me. So, I'm gonna come from that one. My wife gave me some beard oil and I've never once used it. And this beard is completely natural. I'm gonna have to trim it before sending it. But so there's the beard thing. All right, any other questions? Go ahead. John was trying to ask a question there. I don't know if you heard him or not. No, I didn't. I'm not hearing you. I don't think Paul is hearing you. He sometimes mutes people and doesn't realize it. I'm not muting anyone. He doesn't look muted. That's Rick. You might wanna jump out and jump back into the chat, John. Is it better now? Oh, I just heard something. Yeah. Yay, okay. So, it's really hard for me to follow this conversation and Manuel's thinking. And I think a lot of it has to do with language. Okay, so I'm a Christian. So I'm a Christian. I'm a Christian. I'm a Christian. I'm a Christian. I'm a Christian. I'm a Christian. I'm a Christian. I'm a Christian. I'm a Christian. I'm a Christian. So I have been educated into speaking Christianese. And it's quite a large language. And lots of people speak this language. And what Manuel said about the exercise he does in the creating of the worlds and merging of the worlds and then bringing those things into reality makes a lot of sense. Because that kind of creative activity will bound a language. So it seems like a lot of what Mark and Manuel are doing and the other guys that are involved are, because they're meditating together and effectively because they're praying together, they're founding this new language. The problem is they're the only ones that speak that music. In normal rational discourse, people aren't founding languages. They're speaking the languages they've been given. But when you ascend into meditation, mysticism, you're encountering things that aren't languaged yet. And then those things language. And so you've just invented a language with 12 speakers. And then an advantage of Christianese is that there are millions of people that already speak it. And so if you're speaking Christianese, that's good. And if you're meditating and innovating with a language, I already have a jumping off point to understand. Versus like, what Manuel is saying is more difficult to me than even a lot of other intellectual and philosophical talk. Because he's engaging in this creative thing of founding a new language. What do you think? That's a big compliment. It's like, oh, a great new language. It cuts both ways. Yeah, no, like fair enough, right? Like, yes, the language is there for a purpose, right? I'm gonna immediately admit that hopefully other people thought of this stuff before. They use different words. But maybe not, right? Like maybe there is some unique aspects of things coming together that just weren't put together before for some random reason. But what I try to do is I try to look at reality, right? And how it's manifesting. And I'm trying to use a pragmatic framing of like, okay, like how can we do something with this, right? So what is the highest thing, right? Like, and the fractal nature of the thing, right? Like, because that's what I wanna do with the container, right? Like I wanna have the container ideas is something that fractually applies upon every level, right? So that's the way that I'm trying to think, right? Like I wanna have these things that can always be true and that I can relate to. And Christianity obviously has its own version of this. And like, I don't know if it's fair to say that all the Christianese people are talking about the same things with the same understanding because I definitely don't believe that's true. But yes, right? Like if there's a heritage and there's a way there, like I have not created the way there, right? Like that doesn't exist yet, right? And the way there has been the journey that I and Mark have embarked on and the needs that we had to fulfill with the tools that we had. So yeah, I don't know if that's a good answer. Well, I'm not going to understand what you mean until I meditate. I don't think it's necessary. And that's gonna be true for almost everyone. No, I don't think it's necessary at all. I don't think the meditation is part of the things that we say. Like I don't think that's true. Well, I think Sean makes an amazing point because what he's basically saying is that language is in some ways a function of an already established intimacy, intimacy of relationship, intimacy of experience. And I think I agree with Sean on this, on the point that he made because you already have this long established Christian ease out there. And what Christianity has been is this massive narrative that was successfully deployed to multiple generations and millions, billions of people. And it's a system out there that has all sorts of affordances, so on and so forth. So there's the one piece of it. And so as a Christian minister, it's easy to say that, it's easy to promote that. But what I want to point to though is right away early in the conversation, when you made the point Manuel that all of this Christian language, all of this container that was Christianity, that is all over the place in the Netherlands, there are churches, there are schools. In fact, the roots of my own Christian denomination came from Dutch emigrants. Something happened along the way where there was a failure of plausibility, a failure of performance concerning the language. Now, however we want to frame the story that Rick Rapetti told about the babies and limbo and his experience in the Roman Catholic Church, I think we can agree that that story expressed a, that story was one example of a pretty significant failure. A failure of the church, a failure of the container of language for a generation. And I don't want to be too hard on the container of the generation. There's always sort of a reciprocal transjective quality to this, the church fails the people and the people fail the church. I mean, it usually goes both ways. And so part of what I see developing, especially around John Vervecky's work, which is his religion that's not a religion, a different cognitive grammar, this whole project is an attempt to, I'm not going to say establish a new container because I don't think these containers are actually established by us or necessarily created by us. I think it is much more of a reciprocal endeavor, as is Christianity, where you wouldn't say that all of this language is simply creating containers and creating things. You believe that you are all the same. And when you are working in this ecology of practices, if you are meditating, pursuing lectio divina, that you are not just simply creating something, you are also discovering and participating and interacting with something very real that is affording meaning. Did I get that right? Right, and yeah, I think it's even more important. So if we take that framing, so we're interacting with something which is spiritual because it's not manifest in materiality. And it would be the platonic realm, effectively. So if we relate to that, then my words are pointers or they're symbols to represent things out there in the realm. So I don't think it's fair to criticize me for the use of my words because all I'm doing with the word is I'm trying to point at something here. Now you can say, well, the way that you explain. You can finish your point. I have a great time. We'll have that while finishing. Okay, we'll have Manuel finish his point and then you can bring in your counterpoint. Well, you can say that my description of what's in the realm is not good or incomplete or inefficient or whatever. You can have many criticisms about that, but all I'm trying to do is point at something in the best way that I can. Like I use the word container because it's a good description of, right? Like the word is literally meaning what I'm trying to express as what I see, right? So I have a way of perceiving that allows me to relate to this concept and that concept is affording me a bunch of things, right? Like it allows me to look at reality in a certain way and now I can act out a bunch of things that I couldn't act out if I didn't have the word. And yeah, right? Like I can't expect people to see what I see, right? Because like they haven't had my experience. They don't have my context, right? Like they don't have the ground that I stand on. They don't share that. And like this is my argument for Christianity, right? Like with Christianity, you share the ground that you stand on, right? Like this is why I'm going towards Christianity because I think like that's the ground that you stand on and like it's the best ground that there is because I don't see a good competitor for it like at all. Okay, I want to use a brand new word that I just learned four minutes ago called transjective. So I posit that there is a transjective relationship between us people and the spiritual world. So there's a spiritual world that is existing in different ways. And then we're perceiving with it and interacting with it. But when we interact with it, it changes us and we change it. So if you're interacting with an objective, an objective spiritual reality, it's objective or it's existing independence of you, but also you have accessed it. And so because you're you, your perception of it is in, it's different than other people's perception of it because you've interacted with it and it's interacted with you. And so if you go and you interact with an independent spiritual world and then you come back and you language it and then you create symbols and you're talking about the thing that's existing outside of you, if I'm trying to access that spiritual world on the basis of the symbols that you've brought back, then I'm going to access a spiritual world that's flavored by you. It's existing outside of me, but now it's because I'm using your words, there's a piece of you that you left behind in the spiritual world. It's got your signature on it. And then that signature is making it you. You're using my game. I don't think I influence the spiritual world. Like I don't, I think it exists. So all I'm doing is perceiving it. All I can do, this is literally a limitation that humans have is I can only tell you what I see and how I do it. I don't have access to more information than that. So yes, that's flavored by me because that's all I have access to. I don't believe that the spiritual world is a consequence of me. Like I think it just is. And you have this saying, right? Like everybody's touching the elephant, but they're touching a different part, right? And it's like, okay, like maybe I'm on the other side of the elephant. Maybe that's true, but I'm still touching the same elephant. Yes, but when you touch the elephant, you left behind some fallout, some hair or some pieces of your dead skin. And now that's sitting on the elephant. When I touch it, I touch the elephant and the skin that you left behind on it. All right, I'm gonna move on to Anselman's question. Well, we'll get you into Jacob, but Anselman had a question here, which I think, Anselman says, I would ask Mark why he seems to shun exploring Christian theological language. Do you shun that? I don't know that you do. Well, first it's a manual. Yeah, I'm like, it's manual. Second time, but anyway, like I don't shun exploring Christian language. I have a problem with Christian language and like maybe that's because I haven't dug into it enough, but like I feel like there's an abandonment of consistency. I've been criticized for my perception of that, but I have not perceived where I'm going wrong, right? Or if I'm going wrong, because like I'm not convinced that I'm going wrong yet. But no, like I am exploring the Christian ideas, right? Like I brought up faith, hope and love. Like I think they're super important. I listen to Peugeot all the time. Like I think his stuff is amazing. And then language of creation, like also amazing. Like I wouldn't frame things the way that they're framed there for pragmatic reasons. Like it doesn't mean that I disagree with what's in the book. I just like, okay, like I wanna have a container that people can participate in, right? So I'll just use the same structure, right? Like the structure of the world, because I agree that's the structure of the world in different symbolic language so that people can access it. And like maybe I lose some information when I do that, but like I'd rather have people feel the elephant than that they don't realize that there's an elephant. Okay, okay. I think it's a fair answer. All right, Jacob, you had something you wanted to get in? Yeah, this idea that you leave some skin on the elephant, that's just postmodernism trying really hard to get rid of objective reality. You can't feel the skin somebody else left on an elephant. An elephant is really big and God is really big and we're really small and God is real. God is real in a real way. And that's why when we, seven billion people reach out to God and something real comes from God, it's much bigger than just our silly, oh, if we all think together and our collective conscious, no, no, it's real, real. All right, I didn't hear a question so I guess you don't have to answer anything. Well, yeah, I think the proof is in the pudding, right? So like if the collective unconscious is touching something, right? Like either it's gonna exist, right? Like it's gonna accord to reality or it's not functional, right? And strange things are gonna happen. And so there's always a test of truth and if you're not true, you're not true. I wanted to push back too. So look, the people in the meditation hall that meditate with us all the time and there's not too many left. They actually don't always understand the language. That this doesn't happen. And a lot of people come under the server, have come into the server in the past and they don't stay, they don't attend meditation. They get our language and they go off and use it. And they come to get our language in many cases because yes, language can become jargon and that's the negative aspect where you're stuck in your container and you can't get out and it's too small to, we'll say, communicate with others. So if you're an architect and you build buildings, you have a whole set of jargon and when you try to communicate that jargon out, it doesn't work. Absolutely, that can happen. It is not inevitable though. And the thing that language does do is that language allows you to create that bridge. That bridge between maybe your small container and my small container and show us that there's a place to meet and then maybe we both see a larger container in which we can cooperate. And that actually does happen and that's the positive aspect. And that's where when you're creating a bridge of meaning, you need a language that connects to the container the person has. So, and there's a point in that, yeah, if you're a Christian and you have all this language and you're all set with it and it's working for you and I have no doubt that it is, right? I'm not casting aspersions, that's great. But what Vervecky is talking about and the people Peterson are reaching do not have that language. And I think it's because, Manuel's done a brilliant job throughout this conversation of making the point, we didn't have the larger container where that language was used from parents maybe, from society, like those things were not seen at the time. And if we don't have that language to reach those people, and I would argue those are the people in the most trouble, then we need to develop it. And that would be my defense of our use of this language and Paul's excellent way of connecting that in a way that makes us better at communicating it and Christians in particular better at understanding it because I still believe a lot of our many live streams, Paul and also our last conversation with Father Eric and Joey, that the messaging is really important. And if you're using a messaging, evangelizing in a language that people don't understand, you're not gonna get a good result. Yeah, I think that's a big, yeah, the big question is, like how do you provide a language to a person that they can understand? And now it's like, and this is my experience, so when I talk to people, I somehow intuit where they're at in relation to the elephant, and I think that's the biggest thing that I see often, right? And I can see the paths and the struggles that they have, like I can see that in my mind in a certain way, right? It's not a visual picture, but it's a feeling and I can use that in the conversation to point things out where they're stuck, right? Because people, like everybody's stuck, right? If the show is talking about these levels of existence, and that you can only swap between a level through faith, like there's this leap of faith that you need to do, that you can participate in the higher level, right? Like you first need to realize that it's there, right? And there's two ways that you can realize it, right? Like one is like you get launched there by taking drugs or having an experience or whatever, right? You just get jammed up the level and you're like, okay, now I need to deal with it. Or like there's an authority in your life that you trust, right, like there's a hierarchy that you participate in that lifts you up slowly through effort. And that's the better way, right? Like that's the healthy way, because if you just get launched somewhere, and this was Rick Repetti's problem, right? Like, oh, I'm too high. Yeah, you're too high because you don't have the grounding, you don't have the ground to stand on to relate to all of these things, right? So you're building like a pyramid, right? And you need to broaden the base in order to build a higher pyramid else it's not gonna work. And I think, so I'm about to, I just put a comment in that, I'm just gonna pause the question and answer till further notice, just because June I'm doing Synod, July I'm on vacation, August I'm on vacation, and then in Europe, September I'm in Europe, and then in Canada, so I've got a lot of travel and I'm gonna have to make sure that Living Stones gets all they can out of me when I am back in Sacramento. But I'm about to go for the next two weeks with the exception of sort of the estuary events before and after Synod. I'm about to participate in my church community. We are going to sing songs, we are going to talk a certain language, we are going to do all of that in a very in-depth way, in a very intimate way, in that, you know, when I am at the Synod of the Christian Reformed Church, I have, I'm there with classmates, my mother and my sister are actually coming to Grand Rapids after that, so I'll be meeting with them, I'll see my uncle, I'll see my cousin, I'll see people I've worked with for years, it's, there's all these levels of intimacy and we're very much nested within a common story, set of language, in fact, our language is so contextual that, you know, it's all this Dutch Calvinism and we have all this in-house stuff, it's extremely in-house and it's extremely intimate. But that in-house and intimacy is also incredibly insular and many of the people that I talk to on the server and on the internet channels, none of that is, if, you know, I love it if they, in fact, want to take the language learning journey of coming into this community and being a part of it, that would be wonderful, but anyone who has ever, especially after the age of 25, attempted to learn another language and perhaps even a dead language, let's say Koine Greek or Biblical Hebrew, if you want to learn Hebrew, you can talk to Jacob because he has a great Hebrew learning class and course and I hear there's some people on the internet charging like $300 a month and they don't even know Hebrew and Jacob will teach you just for the joy of it, I told him he should charge because the more you pay, it's more it's worth, but anyway, learning a language is an intensely time-consuming thing and part of the struggle that the church has right now is that all of these language silos are segregated and so I know some people felt very threatened when they saw what John Vervecky was doing, but I actually see his project as positive in the sense that I suspect the further he goes in and I think I've seen that over the years that I've been relating to him, he is probably increasingly going to see at least the value and I think we've seen that in him, the value of what Christians have been talking about for a very long time and there will be a meeting of the minds and then the further, even as I watch people in this realm explore this language, just as I think we've seen with Manuel today, suddenly he discovers that, well, faith, hope and love, that those are really important elements in this language world that I've developed and but once you use those three, now suddenly you have this bridge to 1 Corinthians 13, where faith, hope and love and the greatest of these is love. If I speak in the tongue of men and of angels, but have not love, I am nothing. So I and I suspect that this sort of, search for language has actually been part of the ongoing project of the church all the way back to Antioch, where they didn't, people were picking up the ideas of Jesus and they didn't know what to call them, so they're called them Christians and Justin Martyr, who was a lover of philosophy, but then discovers Christianity and tries to put them together. I think every generation tries to put their world together because, and we live in a very dynamic culture right now that is always developing new language and so every time the culture develops new language, we have to figure out how on earth that relates to the old thing. So I actually see all of what's happening here as I see it within, I see it as good stuff of my job as someone whose calling is to help people understand the Christian language, the Christian story, the Christian life and part of what I saw when I saw Peterson and what was following him, what he was sort of turning people onto was an opportunity to say, okay, we're using these words. Here's some other language and maybe you grew up with this language, maybe you rejected this language, but actually there's a huge amount of infrastructure around you. Some of that is churches and buildings and some of that is language and theology and ideas and let's see if we can compare notes. So that tends to be how I've seen it. Yeah, I think a couple things about language, right? So language is trying to relate, it's like a metaphor, right? So I use the word body, which is also a Christian term, but the body is consistent of organs that participate in the whole and that make the whole function and they're necessary. Like they're not optional. First Corinthians 12, 14, yes, that's right. Same book of the Bible. So what is happening, and you're gonna use a new verbatim word, it's an acceptation. So you use something that's functional in one domain and you're applying it to a different domain and it gives you a certain functionality. It gives you an intelligibility that you can use to sense make where you're at, right? So when I'm looking for words, like this is the process that I'm in, right? Like I'm trying to say, well, does this word, right? Like the physical representation of the word allow me to have intelligibility in the spiritual realm, right? In a fractal way, because that's really important, right? Like the fractal like nature, right? Like it has to be recurring on all the levels, right? So that like, now I have an actually universal tool that I can use, right? And that's the process that I'm engaged in, right? Like I'm like trying to look for these things and I hope that through finding all of these ways, I get this discernment, like I have full confidence that like I'm gonna land at the same things that Christianity landed on because it's true, right? And else Christianity isn't true. And so like that's my belief. Okay, good. I got a question real quick though. It doesn't kind of seem like, I mean, hasn't modernity been doing the same kind of thing all along in a sense, like, you know, in a way where, especially I guess with like the post Protestant where we are now, where it's like everybody kind of has their own language. So it's kind of, that seems to be a fractal pattern where we're all engaging in the same kind of thing that you're doing. I don't know. Do you know what I'm asking here? I'm never really good at this stuff. Oh, my apologies. I think humans beings do this all along. I think it's unavoidable, right? Like if I see something, I need to give it a name. Like, am I gonna study Christianity for 15 years to randomly find the name in a book or am I just gonna give it a name? Yeah, twins do that. Twins wind up with their own little language sometime. And at some point, you know, nobody says, okay, you gotta adapt that language to the world, but twins sort of do that. And I think that's pretty common to us. Jean, did you have another question? I saw you unmuted. Oh, yeah. I don't quite know how to put this, but with all this talk of language, brings to mind to me that when the Holy Spirit appeared at Pentecost, one of the first things that happened was gift of tongues, which is, you know, when Peter starts standing up and speaking and all of the people start hearing them in their own language. And so with languages, one of the chief functions, I think, of the Holy Spirit is the bringing together unity in the body. And I think part of maybe even the first task of that is to giving understanding in all of these different languages. Yeah, I think that's right. I think that's right. And I think that's, you know, when I look at how much church work, a lot of church work is, you know, there's singing and there's liturgy and there's music, but pastoral work is a lot of talking and listening. And so often when I, let's say someone is troubled or angry or hurting or something like that, so much of what I do is I sit and listen to them to try to understand, because not everybody has the same, is equally adept at language. And like Manuel said, you kind of have to take the language you've got. That's where you're starting from. And that language is idiosyncratic, has everything to do with the household you were raised in and the neighborhood and all that. So you gotta start with the language you've got. And what often happens in pastoral situations is I sit and I listen and I listen and I listen. I begin to understand their language. And then hopefully I can come around them and say, okay, we've got this language, let's see it through a new frame. And I use language in that way too. And hopefully then we can begin to discover a joint language together. And in the process I can lend them agency, I can lend them faith, and hopefully that will bring them agency and faith and healing and hope and all those good things. Yeah. Oh, Paul. You just said frame. Is that a container? Because now when you said frame, that made container, that made total sense to me. But maybe that's just because we've been listening to you for so long. That, now that changed everything. Okay. No, is there a nuance? No, there is a nuance, right? Because a frame is a way of intelligibility and a container is bigger because it's a way of participating. And I wanna expand on what Paul said, because he was talking about lending agency, right? But he's also an authority, right? So a lot of times people come in and they have a problem and they don't have the right language, right? So they don't have the intelligibility to relate to what they're struggling with, right? And then from the place of authority, right? It's like, I would say authority is granted by your understanding of the intelligibility, right? Like, so there's this form, right? And the form is granting you the rights to say what you're saying. And you say, okay, like this is happening for you. This is relating this way, this way, and this way. And now that person can make connections to what they're going through. And they find ways to relate to it that are better than the way that they're relating to it now, right? And I think that's where authority comes in and how it's valuable and how it's relating to language as well. Yeah, and authority also in terms of this, I mean, the container as in the church. Now there's a great deal of difference if someone is a believer in the church and they believe in authority and they trust in authority and they come to me and say, you're a minister of the word in the Christian Form Church and I have this question and I'm going to sit and I'm going to listen and I'm going to believe and trust and all those, all of those are facilitated by the container. Now outside of that container, in a sense on YouTube or in a channel like this, I have to sort of demonstrate authority because it might not simply be granted because we're not sharing the same container. Right, and you do that by pointing up, right? Like you see what I see, right? Or even the trick that Peterson does, right? Like you can also make a person see by themselves, right? Like you've had this experience, right? And therefore, right? And then you don't have to rely on your authority but you're just subsuming their own authority in some sense. Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, good. Anybody else? That's why I really love the estuary protocols and stuff. It allows for like this kind of dialogus, or trilogos, or quadrilogos, or hexalogos to like happen where we're all in the container and we're just kind of like throwing all of the stuff in our pockets on the table there inside of the container. And then all of a sudden like an understanding starts to, I guess, emerge. It's an interesting thing. So I wanted to think more about this container stuff. We decided that bell peppers were the coolest containers though. I think a container is also something that can hold stress, right? So if you're in a container, right? And you know why you're there, like there's a sense of security that can be provided where you can step outside of your normal boundaries, right? Because the container gives you a sense of safety, right? For example, if there's a festival and like there's a bunch of police around, right? Like the fact that there's police around the place changes the participation in the place. Like it just, there's a sense of safety, but there's also a sense of constraint that's coming with that presence. So maybe that would be a difference between a frame and a container, like a marriage is a container, but a marriage, like a frame can't be a marriage. Like that doesn't make any sense. A marriage is very much a container. You can use the marriage as a frame to see the world, right? You can participate in the frame of marriage. And as we said before, Manuel is still available. So, you know, he's just putting that out there. Putting that out there. We're on the internet right now. He never knows he's watching. Chad's already married. So if you love that deep voice, sorry, he's already taken. Time to jump. Anyone else? Anyone else wanna jump in? If anything happens, Manuel, I got you, boy. I seen your basement, dude. There is a question from YouTube chat. It was kind of asking, I guess, I'm paraphrasing heavily here, but, you know, Manuel, with your practice of lectio divina and stuff like that, like what are your thoughts about actually joining a church where things aren't quite as, you know, potentially quite as free form as that? I am in the church. I am participating for like close to nine months now, I think. And I've been really enjoying it. I've been learning the language in a different way, right? Because it's like honor or like all of these strange words is like, okay, like, and the fact that I have to learn what honor is to honor someone and it's like, it's just, in some sense, it's silly that I have to learn it, right? But like, if you never get taught, like, you never get taught. Like that's just where you're at. But yeah, no, I've been participating. I had this experience where they asked, they said, when you're asked how you're doing, you should respond with I'm blessed. And that's like one of the first, one of the first things where I'm like, no, like I got really upset about that. Because I'm like, no, like, you can't discard the truth, right? I get how important it is to live in faith, right? And to truly believe that you're blessed, right? Because that changes the reality that you live in, right? Like it changes the arena in which you participate, right? Like, or you set a container of potential for yourself if you could consider yourself blessed, right? Like you're highlighting the good in the world. Like you can interact with the good if you consider yourself blessed, right? Well, if you're like, oh yeah, I had this horrible day and I ate this wrong thing, blah, blah, blah, right? Like if you're in that mentality, right? Like now the world that's manifesting in front of you is phalanxed in a negative way, right? Like you're gonna point things out wrong. So there's a really important value in conceiving, speaking, participating in faith, right? Like in the positive way, in the good. But I don't think you can impose it, right? Because you can't deny reality, right? Like if you have a bad day and you have a broken leg, like you're not doing well, you're not blessed, right? Or at least you might be blessed from if you're reasoning from zero, but like that's not the mental space that you're in reasoning from zero at that point. That's odd. But that was my only real objection. I have just fascinated that. Well, part of it is that there are these, I mean, we're talking about people innovating on language outside of the church. There's huge innovations of language that get faddish within the church and the whole blessed thing is one of those. I'm just cracking up thinking about someone telling you, how are you, I'm blessed. That is so, that's the upside and downside of Christianese. These things develop and they don't last very long. And so there's things that develop in the church and they go away. You can find that in music in the church often, especially in Protestant churches. Especially now, I mean, it used to be that the change was so much slower. Now churches constantly have new songs and sometimes Pete will bring up a song that's like, yeah, we used to sing that a lot 10 years ago and now we hardly ever sing that. So churches are very living dynamic places. So I've never seen that happen. But it's a very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very living dynamic places. So I'll tell you, I would love to be a fly on the wall and watch you interact with your church with all of your, because that's what's so much fun as a pastor is when people like you come into church because you're taking it seriously. You're taking the language seriously. A lot of people are just kind of shrug at things, but you're gonna take all that language seriously. So it's good, it's good. Yeah, I think these songs, for example, because I'm just standing there, especially my first time there. They're singing these songs, and it's like the blood of Christ, blah, blah, blah. It's like, oh my God, what do I do with these words? How do I relate to these words? And it's interesting that there is an intelligibility. I can conceive of things in a way that wasn't accessible to me before. And because of my meditation experience and my awareness of what goes inside of me, I can track it. It's really interesting to go through that experience and have this world literally open up and see how it opens up and see the things that it's affording. As a consequence of opening up. And yeah, so these songs are for me like portals, right? They're like, oh, I do like Lectio Divina on them when I'm singing them, because they're opening this world for me that I can now see. There's a psychotechnology, it's a powerful one. And the more you sing them, the longer you live with those songs, it becomes even more powerful. So any other questions or input? Maybe this is a good time to land the plane then. Not quite yet, Rick. Like I said, I think I'm gonna pause the Friday Q&A until at least after Thunder Bay. I'm going to be, like I said, I'm gonna be in and out of Sacramento. Pretty much continually between now and Thunder Bay. I was talking to one of the organizers of Thunder Bay yesterday. Only 17 people have bought tickets to Thunder Bay so far. So y'all gotta step it up. We don't want this thing canceled. And there's still a lot of room available. And all of the 17 people who signed up also signed up for Airsoft or Paintball for Jesus. As someone calls it. So yeah, that's coming up in September. And I'll make sure that there are links in the show notes below where you can sign up. Because that's gonna be, I think, a really tremendous event. And I mean, the organizers are focusing on making sure that there's access to each other. Because I think that'll kind of be a language convention in that sense and we'll all be working on language. So any final thoughts you wanna leave us with, Manuel? Well, I'm gonna wrestle you when you're in the Netherlands. You're gonna wrestle me? Oh, that should be fun. We'll get really intimate. How much do you weigh? Are you in my weight class? I weigh in about 245. Okay, yeah. I don't think I get there. I heard you're even bigger than me. So that's like, oh, wow. I'm sorry for you. How about 6.5 to 45? I had this experience in India where, yeah, I'm 6'2 and I'm like, I don't know, 160. So girls. Oh, wait, wait, I have to say women. I humbly apologize. He's learning, because I'll tell you, dealing with women, oh, yes, it is a matter of language. It is a matter of language. Women have their own language, trust me, trust me. All right, so thank you all for watching. Those of you who are in the Discord server, the conversation can continue there. But in terms of the internet, thank you all for your time and attention. And like I said, no more Friday Q&As, at least for the time being. And yeah, sorry about that. I wish we could do them, but I'll just be traveling. I don't know how much content. I mean, some of you will have noticed there was a big drop this week in the amount of content I'm putting out. Might be kind of a drought on the PVK YouTube channel this summer. Got a lot of stuff going on, but we'll see. You never know. Thanks, Rick. Yeah, I'm gonna make sure I have more content so I can reach all your audience. All right, so more chance for, what's the name of your channel? Agopic Orientation. Agopic Orientation. So more chance for that, for the other channels. All right, Rick, you can end transmission.