https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=nI9BIQW88Tg

 Hi, this is Paul. I'm back from vacation. I didn't do a rough draft for Sunday this last week for a whole variety of reasons, most of which was I had vacation and I kind of split weeks with vacation, which meant I didn't have a lot of pre-time for the sermon, so I didn't really have time to get into the office and do a rough draft. And so I preached the sermon as it was, and you can find the sermon. I'll put the link to the church YouTube channel. The link is always to the church YouTube channel below, and so you can look at the draft I did on Sunday, but I often just sort of let this pass, but I know some of you rough drafts, with the exception of the one where I talked about aliens, usually aren't my biggest viewed videos on my channel, but I do know that there's a fairly committed audience for my rough drafts, and some of you struggle with Christianity and church and the Bible, and so I know that my rough drafts are an important piece for that, and I wanted to do something on this because it's sort of an important transition. During the, for a lot of the year lately, I've been using the Revised Common Lectionary or the Narrative Lectionary to decide what texts I will treat in my sermons on Sunday. Trinity Sunday was, not last Sunday, but the week before, and then you sort of enter a time in the Lectionary season where, you know, there are texts and things you can do, but I usually go off on my own. A number of years ago, I think it might be even more than seven, it might be ten, I haven't looked it up, I sort of got tired of preaching series, and preaching different series are sort of what a lot of Protestant preachers do, and I got tired of that, so I decided I would just sort of go through the Bible, and so I started in Genesis and Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers, Deuteronomy, and I didn't hit all the prophetic books. I treated the exile, I hit some of the prophets, and I'm in the Gospels a lot during liturgical seasons, and then last year I did Peter, I've done things on Daniel, Ezekiel, my adult Sunday school class. Hopefully the adult Sunday school class will be restarting soon, I think probably September. It seems that COVID is losing its grip here in the United States on quite a few things right now, and so we ought to have a certain degree of normalcy by September. So then the adult Sunday school class will start again, that's not on this channel, that's on my church channel, but I know for a lot of the listeners the adult Sunday school class was sort of a learning mode that you appreciated, and so that will come back. But I'm going to be preaching about the Apostle Paul this summer, and probably until Advent, because there's a lot there, and anyone who would analyze the sermons that I haven't haven't preached would note that, especially as a Dutch Reformed minister, I have preached surprisingly few sermons on the Apostle Paul or on his epistles. That's a very strange thing because the epistles of Paul are an integral part of the Protestant Reformation, especially Luther, and that has, Paul and his epistles have been subjects of serious debate over the last 30, 40, 50 years. There's been a great emphasis to try to locate Paul of Tarsus in context of the diaspora Jewish communities that gave him birth, and so you have, you know, NT Wright is again one of the preeminent New Testament scholars, at least one of the ones most publicly known, certainly one of the most prolific in terms of publishing. I've commented before that, you know, NT Wright just seems to drop books as he goes. I have no under, I wouldn't have time to read the number of books that this man writes. So, and the Apostle Paul has been a big part of his work, and I've spoken before about the, sort of the main, you know, his larger books on the New Testament. This is the first one of that main series, and this was my introduction to NT Wright. This is the first book of his that I read, the New Testament and the People of God, and I was, you know, I was really turned on by this, and that made, reading this book, made me an NT Wright fan. And as I had mentioned before, NT Wright writes big fat scholarly books like this. He writes kind of middle brow books, like this is one of my favorite middle brow books of his, Surprised by Hope, Rethinking Heaven, the Resurrection, and the Mission of the Church, and then he'll write even, he has a commentary series on the New Testament, which is sort of devotional. It's sort of a very lay-oriented approach to just sort of explaining the text as he goes through the New Testament. Now, recently he came out with a biography of the Apostle Paul, which I very much enjoyed, and I very much want to reread and probably will as I'm camping out in the Apostle Paul. And, you know, I recommend that book. Now, a generation ago, there was another scholar out of the UK who was a vitally important scholar in the New Testament named F.F. Bruce, and I have, you know, I have his commentary on the Book of Acts, which is sort of a classic, and I bought this in my college days at the Erdmann's Seconds bookstore. I paid $10 for it back in the day. I probably have it on Logos now, too. This was, let's see, revised edition, 1988, so a few years old. And F.F. Bruce wrote another book that I really enjoy on the Apostle Paul, Paul the Apostle of the Heart Set Free, which is less a biography than NT writes, and a little bit more of a, it has a little bit more detail. But again, I read that book a number of years ago, and, you know, it was really helpful in terms of thinking about Paul and trying to understand the man, Paul of Tarsus. Now, this isn't really going to be a rough draft, as I've already been talking too much to begin with. I talked about resolution, and for those of you who follow Jordan Peterson, this is a metaphor that I picked up almost immediately listening to Jordan Peterson, low and high resolution, and so in the process of a sermon, I wanted to try to give a visual example of what we're talking about in terms of high and low resolution. Now, those of you who've been following along on the rough drafts know that I've spent a number of weeks, and this is a fairly stock element of the way I try to teach the New Testament and contextualize it in the church sense by sort of paralleling, let's say, our culture war with what I call the first century Judean culture war, something like this. And again, these elements have been around for a long time in terms of what we've known about the New Testament. They were competing groups that were wrestling with the question of what Israel's continual exile as such means. You might say, well, did the exile end when Cyrus sent a remnant back to rebuild the temple? Yes, but it was just a remnant that returned. And so then in the world of antiquity, in the Roman Empire, far more Jews scattered in the Empire than lived in what became the Roman provinces of Galilee and Judea. And so what that meant, and especially the Roman province of Judea, was not particularly wealthy, whereas Jews who were living in the flourishing cities of the Roman Empire probably stayed in those places because they were thriving economically. And that sets up a lot of the dynamics, that broader imperial spectrum is a big part of the shift in the book of Acts from the Gospels, where we're focusing on Jesus and his adversaries, the people that he's engaging, all these various elements of the Judean culture war, and that's the context of the Gospels. And so in terms of trying to figure out what Jesus is saying, how we can apply that to our lives now, understanding that historical context is very, very helpful. And one of the things, one of the key things that I think is important to think through is how Jesus changes the meaning of what Messiah is. And that's a big change from, let's say, the Maccabees or David or Saul, where a Messiah was supposed to be a geopolitical ruler who would overthrow and free Israel, sort of like a judge in the book of Judges, free Israel from the cultural and political domination by her neighbors earlier in Judges and the Philistines, but then later in the much larger imperial stage where you had Babylon and Assyria and Persia and eventually Alexander the Great and the Hellenistic empires and then the Roman Empire and on and on and on from there. You know, part of what's amazing about the Jewish people and the story that has grown out of that people is how, you know, we don't see temples to Marduk around the world. They somehow managed to continue to maintain their own identity and culture in the face of constant imperial cultural forces. That doesn't mean that their culture wasn't changed. It does mean that it somehow endured and was able to maintain a narrative thread. And that narrative thread, in fact, would split between what is known as Judaism today, who are in many ways the descendants of the Pharisees and Christians who are descendants of Jesus. And I know this is a very interesting subject which has been introduced to me in a lot of ways through the Bridges of Meaning Discord server and at least I won't mention his name right now, but one of the more faithful and ardent Jewish participants in that estuary space Jesus and then the Apostle Paul. And so what I preached about in this sermon was in many ways the transition or the beginning of the transition that you begin to see, whereas the Gospels very much situate, that's a little difficult too because the Gospels are also situating the work of Jesus in the larger imperial sense. They're just doing it in a more subtle way and you can see that especially in something like the Gospel of John, but the canvas changes from Luke to Acts and you no longer have the focus on this Jewish audience that very much feels the weight of history upon them and the deep difficult questions that ongoing Roman subjugation meant for them on into other populations in the Roman Empire that were not culturally Jewish. Now as it began many were attracted to the synagogues that were in the Roman Empire and you can read about that in the book of Paul. Paul almost always went to the synagogues first in a city but the church very much grew beyond simply the synagogues and became its own thing. So in Luke our focus has been redefining the meaning of Messiah from this perspective of the first century Judean culture war. When and how would God save his chosen people and their promised land from imperial slavery, occupation, and oppression? Jesus redefines Messiah from the standard assumption of his culture. So I was off the last week of May. I preached the first week of June and so the last sermon I preached at Living Stones was Pentecost Sunday and it's often been the fact that I would, you do you do Lent and then you do, let's see where are we in the year, you do Lent and then after Lent you get in Easter and you preach all through those post-resurrection texts and you get into all of those themes and then you go to Ascension and then Pentecost and then you have Trinity Sunday sort of at the end of the revised common lectionary. The book of Acts has these two segments, these two glowy honeymoonish texts of Pentecost, chapter two and chapter four. So at the end of chapter two they have, they devoted themselves to the apostles teaching into the fellowship, to the breaking of bread, and to prayers. Everyone was filled with awe at the many wonders and signs performed by the apostles. All the believers were together and had everything in common. They sold property and possessions to give to anyone who had need. Every day they continued to meet together in the temple courts. They broke bread in their homes and ate together with glad and sincere hearts, praising God and enjoying the favor of all the people. And the Lord added to their number daily those who were who were being saved. So you have this just glorious vision of fulfillment. This is in many ways the fulfillment of Jesus' messianic vision with the Hebraic disciples in Jerusalem and just praising God and enjoying the favor of all the people. You have this seemingly this pause from this conflicted tension between the Jesus followers and the broader population, the religious authorities, etc. etc. Now then you get to Acts 3 and the story starts to pick up because John and Peter go into the temple and they're spending a lot of time in the temple and in my Ascension Day sermon I used this illustration here to talk about the fact that, what word to use, spiritually, symbolically the temple was the closest place to being with God and Jesus at the right hand of the Father, let's say it that way. And so they're spending time in the temple after the day of Pentecost and some New Testament scholars see this as sort of a foot dragging that they're experiencing fulfillment and these honeymoon texts after the book of Pentecost. But then they go into the temple and there's a cripple begging and silver and gold have we none but in the name of Jesus Christ stand up and walk and so now we're getting back into the Jesus pattern but it's the disciples now empowered by the Holy Spirit that are doing what Jesus did. All right and then Peter gives a sermon in the temple colonnade and Peter and John are brought before the Sanhedrin and you're beginning to see these patterns that are setting up and they're being treated like Jesus was and the same things that happened to Jesus are now happening to his disciples. Peter and John remain fairly defiant but they're let go with a warning and then we have the scene of Jesus' followers gathered in prayer and then we sort of have a redux of Pentecost. After they prayed the place where they were meeting was shaken and they were all filled with the Holy Spirit and spoke the word of God boldly and so you have again this this Pentecost it's almost a second Pentecost right after. Now Peter and John are interesting because Peter quite likely the oldest of the apostles and therefore the leader because traditional society he's oldest and John quite likely the youngest who and so they sort of bookend and and so Acts 3 isn't just a story about what happened with Peter and John when they went to the temple it's also in terms of the development of the book talking to us about the life of the apostles in Jerusalem after Pentecost and they are so this story exemplifies the continuation of the story. All the believers were one in heart and mind no one claimed that any of their possessions was their own but they shared everything they had with great power the apostles continue to testify to the resurrection of the Lord Jesus and again the the resurrection at the center of the apostles teaching is key in the book of Acts and you'll find later on when Paul goes out and preaches in the synagogues around the Roman Empire it's and when he goes to Athens it's whenever he talks about the resurrection that everything really starts to the conflict really begins to engage and God's grace was so powerful at work in them all that there were no needy people among them for from time to time those who owned land or houses sold them brought the money from the sales and put it at the apostles feet and it was distributed to anyone who had need. Okay so here you have your second Pentecost honeymoon text and that's the end of chapter four and now though the resolution continues to get cranked up because then we're introduced to Barnabas who sells a field and gives the money to the community and then you have Ananias and Sapphira who claim to have given all the money they weren't under any compulsion to give any money at all but they seem to be seeking status and then they both drop dead and you know then fear goes through the church so you have this movement of first you had fulfillment now you have a little uptick in the conflict a little bit more now we're sort of getting back from eschatological realization into productive work of the cruciform church in the mission of God well and where we'll get there so then the next story is the story of Acts chapter six in those days when a number of disciples were increasing the Hellenistic Jews among them complained against the Hebraic Jews because their widows were being overlooked in the daily distribution of food now one of the things that you often see in the different translations of this verse is the struggle of translators to try to communicate what exactly is the tension there's clearly a cultural tension is it racial not really but then you have to ask the question well what do we mean by race it's clearly cultural and and what seems to have happened was that there were and this makes perfect sense the temple is sort of ground zero in the life of the Jewish community in the first century the you know it would have taken you know there are prescribed festival days and many of the diaspora Jews would not be able to hit all of those festival days faithfully in Jerusalem and see right away you begin to get a sense of well aren't all of these days prescribed yes shouldn't you go to all of them yes can you know and so religions continue to accommodate to the on the ground changes that are needed and as always with with respect to this kind of accommodation how much is too much how much is too little how to figure it out well there's a fairly good-sized diaspora Jewish community centered around Jerusalem and if you read the gospels closely you know one might imagine that many of these people that are up in the Galilee probably have family and friends that have homes or they may themselves have a home in Jerusalem because they're always going back and forth and back and forth so they're sort of living in two places well others would go there to settle in I'm taking this from Craig Keener's IVP Bible backgrounds commentary which is is really a resource that I enjoy you can look at you know full-blown so again here's uh F.F. Bruce's commentary on the book of acts which is you know from the 80s you can look at let's say a critical commentary from a liberal scholar you'll get different perspectives um you know there's there's a whole there's a lot that goes on in in New Testament scholarship but but the IVP Bible background commentary just gives a lot of nice little tidbits and usually when I go through another book of the Bible I'll grab a commentary to sort of read through as I'm going through the book and and I found this commentary to really give little nice little tidbits for sermon illustrations that here's some things that can help people in the church who are not experts at reading the Bible understand a little bit better the historical context of what's going on. It talks about how the Bible mandated caring for widows this was taken very seriously among the Jewish people more so than in the Gentile cultures and there was also a tradition of course the first century Jews were expecting a general resurrection you know you can hear that attested to in Jesus conversations with Mary and Martha at the death of Lazarus but there was a tradition that said that it's a very interesting tradition but because it was considered to be virtuous to be buried in the land of Israel many foreign Jews would come to spend their last days there and then die and leave widows. Oh now again I've gotten pushback I'm just reading the text I mean how what labels to use with respect to this geography will always be contested. Craig Keener for whatever reason decides to go with Palestinian you could say Judean whichever time period and name you want to use on that contested land historical Israel I mean just take your pick I'm not here to fight that battle. Palestinian rabbis eventually provided further theological incentive to immigrants according to one common tradition the dead would be resurrected only in Jerusalem so the righteous dead of other lands would have to roll the whole way back to Israel underground. Oh that's a vivid picture and this was and this was thought to be very a very unpleasant experience I would imagine it would be just I mean just my imagination with all these dead bodies underground bumping along getting back to pop up out of the ground in the resurrection in Israel that's fascinating fascinating stuff. Thus a disproportionate number of foreign Jewish widows lived in Jerusalem which did not have enough foreign Jewish synagogues and what you see in Jerusalem again you've got all these different cultural groups and so you have synagogues forming to cater to these different cultural groups not unlike let's say churches in the United States the Dutch reform church for one thing that that sort of cater to different immigrant groups they'll have different language questions different cultural values all of this and so you get sort of the multiculturalism among the synagogues and Christianity at this point is is not terribly distinct necessarily from what's going on in terms of how people believe they've just got this master Jesus and they're talking about his resurrection but you know people regular people are very practical and they spend most of their time thinking and paying attention to more practical things and you know theological distinctions usually don't rise to the top of their salience hierarchy until something provokes it so so you get the sense that the church is very much sort of part of the community at this point they're they're distinct but you know the the there hasn't really been a a serious social reaction now there's going to be one but the community around it is going to be interesting in terms of how this goes and again this this leads to all sorts of thoughts about the very early church the relationship with the the the religious context of that time it's all tremendously interesting stuff at least to me this urban social problem of Jerusalem spilled out over into the church acts six two through eight so the twelve gathered all the disciples together and said it would not be right for us to neglect the ministry of the word of god in order to wait on tables brothers and sisters choose seven men from among you are known to be full of the spirit and wisdom we will turn this responsibility over to them and we'll give our attention to prayer and ministry of the word this proposal pleased the whole group they chose Stefan a man full of faith and of the holy spirit he gets a little longer title and he's named first here because he's going to be central to the story also Philip who will follow and there'll be some stories about Philip and the rest of them we don't know hardly anything we did the book of acts doesn't really treat further procurus nicanor timon parmenas and Nicholas from Antioch a convert to Judaism now again the last one in the list is important because he's not even raised a jew now they presented these men to the apostles who presented them to the apostles probably these other synagogues who are increasingly influenced by these disciples of jesus and their teaching and the talk about jesus resurrection etc etc and these are probably the places that are not getting as many resources from the selling of the property etc etc the number of disciples in Jerusalem increased rapidly and a large number of priests became obedient to the faith so so you see you know very much the spread of these ideas in Jerusalem and but now the main thing to notice here are the names and the language of the names because they're all greek and which leads us to believe that these come from this diaspora jewish community or these hellenistic jews rather than the hebraic jews and again none of the labels are perfect here but it's the best we got tomb inscriptions show that many Jerusalem like Jerusalemites had greek names whether or not their parents or grandparents had lived outside judia that's interesting but even in rome under 40 percent of jews had any greek in their names and only one or two of the apostles had a greek name now it's not uncommon in i have this in the dominican republic you can check that off on your bingo it was not uncommon in the dominican republic where i was working with haitians who were living in the dominican republic so in haiti they spoke sort of a french creole and in the dominican republic they spoke spanish people would often have this was confusing for a missionary they would have a name that they used in haiti they would have a name that they used in the dominican republic sometimes that name from the dominican republic was whatever name was on whatever government documents they could get and sort of get i'll leave it at that and then they often had a nickname and so it wasn't uncommon that i'd work with these people i'd have to try to keep all their three names straight and realize you know who we're talking about here and all that's he's him oh okay and so well what seems to be going on here that all of these people have have greek names is that they are they're probably helenists first or second jewish first or second generation jewish immigrants to to the holy land hence members of the offended community one is even a proselyte a former gentile who had converted to judaism many of these lived in antioc and then again a little bit later in the paul story antioc is going to be pretty important in terms of the development of the church now stephen a man full of god's grace and power performed great wonders and signs among the people opposition arose however from members of the synagogue of the freedman and again here you have a sense of you sort of have specialty synagogues that have arisen synagogue of the freedman these were that that likely was either founded or populated by jewish persons from the diaspora in the roman empire who at one point had been slaves had paul been a slave uh jews of sirene and alexandria as well as provinces of cilicia in asia and cilicia is a province in that of which tarcis is the capital once you say tarcis then it's like oh that's where paul's from oh wonder who was stirring up trouble in the synagogue seemed to be his pattern all over the place who began to argue with stefan so the longer that the these followers of Jesus are around and the more they talk about the resurrection and the more it's in this community probably partially because to be from my guess is and this is just a guess on my part my guess is that It's probably the most observant segment of the diaspora community Would long to relocate back to Jerusalem and and they were likely Very well educated in terms of their belief. They were very observant about their belief They were very serious about their belief It makes perfect sense that some of these people would begin to listen to someone like Stephen and say hey, wait a minute because well the Hebraic Jews they're probably over there in their own synagogues and in in So I grew up in New Jersey, there's another thing for your bingo You know in Jersey is sort of this patchwork of these little communities. And so what's going on in another community? It's like that's what they do over there. That's what they do over there. We're too busy with all of our own internal stuff We're not gonna worry about what's going on in these in these other synagogues But it's in these communities that the the conflict really begins to arise But they could not stand up against the wisdom of the Spirit The wisdom the Spirit gave him as he spoke Then they secretly persuaded some men to say we have heard Stephen speak blasphemous words against Moses and against God now What's important to track as you go through these verses is how Luke is very intentionally Paralleling Jesus and Stephen here. You'll find many of the things that were true of Jesus Luke is using the same language to talk about Stephen. It's not accidental It's also critical because of course Jesus is a Hebraic Jew and Stephen is a Hellenistic Jew and right away we're getting the intimations that Which will become full-blown in Paul's work. You don't have to be a cultural Jew to be a follower of Jesus that's going to be the big issue all of these cultural issues and you know as someone who has worked most of his life in Places where there have been at least two or three cultures within a within a worshiping group within a church Culture is a very big deal culture is an extremely big deal people will give lots of passes on theology But get caught up short with cultural things so These people want to get Stephen stopped. How do you do that? Well, it's not dissimilar than today you find a way to use the authorities and wield them against your local adversary So they stirred up the people and the elders and the teachers of the law and they see Stephen and brought him before the Sanhedrin They produced false witnesses who testify this man never stopped speaking against this holy place and against the law And if you remember Jesus, what's so fat? Jesus said, you know Jesus at his trial it was reported against him I will destroy this house and build it again in three days What's what I always find really interesting about that charge is we only the charge isn't denied by the Gospels But we first hear about that charge on the voice of Jesus critics Which says something about how Jesus was being understood and now again how Stephen is being understood and again You always have these questions about Jesus and the law especially with Jesus and the the tradition of the elders and so These issues are you know, it's not surprising that these same issues and these same charges would come against Stephen Well, how is it gonna go? For he heard him say that this Jesus of Nazareth will destroy this place and change the customs Moses handed down to us All who are sitting in the Sanhedrin looked intently at Stephen and they saw that his face was like the face of an angel Now what follows in chapter 7 is the longest speech in the book of Acts and the book of Acts is basically a book of speeches and sermons This tells you something about how important Luke thinks that this transition is and And again Luke uses the language of Jesus to describe Stephen all the parallel isms It's also interesting that I Got books about all this stuff around here When the New Testament is in a lot of ways a an interpretive guide to the Old Testament That's what it's designed to be and so the New Testament is simply full of Citations and allusions to the Old Testament and you have Jordan Peterson with his big rainbow thing about Hypertext and that's exactly what he's talking about Now When scholars look at that look at citations are especially quotations from the Old Testament scholars Spend a lot of time looking at those things carefully because they can tell you things about What's in the mind of the author and the intent of the author? one of the interesting parts about Stephen's speech is it's all taken from the Septuagint or the ancient Greek translation of the Hebrew scriptures That's a very interesting thing to note in this all of those citations are just taken straight out of the state straight out of the Septuagint and now what's interesting is that This is clearly showing tensions both among the diaspora community and probably Tensions between the diaspora community and the Hebraic Jews So again, the resolution is upping and we're getting a picture of the tensions and it's almost always within Conflict that you're going to see Progress that's true just in terms of how stories are structured, but it's also true in terms of how history works and And if you read the speech, this is not a speech to save his life. This is a speech that is going to cost him his life and because he very much casts his critics as rebellious elements of God's chosen people and The Old Testament does this all the time that Hebrew prophets do this all the time and so he casts, you know outsiders Abraham who was a stranger to the land? Moses Joseph he focuses on these guys as the heroes and Sort of and then casts his critics as the adversaries of God This is a speech that's gonna get him stoned However, the most holy does not live in houses made by human hands Wow, so So on one hand, he's not Speaking against the temple per se but he like Jesus is certain certainly signaling a moving beyond the temple Heaven is my friend using the Hebrew prophets to legitimate that move Heaven is my throne and the earth is my footstool. What kind of house will you build for me? Says the Lord or where will my resting place be has not my hand made all these things and Stephen Uses this to make his point that basically a similar point to what Jesus makes at the Overturning of the money changers and the cursing the fig tree that the temple is going away And so here Stephen addresses the holy place by picking up the temple Holy place by picking up this prophetic theme This is a critical junction junction point where Jesus will become the Savior not just of Israel but of the world And that's the key transition that the whole world will be claimed by him In other words, you don't have to be a Jew to be chosen by God The Apostles had not taken things The Apostles had not taken things taking the gospel out of Judea and the Galilee these diaspora Jews will in fact fulfill God's fulfilled Jesus commandment given in Acts 1 6 through 8 and Then you know the conclusion of the speech Basically does him in you stiff-necked people and not a way to curry favor with the audience Your hearts and ears are still uncircumcised It basically says that their hearts and ears are Gentile hearts and ears and his audience would have felt that as a stinging Condemnation you are just like your ancestors which ancestors you always resist the Holy Spirit Was there ever a prophet your ancestors did not persecute? They were even they even killed those who predicted the coming of the righteous one meaning Jesus And now you have betrayed and murdered him you have received the law that was given through angels But have not obeyed it now It's very interesting to compare this end of Stephen's speech with let's say the end of Peter's speech in Acts chapter 2 Where Peter in many ways? Hits some of the same notes but appeals to the audience to repent and join and they do and many do according to Acts chapter 2 Stephen rhetorically splits the tradition between prophets who called for covenant faithfulness remember Pentecost Remember Pentecost God's spirit goes out more broadly and those who in the narrative resisted Israel's history He deconstructs some Protestant Reformation narratives of leaders and legalists And this is you know often in the Protestant Reformation and preaching that follows that tradition sort of sort of casts Pharisees as legalists, but you know a lot of work by NT right and a lot of contemporary scholars say that that really isn't What the issues are it's how does the law get fulfilled? That's that's much more where the issue is The charge was that Stephen was speaking against the law Stephen like Jesus charges them as Failing to keep the law and thus resisting God's work through history Stephen like Jesus will stand no chance of getting out of this alive after giving a speech like this When the members of the Sanhedrin heard this they were furious and gnashed their teeth at him But Stephen full of the Holy Spirit looked up to heaven and saw the glory of God and Jesus standing at the right hand of God Look, he said I see heaven open and the Son of Man standing at the right hand of God Now it's very interesting, I mean, why are they in the temple? Why are they in Jerusalem? So they're closest so they can see from one world to the next as NT right says these worlds are are overlapping At this they covered their ears yelling at the top of their voices and they all rushed him dragged him out of the city And began to stone him Meanwhile the witnesses laid their cloaks at the feet of a young man named Saul enter our new hero While they were stoning him Stephen prayed Lord received my spirit Then he fell on his knees and cried out Lord do not hold this sin against them When he had said this he fell asleep now again If you look if you flip over to the end of the book of Luke and compare the language We're getting the point Stephen while not dying on a cross dies via stoning is very much following in Jesus way Although Stephen is not killed by the Empire. He's killed by his own people Saul approved of their killing him on that day a great persecution broke out against the church in Jerusalem And all except the Apostles were scattered through Judea and Samaria now What do we what do they mean by that again? We're quite likely seeing the continued division between the Hebraic Jews that are culturally Similar and and not as offensive to these groups that are really riled up by The Hellenistic Jews and especially these deacons who have started to do their work in the city Godly men buried Stephen and mourned deeply for him, but Saul began to destroy the church going from house to house He dragged off both men and women and put them in prison And what we're seeing here is this transition to a larger canvas to a larger story from just a story of the people of God in the promised land of God to seeing The opening up of the people of God beyond the ethnic Jewish context and the opening up of the promised land beyond just Judea and let's say the Galilee Peter and John oldest and youngest Hebraic disciples are exemplifying the fulfillment of Jesus work in the Judean culture war They are continuing Jesus work for God's people in the promised land But weren't the Hebrew prophets clear that the whole earth is God's footstool Israel has always been intended to be a scale model Israel has always intended to be a beachhead for the larger invasion and one way to see this is sort of Compare and contrast acts to the honeymoon passage to the conflictual breakout that we see happening at the beginning of chapter 8 Now what you see here is sort of a tick-tock of partial fulfillment and then Conflict generated progress in the mission of God out to the world He keeps sort of breaking in order to reform and we see that again and again There's a parcel resolution within the Judean culture war with Peter and John their bookends of the Hebraic Disciples the new global front opens up Judea is in a sense taken and the world the rest of the world awaits The cruciform pattern the pattern shaped like the Christ that the cross the suffering pattern re-emerges and this is the pattern that we saw in the Gospels the conflict is among the Hellenistic Jews and Originally, it's Galilean fishermen and now we have converts from all over All over the Roman Empire and we're moving sort of from the Sea of Galilee to the Great Sea or the Mediterranean Sea and that then becomes In in the Galilee, it was sort of around the Sea of Galilee. That's the focus of the ministry now It's around the now. It's around the Great Sea Now Stephen dies like Jesus releasing Releasing his spirit. It's not taken from him and forgiving his killers And again, this is just right out of the gospel of Luke and Stephen sort of fulfills the same role but now again, he's a He's a Hellenistic Jew not a Hebraic Jew so you see the capacity broadened Now Paul is interesting because He elicits more transformation than Stephen in the story We first meet Stephen Stephen is someone who was full of wisdom and full of the spirit. That's how we meet him How do we meet Paul? Who is Paul when we meet him? Well, he's a Hellenistic Jew who was zealous for the Lord and NT Wright begins his book with that that That theme of zeal he's zealous for the Lord and he is persecuting the church Why doesn't I mean if God is going to open up the heavens and the earth and the earth Opened up the heavens for Stephen to see Jesus said it at the right hand Why not if Paul's right there? Why not say hey Paul look up you want to see this you've been late, you know shortcut but no God permits Paul to go through and persecute the church Well, that doesn't sound terribly nice surely um, God would want his Christians unpersecuted but How do those narratives work through how do they play out Paul will be the chief of sinners It'll be the enemy of Jesus. He will suffer for his lord becoming his servant. He will exemplify the work of the whole world Becoming God's promised land. He will teach how fulfillment of the law goes out to the Gentiles Oops And then the global work continues and I had some other themes in the sermon But I won't necessarily go into them and you can again listen to the listen to the sermon on the church youtube I should probably I I right now just have the service the main service there and so you'd have to kind of fast forward to the sermon here at one of these days I should pluck out the sermon and Post it as such where it is. So that's these are sunday leftovers today And so sorry to not get a rough draft out on saturday just didn't work on with my schedule And as we continue at least with the rough drafts and on the sunday sermons we'll continue on paul for a while It's quite likely that i'm I've got two years of vacation To take this one year for me because there's you know, because of all the covet vacation I never took in 2020 so There'll be some sundays that I miss but I think we'll be taking a look at paul and and some of these things for the Next little while so thanks for watching