https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=QnnQ2QpmthI

 used to be here. Well, I'm glad we finally get a chance to talk again. Do you recall that so many years? It was a while when I read the description, I vaguely recalled it. And now seeing your face, I recall it more. Well, that's an amazing memory. Because my whole story is going to be somebody who cannot remember the past for the life of me. The discussions that you have with people, you know, your remarkable memory and ability to pull everything you've ever learned. And it's Jordan Peterson ask that that you are delighted with him and have some kind of similar I don't know if I'm using my sound. Okay. Well, okay, because I was going to put my I was connected with this to my computer, but it seems like it's coming through that. It's going through the I've got hang on a second. I had a I had a date confusion with rando who stopped by. Okay, but technical things going on. Hang on a second. I'll get it. I'll get it fixed up right. You're having the technical difficulties I wish I had. I I think from you, I felt like this is a direction that I have to go and I'm somewhat forward thinking. So I, I want to do it. But I also struggle with getting things in place without someone helping me. That, you know that this kind of ministry is I just love what you do. Oh, thank you. Well, let's start with a little bit of biography from you and then you can take it wherever you want to. Okay, I wrote it all down because I've asked my sister some questions about my own childhood because I I couldn't remember. That's dangerous. If I asked my sister questions about my childhood, she would give me answers and I know they would very much be shaded a little. My sister, it's like we grew up with two different worlds. She'll tell stories and it's like, that didn't happen. Yeah, I just watched a video about Calvin and Hobbes. And he was talking about how he presented Hobbes as both a toy or a stuffed animal and alive animal. And when he's questioned, it's it's that it's, we think it's all Hobbes imagination or Calvin's imagination. But he said, No, I want to present that the world is seen by different people in different ways. And everybody else sees. But it was it wasn't just Calvin's mind that he was playing off of it was that the world is interpreting. And your sister, you know, would see the world of Paul van der Kley is. Yes, yes. You don't remember. She does. She has a YouTube channel and a podcast too. And apparently, one of the podcasts she told her story and my mother listened to it. And she said, Oh, you gotta listen to it. So I should listen to it sometime. I'm sure I would listen to it and say, No, it wasn't like that. Well, my thing is, so I'm, I'm 60. What is today? 2021. I'm 61. So I've had a long history. And it's a history that where I, I guess I've always struggled to remember, but I credit a lot with some segment of my life being involved with with drugs, and, you know, maybe a little too much things playing on my own memory, which is one of the symptoms or one of the consequences. But anyway, my past. So I moved to Pennsylvania, I'm in Pennsylvania, I moved from Indiana, Pennsylvania, when I was about 13. But before I don't consider myself churched, I consider myself familiar with Christianity, my dad was plugged into some different things seeking out this Jesus or this, you know, who's, who's in charge here. And his own childhood is, I have him in my house now, at the beginning of January. My mother had, and both of them had COVID, my mother was hospitalized, and she passed in January. So, so then I, I'm somebody who tries to figure things out and put together the pieces, and I brought my dad in, and we sold his house. And now I'm trying to put that piece together, which is very complicated. And, and dad who's distant, is way more pleasant and comfortable than dad who's close. And that's, you know, that's a sign of the test here. Now, how much are you like Jesus turns out? Maybe not much. Yeah, Stavsky made that observation that, yeah, it's always easier to love in the abstract. Oh, yeah. Yeah, as it as it turns out, you might be right. So I don't think I was real churched. My sister reminded me that we did go to church. But for the life of me, I don't remember church Sunday school. Don't remember it came to Pennsylvania. So kind of a very working class, probably close to the lower class level. And that was, I think, common back in the 60s, when my dad was a truck driver, and maybe worked at a couple of factories, but mostly he's been a truck driver. And played in the neighborhood. That's what we did. We moved to Pennsylvania, and got caught up in the in the drug world. It's the 70s, for goodness sakes. And all that is rampant. When you say in the drug, I mean, what, what? I don't want to be too nosy. But there's lots of different kinds of drugs. And psychedelics are over here. And then yeah, I'm one of the guys who knows about psychedelics. And I, I played the whole gamut. And as it turns out, the way I tell my story, because I like to talk to students, and, and some of the dramatic things will catch their attention. And so I was talking, and I have to mention the scooter gang, who's one of my I'm a youth leader. So the scooter gang is one of my ministry outreach things. And I want to mention them, because they might watch the video. So the scooter gang in our church is called the grind church. So it's where they go and grind on the sidewalk. So the grind church, that's how we're right. Wow. Yeah. So came to Pennsylvania, and I got, to me, smoking and all these things where you're, you're using substances that aren't natural. So to me, I get the, that it's a gateway. You know, not everybody says that. But to me, like anything you explore, once you are in the door, you find are there other things that are, you know, that can advance my interest. So smoking and marijuana is easy entrance and then speed and vitamins and, and then just continue to advance. And to me, all people like to get better at what they're doing. And it all doesn't matter what your hobby is. To me, you try and get better. And you want to perform well. So that's even to me, abusers are they get caught up in something and they're with the cool kids and whatever. And then, you know, somebody says, well, this is pretty good. So I did everything except shooting, shooting up because that seemed like the line that was where you're turning into a pro and you have to start beating up old ladies and stealing. And I'm like, yeah, I'm not a good kid, but I don't want to go to jail. I have something I know is trouble. And you could always see when things are getting, you know, when tempers are flaring and you see a fight coming and you're like, I'm not really a fighter. I think I'll take a few steps back. So I always had a nose for the appearance of a good kid or whatever, but I'm sneaky and I'm just playing whatever. So that was a good portion of my life. So I wanted to get through that. And then, but then what happened when you say a good portion of your life, how much of a 14, 14 to about 27. And it's all in there. I met Jesus around 24, 24 years old. So I'll get to that is the thing that when you're a user or an addict, and I don't claim, you know, addiction is a funny thing. When you're a user, you can see what's going on. And you only have to fool one person. If you're saying no, I'm fine. You can see this probably isn't wise. And I would sit up when you do cocaine. One of the weird things is, there's something called the cocaine blues you it's a bit of a pricey drug. It's a, you know, a great, natural feeling, exuberant high, but then about 3am when you've blown about $300, and there's nothing left. It's not a long lasting. And then all of a sudden, the reality, because you never escape, you never change your life. You start getting this. Well, I'm out of I'm out of drugs, my life's the same. Now I'm a little broker. And I'm with somebody who's kind of fun to hang out with when he when you're both on drugs or whatever. So you get the blues kind of. So where was I going with that? So I'm doing this stuff on and I'm doing everything that I can but then about 24 years old. I think it was then that I started trying to escape. And I was thinking I got involved in truck driving a little bit. And with my dad, he gave me the start. And it was a two man crew that set up equipment to hold carpet or vinyl rolls that you'd see at any vinyl store Lowe's or wherever. So I get involved in that. Trying to escape. And then I get introduced to Jesus by a couple friends who are in the crowd that I'm hanging with there, people who are using and kind of a party crowd. And one of them is he's like in an adopted home or he's in a he's parents are there but he's with an aunt and uncle or something like that. And he goes to church and he maybe he invited me or he told me something about Jesus and I'm like, I need a I need some aim and it's the hierarchy you see the good person that you want to follow. Like, yeah, I'm interested in that. And another guy had come out of Teen Challenge, which is nearby, where I live. He was a graduate. And we were still he was doing drugs with me because he graduated, but it didn't change anything. He could talk the talk, he was some kind of scammer. He could talk the talk and he would give me the spiel because he could tell me what the program taught him and I'm like, well, you're laying that out. And it's pretty convincing. So in some way, I'm introduced to Jesus at about 24. And then then I really start trying to think what do I do to change things. And I think that's when I got into truck driving, I broke out of the AA idea of people, places and things that trap you in the world. If you can get away from those. It gives you a clearer head, it can, you know, you can change your life, you can't if you're still hanging out at the bar. With all your buddies, you're going to drink some some booze. So I tried to escape a couple times, like, live on the road for a while, come back home, and I'd hang out with the people places and things and wasn't really working. And then at about 27. After really a pretty long commitment, and then you know, then I was trying to kind of break free. And I don't believe, you know, addiction is a weird thing to talk about. I believe I was making choices almost all the time because I, I quit smoking, you know, you can break addiction, but it's hard and depends on your personality and whatever. I don't know. So I'm 27. And then at one party, at some point a year or so previous, there are a couple girls and Shelley was this just beautiful young woman. And my buddy was talking to her. And I'm like, I'm turning into the wingman. And I'm like, and I never had this great connection with figuring out women still don't, as it turns out. So Shelley and Ron, and I don't know if you would ever hear this, but it was a turning point when Shelley and Ron get engaged, and they're getting ready to be married, and they're a young couple. And she's just delightful, just bubbling effervescent, you know, pretty and everything, you know, that is appealing. Yeah. And then at one point, I get a phone call that Shelley's killed in a car crash, and like two weeks before they're to get married. And so every time I tell the story still, it's, you know, it just comes back and I'm ready to cry. But so I go to Ron. And it's the first time I get this kind of view into the, you know, the eyes, the window of the soul, and you're looking deep into this place that's just been emptied. And it's, it's, you know, it's very tragic, you just see it live it out. So yeah. So the pastor was going to wed them, perform the funeral. And Ron wasn't my close friend, but he was in the group of people, and I knew him. And at that time, I'm, I wanted to serve Jesus and so I didn't know what that was. And I'm not giving myself much credit. But I thought, when I saw him, I had no words, I couldn't say anything that could be of any use. I'm just, you know, all you say is I'm sorry, and I had nothing to do with it. But I, I don't know what to do. So I decided, well, I'll hang with Ron for a while while he just sits in this grief and wrestles. And we went out to the intersection, you know, he's looking for some reason, who can I blame? What can I say about this? And we just hang out. And, and all of a sudden, Ron's going to church with this pastor. And all of a sudden, I'm introduced to the church in a way that's new, whatever my childhood was. Yeah. All of a sudden, now I'm thinking, well, I love people. And here's all these people that want to commune with Jesus. Like, I'm in, I'll party with you and the way you party. You know, you're loving each other, you're having fun, you're doing missions, you're have game nights or whatever. And I'm planted. And since that time, I'm a church man. It's like, I am all in. And the strange thing is the church in in 87 is kind of a hippie looking dude, I played guitar. I just that was the end of my drug use. It was just people, places and things completely changed. None of them were smoking weed that I know of. But that it was a time well before any, you know, processing of how can we give this person a leadership role, I got right into youth ministry. And it's like, from drug user right at youth ministry, no background check. He seems okay. And that's, and that's the world at that time. It was, it wasn't a scared world. It was a, you know, still daring and bold people, sort of whatever it was. So then I got into youth ministry, and I was in music ministry, and I was everything they did, I said, Yeah, I'll help. I'll help with anything you're doing VBS, mission trips. So then then I moved along in that route and got ended up going to another church that was just closer, and a pastor who was ready to plug people in and he plugged me into the youth group. And I've been a youth leader for 33 years, wow, a youth leader of some sort. But still, the same person you, you know, you grow up and I'm, I struggled in school, I got caught up in drugs. So I'm some quirky, quirky youth leader that not everyone's on board. No, I'm saying we should do. But you're talking about these wrestling issues and a lot of things you said in the playing off the video that you did. It was about four videos ago, and I'm, I actually am following closely. All this world. I'm one of the people who is watching every video that you view the three hour ones and I tell other people to watch. They're about they're about two to 3000 of you that watch almost all the videos. It's really hard. I can't figure it out. Well, there, it really fits. Everything that I'm questioning is, are the things that you're talking about. And it's, it was Peterson, but I think you're, you're more than Peterson, because you're staying the course and you're walking people through it. And in some way, Peterson is a rock star and you watch a concert and you're like, hey, I might or might not have this poster on the wall. I actually do not. But, but the real thing is the, you know, the, if you watch a rock band, but then somebody, you know, a friend of yours will place music with you and you'll sit around campfire and actually play music. It's music that you want. So the, the wrestling is what we want. And you're actually committed for the long term. And Peterson has his own things he has to do. But your video a couple videos ago, I watched it like four times because I'm like, or six times. Which video was this? It was the one about politics being the death of the church. And you talked about some things I'm interested in and what I want to talk about. One of the things I thought was interesting is when you talk, it'll do an interview with a rando. So you did the interview with Nick and you went through some real interesting wrestling, but then you not only talk with Nick, but then you talk about your talk with Nick. And then you, you think, what is it all? And that's the thing that was interesting. So I want to get to that talk. There's something I want to add there. But you also talked about pastors and the ones who are gifted because we're looking at this hierarchy and we're seeing people who want to emulate and you have a church planner discussion. And you know, why can't I plant the church because I, I ended up being a youth leader. And about four years ago, someone clued me in that if I would get in, I'm in the Methodist church. And, you know, I'm not, I'm actually followed Jesus and I'd go anywhere because I was in a UCC church. Then I was in a Methodist church. I have friends who are in different churches, but I'm a paid staff, which is a unique gig. And which is the delight of my life to be just to be thinking about and be with young people and try and tell them about the greatest joy we can have. Or what idea can you find any place that you can open your heart and not have someone stab it or what, you know, what is it that we have to guard our hearts so carefully? What even are they that you don't dare reveal them except to Jesus or, you know, you try and get to that point. It's, it's a long process. And my scooter gang, I'm trying to, to connect to them and they're not hanging at the church, the grind church to hear Jesus stories. But I'm like, look, you're grinding on my sidewalk. I'm going to tell you a little story. And, and there grind if you can't do the time. So you get to that stuff. But so a few years back, let's see, you know, I think I got through everything on my childhood. So now we're at now. A few years back, someone said if I would get into the program, the Methodist have a, you can be an ordained elder and go through seminary and whatever. And I'm some guy who finds back doors. I'm the guy who's playing the system in some way and just looking like a nice guy. And I'm like, Hey, you can trust him. Sure. He just came off years of whatever. But you can trust them. So four years ago, they said, if I get in the local license pastor program, there may be an opening and opportunity for me to pastor because I started looking around for places to rehearse or practice giving testimony because I want, I want a little more. I want to practice. So I gave testimony in another church. And then someone told me, you know, given the program and then I an opening for a quarter time pastor opened up right next door, a couple miles down the road. And I got plopped in there as someone who's in the program, but it's not in any way. It's like my youth ministry, they plop me in and I'm like, I'll do it. And now every week, at quarter time, there's very little expectations outside of preaching. I'm like, well, I can try and tell the gospel and practice. And it's, it's another thing that's, you know, there's no way I belong in this course, because I aim for nothing like this. I don't even know where I am aiming. And when Peterson talks about going through a field and you have to have some, you're aiming somewhere. I'm just meandering around. I'm looking at butterflies. And I keep landing in places that are so wonderful for me. And it's, you know, this ministry, the church to preach every week, even if you're not good at it. If you want to do it, you'll get better. Yeah. But, but even if you want to do it, and even if you have, I tell them, I tell them this, look, if, if I was a ballplayer, and I got one little bloop single, every three at bats, I'd be a million dollar player. Yep. Yep. So I need to get one good sermon, maybe out of three, maybe out of four, I'm a pro. And they don't even have to be good at bloop single. You know, I walk on base, you know, whatever the standards are in the world. It's, it's very strange. And I wanted to get to the other thing. So I told you about that. So I want to let you talk a little bit because I want to wrestle with you a little bit about this idea of hierarchies. Because one of the things I keep talking about is I'm some kind of average character, and I get into positions that are like, there's no way I was aiming for it. I was not well trained for it. And I'm not the dude at the church who's that's the big guy that you're talking about that video. The church pastor who got kicked out and started another 2000. Oh, Driscoll Driscoll. Driscoll. Yeah. And I've watched Driscoll. He's got a gift. Oh, yeah. So, and in some way, people want to emulate that. And the same with the other two pastors you talked about, it's not going to come to me, but you talked about mega church pastors. And they're at the top of the hierarchy, and everyone wants to be like them. And I'm thinking, what do you do with the people that aren't going to be like them? How do you say, you can be a, you know, a scrub player, and work with Jesus tell these stories. And it's the bottom of the hierarchy. And I'm thinking of a pyramid, I'm like, you know, the whole pyramid rests on all of the people who aren't good enough, and will never get get up that pyramid. Yeah. So I want to talk about that idea of Jesus calling people to be to lose their life or to the first shall be last. And I've just got a couple stories with that. But, you know, that's the thing I'm trying to figure out how do I say something about people giving up things that the hierarchy is really for succeeding in this world. And giving up on that success coming back down the pyramid. Yeah, is part of the gospel. And I think that's one of the things that we're stuck with, and churches that have not pulled the right message, because we want to be good people. And that means getting better at getting to that more like Jesus, because Jesus is at the very top. And I think you get there at the top, and you're like, Jesus, I am so close to you right now. And he's the bottom saying, No, I'm way down here. Yeah. And whatever you're doing is a tower of babbler. Yeah, you know, and even Peterson, building from the ground up when the miracle happens from, you know, some mystery that God drops on you. Yeah. So yeah, that was the main thing that I wanted to get to was this flip. And I want to get to something with Nick, too. But I want to not talk the whole time. I get to talk lots. I have hours of me talking on my channel. Yeah, I'm gonna do today I'm gonna record a it's three plus years into my channel. And I haven't recorded an introduction video to explain my channel to people, which is a real problem. So I'm gonna do that today. But I this this to me is a high point of the week getting to hear your story and getting the vision. But what you say about the hierarchy is just so true. And it's part of the reason. It's part of the reason I you know, some every if you gain a degree of celebrity, even tiny little internet celebrities, so my sister Ruth was talking about how she does her YouTube channel is on. Right now it's on primitive home. It's been on two, three different things over the last while and, and she so she she goes into people's houses and it's decorating the certain style and she takes videos and so she went someone somewhere and so her name is Ruth Heisinga but she on her YouTube she's Anne Clay, just kind of riffing off her maiden name and her middle name and her maiden name and and so someone's like, Oh, and clay and clay's here and she's like, she's loving the celebrity. But I so even if you have a little bit of celebrity people will, you know, want to meet you and all that's wonderful. But the real, the real joy for me is introducing people like you to the rest of the world because the truth is what you say about the pyramid is exactly right. And to me, you know, churches that I've been in so often, it's the and I can I can name people from Livingstone story here who these are, these are salt of the earth people, they give they sacrifice they love. I one guy that I baptized in his 70s, actually his name was HJ. And, you know, it's just, I remember coming to the church fairly early, his wife had been coming to church, she was a she was a ER nurse. And she, she just told she just didn't have patience for fools. And so back when I got here, church, I had to, you know, part of my job was I had to pick songs for the service. And so I did. And there was this other Nino was picking songs for the for this is all this crazy, crazy stuff in churches. But, but, but, but, but a Patty asked me, she said, like, Nino picks those songs at the beginning, and you pick those songs at the middle in the end, I said, Yeah, Nino picks better songs. And HJ was her husband. And when I first did a house visit with them, he had all these Bibles out, Mormons and Jehovah's Witnesses were coming to the door. And he had all these, you know, he's just trying to figure things out. And then he was 72 when we baptized him and his wife died of pancreatic cancer. And he had a son who was had mental illness issues, and he was in and out of trouble. And he was trying to help. And then he got cancer. And, you know, he was a greeter at the door for years of the church, he would just smile and hand a bulletin and, and these people there. You know, God fills the world with them. And they and his glory is his glory is in them. But because of these hierarchies in these pyramids, we don't get to see them unless you get down to the bottom of the pyramid. And you shut up and open your eyes and pay attention and you begin to realize, wow, God has richly blessed us. And if you're if you're quiet and patient enough, you'll see the glory. So that's very true. Yeah. Yeah, it's hard to preach though, because I always feel like I'm talking to people who have income and they're they're successful. And I'm thinking, what do I say to somebody that's in some way, you know, every time I speak, you know, at the end, I'm like, well, I should do I should do on my channel or on my, I should do a stream that says what I meant to say, because every time I say something, I'm like, I didn't really get it. And how do you even say to people I want you to the thing I want from you is to give up all the things that you love, because we build our little kingdoms. And, and that's all passing. And everyone knows that they hear the same thing every week. And yet we're, we're so planted in the earth. That's the other thing I, I keep coming up with is that we're stuck, is that we do only understand the hierarchy and, and getting better and being a better person. Because we're so stuck in the earth, we're planted here. And I, you know, I long for Jesus, but don't pull me out right now, because I kind of like what you gave me. And that strange dilemma that were, I even wanted to say, when you said something about what's the matter, in the video that I was watching. And it dawned on me that you're talking about material world and even words that you use when you preach what's the matter? Well, the matter is what makes up this world. But what's the spirit is the thing that actually, really actually holds everything up. But we see the matter. And what's the matter is our key. And what's underlying is, it's too hard to get to in some ways. And so it's very strange to preach and keep getting, you know, more swings. And to me, I like, I like your videos, because you have enough time to really, and you're also, you know, deliberate or disciplined enough to hear that very disciplined at how you get us from one point to another. And you have to try. I try to be disciplined. I often fail. The time is important. I what I'm pushing for in my preaching is, I need more time because 20 minutes, I do not know how to say something. Every week, I'm like, well, I just have one more thing to say. And they know that means that I do not have one more thing to say. And I have to cut it off. And I often say, well, I didn't finish what I wanted to say. But it ends with Jesus. And that's like something like that. And get to move on. So yeah. But that's a it's such a wonderful thing to have to be able to, to swing, get another at bat, and as long as they'll have me, I'll keep swinging. So one of the things I wanted to talk about was, okay, so Melody, my niece, I wanted to mention Melody. So Melody is a she's, I think she's 12 now. And she had a traumatic brain injury. And it's my great niece, I guess you would call it. So my sister's, it's my niece's daughter, Melody. And when she was under one, I think she had a brain injury. And she is special needs and will not never, I think she'll need assistance her whole life. She's not 12. But she's the delight. And one of the great joys is my sister joined us at church. And it wasn't clear that she had had that in her life. And she's in some way supportive of me. And, and then she brought Melody. So Melody had a fault, her daughter's child, and I don't want to have to watch how I say everything. But when, when Melody was hurt, my, my sister swooped in and said, you're not going to raise this child and took the child. Because she was injured, took her away from my niece. And they didn't, they didn't fight too much. She just came in. And she had the mom bear that we better not fight this animal. So she came in and raised Melody and, and came started coming to church probably two years ago, three years ago. And Melody, one of her things, and this gets to the bottom of the hierarchy. Melody is such a joy for the church. It's an aging church, the church I preach at, maybe 40 or so people. And very few young people, you know, it really is that average age of 50 or because the aging population is really weighs heavy on the scale. So Melody will come around and she, her thing is she'll go up to people and say, what's your name? And they'll say, my name is Jane. She says, Hi, Jane. And then she turns back to my sister. That's Jane. And my sister says, Yes, that's Jane. And then she'll she'll do this to everybody. And people she'll have said it to people 10 or 20 times a week after week. And my sister will take her out. And she told the story the other day of I think she was at a meat counter or some kind of deli or something. The woman was cleaning up and she was just upset and now at a low point, she just says, it's a hard job. She wasn't appreciated. It's, you know, she's in a dour mood. And Melody just says, Hi, what's your name? Or just says, What's your name? And she's all of a sudden, all the clouds lifted in this beautiful interaction with what Jesus is calling us to, which for the life of us, how do you tell somebody I want to be more like a disabled person and give up all your status and come and wouldn't it be something if people just came up to you? And just with a wide open heart, no agenda, no status to lose that you're some kind of hero in her eyes. She just wants to know who you are. And it's the most beautiful thing and the church loves her and I want her to be like a greeter, give her a little vest or something that she is in some way exactly what we're aiming for. But for the life of us, we can't. We can't preach it or teach it. And it's the mystery that God reveals this glory in this in the broken places. And it's, it's so amazing. Yeah. So I wanted to mention Melody. I'm glad you did. We have Jill. We have Jill. Jill does that. Jill's, Jill's got to be close to mine. She's in her 40s. I think. She's disabled. She's been disabled. And she's a daughter of a couple of people now ones, Fred's in his 90s, Jean, probably not yet, but she can't get the vaccine because she had a illness a number of years ago. And their disabled daughter, Jill, bring her to church and same thing, same thing. Suddenly, suddenly, suddenly in that interaction, our pretense and our hurry and our busyness and all of these things that we think are so important. They all just set them all aside. Yeah. And suddenly it's like, Oh, yeah. Why am I getting in the way of myself? Why am I really this important? Is all these cares, do they really matter? Oh, that's beautiful. It's beautifully told. Thank you. You're welcome. It's yes. And you know, when you're preaching and trying to get to that place, it's almost happens sometimes limpsically that you, but even the opportunity to just keep thinking and, you know, to live this life is it's such a blessing to just be able to do this and to have time to watch Paul Vanderpauw videos and wrestle with what is God calling us to? And what is it to be a representative of Jesus? And what does all that mean? Because it's not an easy task. And you know, working with the scooter gang, I can definitely figure out the insulted and, and I might look like Jesus because I'll be insulted, I'll stick it out, and I'll bear that cross. You know, they're not interested in I have to keep trying to find lost sheep and they're for sure they're and they keep coming back and I'm like, oh, I'll work this angle. Usually at their own timing. Yeah, yeah, you have to in some way plant seeds and be able to allow them to grow in a way that's God's work. It's not ours. I like when you said about what's the woman that midwife that that there's, you know, we can be a midwife, but God does this strange work and it doesn't, you know, we don't get too much credit in the they're not on they're not on a fairly predictable nine, you know, 42 week pattern. Sometimes, sometimes they you know, one of the things I learned from my father's ministry was in 36. He was at his first church for 36 years. There's time is important. And sometimes people need decades. And that's okay. That's okay. So don't be afraid of decades. This is, you know, this is this is God's world. It's not ours. We can trust it. So let him do his work. Yeah. Don't get in the way. But get in the way we do. Yes, we do. And that's where I'm thinking we're stuck. And I keep thinking, I think I have to preach a simple gospel because I don't know that we've done the first step yet. And it's, you know, you keep having them and storytelling, you know, you can figure out how do you tell these stories. And, you know, you look at Scripture, and there are some stories that are easy to tell. I just went through Genesis, which was hard. I did my own, like Peterson lecture going through Genesis. And it was a mess. It was not. You know, the stories are too big. I got 20 minutes, I'm thinking, you know, here's what God is revealing. And I want to say something a little nuanced, different. I'm actually going into job now. Yeah, I want to challenge it. And I love it. I love Joe. To me, job is this. It's such a wild story. Yeah, I was thinking strange to be in this in ministry and you you're trying to think how do these things connect? How do these Jesus show up in Job and it's like, well, I don't know. But I was thinking, because of the Satan and God interaction, and then he is released somehow to Joe on Joe. I was thinking, you know, Satan isn't mentioned in, in Joseph story, but that, you know, I might connect and say, you know, what is it with Joseph that he had so much twists and turns that all was going wrong, and I think there's something to that, that has to be part of what I tell is there are these powers and principalities that aren't always mentioned, but they're always in play. Yeah. And Joseph had a pretty rough go. Yeah. And we just, you know, it's, it's, it's pretty bad. And it's an extended, bad stroke of luck. Yeah. And then in the end, it's like a dream come true. The dream that he had initially comes true in the end, and it's not at all what anyone predicted. And, you know, the plot twists are just ridiculous. And, and always, you know, there's another turn and it turns out it's like, they are bowing down to him, but he didn't want him to bow down there. And he's not some ruler trying to dominate them that they were so angry and jealous. He's saving their life and he's not taking credit. He's like, it's God that did it. I, this wasn't my plan. Yeah, go to jail and to be accused of rape or whatever. This isn't the way I worked it out. And I get that because my life is this thing that I, I don't have a great plan in place. And Peterson in some sense wants you to lay out this plan. It's like, well, as it turns out, you cannot have a plan at all. And, and that's the, I think the bottom of the pyramid is this, these people who are like, I'm just trying to get by. And if, you know, if I can be any use and they're, they're open to that. I don't have a lot of plans. Same with Melody. It's like, I didn't have a lot of plans. So now you're useful because I have too many plans to, you know, to go to a food bank and help. I have big goals and ambitions, but I do admire that. I, my daughter watched Simone Biles as she came into my daughter. I have two, two children. I didn't tell you that I got married late. And that's, I won't get into that, but that's its own wreck. I do have train wrecks and nothing but train wrecks in my life. And that keeps, keeps using me. But my daughter, I have a 13 and I married late, a 13 and an eight year old. They're wonderful. I got always watching Simone Biles and I totally believe that the hierarchy and that we're planted in the earth and Simone Biles is just a wonderful person to watch and admire. Or was I going with that? But in some way we won't be her because she had to dedicate everything. And she's still, I think, a Christian woman and just sweet and tender hearted and every wonderful thing that I want to be Simone Biles. I want to be like that. And successful and popular and a champion of the world. But I'm stuck where I'm stuck. And I clearly don't have the motivation to do that many backflips. And, you know, do all the things that she had to dedicate, you know, 15 years of her life, totally dedicated, and then have all the gifts besides. Yeah. You know, these people who are successful. It's there's a lot going into that they were given a lot of gifts, they have a lot of the right things and the right circumstances, right people open doors and yeah, and and somehow I want to minister to I want to say, you know, the I want to minister to let's try and hit average, let's just try and hit some very low thing and say, Can I, can I get enough in place that I can still be useful? How do I not have too much on my plate? But I'm too busy to be and even when Jesus wants us in weakness, God will shine through. Yeah. It's like, so my weakness is I'm like, there's somehow a badge of honor, because for sure, it's not me. If good things happen, because it's clear, I don't have all the things in place to say, for people to say, Yeah, you are amazingly gifted. I'm like, am average. You know, I learned to play guitar, but I, I got to the level where I can play pretty good. But no one's I did special music on Sunday. And my voice is pretty average. There's another guy that does special music. And he's really gifted. He's just got a beautiful, velvety tone. And he plays guitar, and he'll do music and everyone will be a little weepy and they'll clap. I did my special music and I hit my last note. And then a couple of people go, but you know, like, yeah, I know this is my life. They're not like, thank you for that. And I know it and it's like, well, but I want you to know that that's the call is you do your average work. Because now, God will get any kind of glory. Yeah, I don't get too much glory. I don't have to struggle with that. Where are we at here? Time? Another five minutes. Okay, well, I wanted to mention one other thing was you're the talks with Nick. And then you had your talk about the talk with Nick. And then you talked about well, the thing the thing I want to say about this was one of my favorite artists was Jennifer Knapp, and she had a big. Oh, yeah, I love Jennifer Knapp. Oh, she was so her just her heart was laid out. And I know, so moving. And I just loved her one time I went to a concert. And I just loved her one time I went to a concert, me and a buddy, and it was a youth. We went to a Jennifer Knapp concert that was local. And man, I adore her. And we're front row. And it's a small venue. So she's like right next to us right in front of us. And then she plays the concert. And then at the end, she stops and then she has a pic in her hand and my team the team that was with me sticks his hand out and she puts the pic in his hand. I'm the one who loves you. So I get you know, I get the leftovers. And I'm like, but so I love Jennifer Knapp and her music was so powerful and so heartfelt and so and then she dropped out of the scene. She just disappeared. Yeah. And I'm like, what in the world? And nobody knows what happened. And then a couple years later, she started touring again. And she came out as Yep, they Yep. And I went and saw her and and everything changed because now she was in some way affirmed that it's when she was singing, it was she was had a hidden pain that God she's crying out to God, can you reach me? Can you heal me? Yeah, yeah. And it was so extraordinarily beautiful that this pain and torture she was going through. Yeah. And now that she's in some way affirmed and says, No, it wasn't sin. It was, it was that you didn't understand and you didn't in some way affirm who I am. And her the power of her music. I, I don't think I care that much about her music now. And I don't think she'll be what she was. No, I know. was a sinner. In some way, great pain. Yeah. And, and that sin, you know, we don't want to call it. The church wants to say, well, we'll affirm, we won't call it. But there's something about the hardship and you have it the same way that the old Negro spirituals where you're, why people in great pain. Yeah. They're great art. Oh, yeah, they're so you know, it's all hard. It's all long. It's, it's, you know, the most beautiful things. And you don't want to put people in pain. So they can give you some good songs, but there's some connection that when it became not sin, when it wasn't her deep stress, for crying out to God when it became accepted behavior that something was lost. Yeah. And that's something was, yeah, good. That's just so strange. It's that's Yeah. But you're right. You're right. And when I work with students, that's one of the real battles that students have is because they for sure, you know, the race issues, they've gotten past some of them, they didn't grow up with tensions, they're still there. But in same way with affirming that they have some they don't have a past. And, you know, I have to talk to them and be very cautious of the lines that I draw. Yeah, because I want to be nothing but love. But you also want to say, you know, I don't accept everything. There seem to be fruitful unions. And there seem to be fruitless unions. And you can't say it's the same because fruit, you know, I like a good apple. And it comes from a tree that produces fruit. And I love the students. It's like, yeah, I'm glad your parents employing a girl got together. I'm glad to have you here in this earth. This veil of suffering. Oh, they're struggling with but I love the ministry. And so there it is. There's my story. Wow, Tom, this was great. You are gonna let me share this, aren't you? Yes, I wanted to not I thought if this really stinks. I'll really be upset. I don't know how it was gonna stink, Tom. I don't know. I can't imagine that. I can I can mock things up. What? Well, you didn't you didn't this was this was you know, these randos conversations are you just never know what you're gonna have on the other end of you know, because it's a wide open calendar and people sign up and you just it's a box of chocolates. You don't know what you're gonna get. Yeah. But years to get back on that calendar. Yeah, well, I know it's there's there's not that many slots and they go immediately. So I'm sorry about that. It's just I don't want to get you into no, I do want to do more but they are. It's not just the time. It's the I don't know what it is. The anxieties at the energy that I talked about it actually in the video I'm going to make today. It's it's that what's so difficult about this is that all probably you never know, but probably all we get right now is sort of a stub of a potential relationship. And that's so hard. Because I feel like, you know, you know, I want to meet Melody and I want to watch you preach and I want to see your little church and I want to I want to see your I want to see your kids and I want to know I want to meet these youths and and and and and and and and there's no and that's again why I think well, this is this is what this is what this is what heaven and our next life is for where we actually we're not bound by time and the way we are bound right now. Yeah. And what a tremendously wonderful thing to think about. Yeah. Hard to imagine. Yeah, yeah. So thank you, Tom. This was I'm so glad we finally got had a chance to do this right. So maybe maybe we'll get a chance to do it again, or who knows. And maybe maybe once if I get my act together, we'll get we'll take the the meetup show on the road and I can go back on tour. And because that that that was great fun, the little tour that job and John and Duncan I did get cut off by COVID. All the way across the country. So you had to really I love Pennsylvania. I spent a lot of time in Pennsylvania driving between New Jersey and Grand Rapids, Michigan. So okay. It's a beautiful state. Yeah. So anyway, thank you, Tom. This was a delight. Thank you. Watching your videos. All right. Well, God bless you and your ministry. Keep keep keep swinging for average.