https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=99i9d4wWKT8

 Hi, this is Paul. There was a very interesting posting from Rebel Wisdom on an addiction specialist, Gabor Matei. I assume that's how to say his name. I didn't know anything about him. I read the free Amazon sample from his book. The book sounds very interesting. I've had a fair amount of experience with addicts, given where my church is and the ministry that I've had. And so I find the topic interesting and I found the interviews very interesting. I wanted to do a little bit of commenting on some of it and play a few clips. So let's dive in. Gabor Matei is a world famous expert on addiction in his book In the Realm of Hungry Ghosts. That's a great title. He talks about how addiction is best viewed not as a crime or an illness, but as a coping mechanism for a personal spiritual crisis. Now, right away when he started this way, it obviously had my attention. AA of course popularized the notion of especially alcoholism as a disease. And I've often pondered that because even categorizing something as a disease locates it within our frame in a particular place. And so the categorization of alcoholism as a disease obviously had the intended consequence of lifting the degree of moralistic guilt that many alcoholics have been plagued with. Now that's very, very complicated because obviously it's just very complicated. And I think it shows we don't know how to think about ourselves, even with some things that are basic and common to us and we don't know how to categorize them. And so I thought right away David's introduction to this grabbed my attention right away. So let's keep listening. Addiction is a response to human suffering. It's an attempt of a human being to feel actually normal. I thought that was a tremendous observation. And so rather than a disease or a choice, it really is a coping mechanism. Now how do we categorize a coping mechanism? That's because a choice places it in a moral context, a disease places it in a therapeutic context, and to a certain sense takes away agency from the person. If I have cancer, I don't feel liable for it unless of course I can directly tie causation to, let's say, smoking or eating poorly or some other cause that we might. But if it's, let's say, genetics, well then I can blame. I mean it just shows how difficult agency is. And so what he's doing here is saying, and I think it's a brilliant, it's got a degree of obviousness to it that it's a coping mechanism because if you've had a relationship with an addict in one way or another, you know that stress brings on and tempts people back into addiction even if they've been in recovery. This is something that's common knowledge. So it's a coping mechanism. Well is a coping mechanism an illness? Well no, not really. Is it a choice? Well it just shows how complicated choice has become for our current frame. Social media, there's been a lot in the press around our addiction to social media. So what do you feel drives that or our unhealthy relationship with it? Is it the same dynamics? Is there more to it? Well you can use social media responsibly just as you can exercise responsibly or you can exercise addictively or you can use social media addictively. So it's their own relationship to them, these activities that defines whether they're addictive or not. Now if you're using something for temporary relief or pain, pain relief or pleasure, and you crave it despite negative consequences, you go down addiction. Okay right there is this definition of addiction and again I think it's a really helpful definition but I don't know that it's definitive in the sense that it I don't know that it completely captures it. So something so something let's say for temporary relief is okay, something that, well let's listen to what he says again. And you could be for fines whether addictive or not. Now if you're using something for temporary relief or pain, pain relief or pleasure, and you crave it. So the craving, I mean that's almost begging the question in terms of addiction because that's almost the definition of addiction. Despite negative consequences. Okay despite negative consequences. Well taking almost any medication has the potential for negative consequences, side effects we call them. So and this is an MD at least to the degree that I could I could look him up and figure out his background. So it's a it's a really nice definition and I can see how it's really useful and really handy but I'm not quite settled on it. You go down addiction whereas if you're using social media not to escape the emotional distress not because you're craving it but something because it's a useful modality and you don't suffer negative consequences then it's not an addiction. And again that the negative consequences is just kind of out there. Where I'm going with this is I want to ask questions. Oh maybe I'll just jump into the slide right away. We have a crisis of purpose in the secular frame and this now purpose and meaning are pretty closely are terms that are quite close together. Purpose let's say it's an existential philosophical category. Meaning seems more existential philosophical plus emotional so perhaps meaning is a little bigger and of course for the Peterson conversation meaning is a is a very big thing. And we are one of the one of the things that I've been talking about has been the the difficulty of purpose in the existential frame. We can look at via science what a thing is what it is made of but for example if you look at the four Aristotelian causes we have a lot of difficulty with that in the in the secular frame. We have difficulty saying well we can say these are the the effects of something but we have difficulty with the purpose of something and often if I'm trying to diagnose or analyze something within our frame I will ask what is it for. So we've had a robust conversation about marriage in our culture same-sex marriage whether monogamy is is tyrannical things like this. Well at some point you have to ask the question well what is it for? What is marriage for? What is human sexuality for? Right away you run into the brick wall that science cannot tell you what something is for. It might be able to talk about causes and and processes that lead to outcomes but what it can't get at is is one of these causes which is intent because intent always implies mind and so if you listen to scientists talking about biology genes especially you'll hear often Brett Weinstein talking about what genes want. Well once you introduce the word want into a conversation you introduce mind and intent. Now they'll often put they'll often put qualifications on. Well we don't really mean intent and again with the Sam Harris conversations with Jordan Peterson if you listen to those Sam Harris regularly lapses into assumptions of intent with non-agency or non-personal actors impersonal actors. Can you really talk about intent in that way? Now you might say well this is something that way. Now you might say well this is simply a a relic of language that we can't get rid of. Well then we're then we're prisoners to these to these relics and so what it looks like to me and I've drawn this this three-sided rectangle before about our situation in the secular frame that you have idealism from above how things ought to be authority that comes from above you have empiricism and experience from below you know science talks about how things are or how they work but science can't really tell you what something is for because for implies intent and purpose and so this this question of meaning purpose this is all bound up into this so now in the secular frame we have the past which is history which is to a degree available to empirical means but the future is not and and it's the future that you have all of these terms such as purpose meaning telos which is greek meaning ends or an ends in greek has the same dual meaning as it does in english for example the the shorter Westminster catechism the first question to answer is what is the chief end of man what do you mean by that what's the chief end well it's it's got this dual meaning where on one hand it's it's a temporal end and it's also purposeful and and you'll see how this is all tied into our language at a very very deep level so we don't really get away from it this is where we get into the eschaton which is last things or the last times or the where things are going and and when we look at when we as human beings think about our lives we are always leaning towards the future Charles Taylor writes about this in his book the secular age how how secularism always sort of leans us to the future and I think the reason we do that is because we have now a skeptical approach towards things from above idealism how things ought to be we're skeptical of that and and so what we really get reduced to are sort of the back end of the rectangle and the bottom of the rectangle and so then we try to lean towards the future for this purposes this telos this this meaning because hoping that maybe in the future the meaning of the present will be known and and this is the bind we find ourselves in in the secular in the secular frame now now when you get into addiction as we're we're getting into in this conversation well what what what this author is making the point is that addiction is a function not simply of let's say a genetic disposition not simply of well a lack of willpower because those are the two the two poles that he's resisting but but addiction has everything to do with how the self is located within their world story now I've been doing a lot of thinking lately on on Jung and you know when I read Jung's autobiography a while ago and then one of the my chief takeaways from his autobiography was the was his awareness of how the story we live in the metaphysical story we live in is deeply connected to our emotional state then again I was pondering this with respect to my sister my sister's death did not impact her car my my sister's car is not grieving the loss of her now sometimes we might project that onto the car the car isn't running well and so the car is mourning but but most of us most of us don't buy this and certainly not Sam Harris or Matt De La Honte they won't buy that but I am her brother and I am mourning the loss of my sister well why and in what way am I connected to her in a way that her car was not well well I am a very different thing than her car is and and so you know one of Jung's great observations so in in his autobiography he writes about the fact that he's a young doctor and he starts working in a in a mental hospital and he wants to talk to the patients and his his mentors and supervisors say well don't talk to the patients because they're all crazy and it's kind of like well yeah that's kind of the whole business of the mental hospital is and they're all crazy they all have diseases and so unless and of course he's beginning this is the beginning of the 20th century they don't have they don't have medicines to help these mental patients with their diseases so there's no point in talking to them in a sense like there's no point in in me talking to my sister's car well now we have these things where I compare my cell phone by talking to the car but you understand what I mean so the the the doctors the mentors and supervisors of Jung said there's no point in talking to these people because they're crazy they've got a they've got a disease and so there's no talking them out of it and Jung's kind of like well he's a he's a young doctor and obviously a brilliant guy so well so he starts talking to people on the sly and and he begins to notice when he talks to them that yeah they're crazy but they're not disconnected and that they're they're different kinds of illness that the stories of themselves are tied to these larger world stories and that's where he gets into you know looking at religion and comparative religions and all these kinds of things that the there's a deep connection in terms of the story within us and the stories out there and and he begins to postulate that perhaps by working these stories we can in fact help people who especially with beginning of 20th century medicine may or may not have what we call a disease but but by adjusting these stories that in fact inner health could be found and people's lives could be improved now now even that idea of improving a life is not a simple or easy notion because again we have this we have this idea of well what does it mean for a person's life to be improved now obviously if they're an alcoholic and they're drinking all the time and they're they're neglecting their children and they're abusing their spouse that improvement as Sam Harris would note in terms of well-being improvement doesn't seem to be a very difficult thing to think about improvement would be no longer abusing your spouse improvement would be no longer neglecting your children and so what we can find is is is calibrations within life that seem to seem to work fairly well but we're always a little bit fuzzy on whether those calibrations can how far those calibrations can go out and I think about Jordan Peterson's comments about the resurrection he he often wonders well if if if we know how bad things can get maybe we really don't know how good things can get especially because good is really hard to maintain bad is really easy to come by so that's where he questions you know the the resurrection of Jesus and ponders that is unwilling unless he's under the cross-examination of Sam Harris on a stage in front of a whole bunch of people in in Vancouver he's he's not willing to give up on the possibility of a resurrection so back to back to this conversation so so the question here about addiction is a curious one because someone we can know that someone's life could be better if they would drink less and and they would say well their life can handle maybe having a drink at night or a glass of wine with the meal but having five ten fifteen or twenty beers or drinking that that entire that entire bottle of vodka is is going to seriously incapacitate the person and as again and and as people would know let's say something like Alcoholics Anonymous it's a it's a very interesting move that the 12-step makes when they say on one hand well let's locate let's say alcoholism as a disease but we're not going to treat it as we tend to treat most diseases at the end of the 20th century in the beginning of the 21st century where we give people chemicals into the body and chemicals into their body to address the disease someone and I'm sure it'll come up in the comment section someone said that someone drew a connection between Jung and the origins of the of Alcoholics Anonymous I don't know about that connection so if you do know about that connection put something in the comment section for me I didn't just think about it until now because what's interesting is that in a sense Alcoholics Anonymous is kind of a combination between accountability and the talking cure in a 12-step program you talk and you talk and you talk and you talk and and as you work through the 12 steps you you attempt to not only your problem isn't simply that you drink too much alcohol your problem is all around in your life and that's that's very similar to Jung's observation that the story within and the story without if if these two stories are not synchronizing well there's going to be dysfunction and now Matei is an MD who talks a little bit about the fact that his addictions and and so on and so forth well in a sense shalom the stories outside and the story within all need to all need to be in concert all need to be in sync all need to be working together appropriately to have a human being flourishing even in the small frame calibrations that we think about okay and and so now here Ali is asking Gabor about social media and social media if you listen again to Jonathan Haidt will note that there's there are real issues with social media in terms of well-being and this this is something that we can use we can tolerate it in small degrees but it can easily get out of whack and you might ask well is addiction to social media a disease well now suddenly in a lot of our frames of reference we begin to ask questions well what exactly is a disease because when I say I have cancer or I have a thyroid condition I might think of that as a within a chemical sphere within a physical chemical interaction but the disease of social media would be a disease much more in the story verse and now we're again we're getting into we're getting into this observation that Jung made about the stories out there and the stories in here and and how they align and and again as I was immediately grabbed by David's introduction to this video in this conversation with him beginning to try to process okay how does it work for this guy so let's listen to a little bit more so it's not the external behavior I mean you can drink alcohol not addictively you can have sex not addictively you can go shopping not effectively or you can engage in all those activities in a purely compulsive addictive fashion and again compulsive addictive these are all synonyms and and in terms of theological conversation we get into let's say idolatry that that some that some lesser good becomes the dominant good in a person's life this gets into Saint Augustine and his conversations about ordered loves and so for for Augustine and many many people followed Augustine after that Augustine talked about your loves have to be in order I would put it into Jordan Peterson frame there's a hierarchy of loves and and in and in your hierarchy of loves those loves have to be in proper order and if those loves are not in proper order your life is going to be disordered and so let's say for an addict let's say an alcoholic alcohol becomes the dominant passion of the of the person's life and that then because all the other loves are disordered because alcohol should not be governing a human being then you have a problem but that if you see it that way you begin to ask questions about well if there must be a structure to the world to a human being that says that alcohol should not be the master of a human being that alcohol is a perfectly fine servant of a human being but not its master now suddenly you're into questions about natural law and natural order because well in what way in what hierarchy in what schema do human beings and alcohol relate to one another and if that's true with respect to alcohol isn't it also true with respect to not only other things world as space of objects other things in the world but also relationships with other persons in the world and okay so my relationship with my wife is different than my relationship with my children and that's going to be sorted out somehow but let's say my relationship with my wife has to be of a certain status higher than let's say relationships with let's say other with other women and there needs to be a priority there and if that priority gets out of whack well you're going to have a problem you know even in terms of genesis genesis 2 where the man leaves his mother and father and clings to his wife cleaves to his wife well there you're setting up a you're setting up a a priority you can see that this conversation about addiction part of what's so interesting about it and what's so important about it is not only the therapeutic and pastoral application about it but also the way that this is a conversation that leads our way into theology and leads our way into thinking about well what are the structures of the world why is a human being supposed to be masterly and masterly being supposed to be master of alcohol and not the other way around and the same with social media depending what the internal dynamic dynamic is does it provide temporary pleasure pain relief do you crave it and do you crave it every time he says that it's kind of you're begging the question on the addiction thing the question isn't just do you crave it do you give into your cravings and then the question is what is you and and what is choice and and you can see why addiction is a terribly difficult thing for us to figure out to continue with despite negative consequences that's what plays whether it's an addiction okay and negative consequences well let's say if you drink too much one evening and you wake up the next day and you say oh that's you know I shouldn't have done that well I'm not a drinker but I could maybe relate to this that I'm I'm watching a I was just watching I'm watching I'm a sucker for history documentaries and so I'm watching a history doc and I have weird addictions I'm watching history documentaries and here's a better addiction I'm playing civilization and I'm playing civilization and it's 11 o'clock at night and my wife's gone to bed and it's like I can play more civilization just one more turn and I play civilization and I go to 12 o'clock and I'm still playing the civilization I go to one o'clock I'm still playing civilization it's like I gotta get up and go to work the next day I've got stuff to do so finally at 130 I close the computer and I go to bed and I wake up the next morning it's like oh I'm tired that's a negative consequence to playing civilization to one o'clock in the morning now am I an addict to civilization well now we're getting into questions of extreme and so the next night I let's say I start playing civilizations I said 11 o'clock I'm turning the computer off and I'm stopping civilization and I'm going to bed then I do it but then a few months later I stay up too late and I play civilization to one in the morning and I wake up the next morning and oh why did I stay up so late please so so am I an addict well this is part of what's difficult about addiction because well how often do I do it am I losing my job because I'm playing civilization no I haven't played civilization in in weeks actually but now that I'm talking about it part of me and my brain is thinking oh civilization that's a fun game maybe you should play it tonight and then I'm going to get back into the cycle so this is hard hard stuff to figure out and and the definition are there negative consequences well how profound are the negative consequences now broadly speaking social media are highly addictive and a lot of people addicted and it having a devastating effect on their lives but but not of course everybody especially on social media but just in general we this polarization seems to be increasingly ideological you mentioned people are I like these rebel wisdom guys I met they came to living stones and they hung out with me and they they're just sweet sweet guys and I don't know I just I like people what can I say so ollie and dave cool cool guys really enjoy them really in their specific tribes and speaking from you know let's have a chance to hit the other tribe can we be addicted to ideology well again if you define addiction as I do as any behavior that a person craves finds temporary pleasure or relief and suffers negative consequences and cannot give up despite negative consequences that's an addiction again I don't care whether it's sex gambling ideology or cocaine and and the brain circuits are the same the same brain circuits are involved in all the addiction so we think there's all these different addictions if you actually look at the addicted brain it's the same brain circuit that's involved in all addictions so an ideology that allows you fee expression of your impulses you will get to hit somebody if you're angry you have to throw a window to a rock through somebody's window or a verbal bomb to their personal sense of self if it if you're lacking a sense of personal power but the ideology gives you a pseudo empowerment might belong to something really important if there's no meaning in your life and ideology gives you a pseudo meaning if you see I love this section because here okay an ideology well what is an ideology one ideology is a story ideology of nazism is the story of racial progress ideology of marxism is the story of class progress ideology is a story you can be addicted to a story so is it a disease it depends what you mean by a disease depends what you mean by any of these categories fun interview and and watch more of it I'm going to play a little bit more of it later because of course David gets him to talk about Jordan Peterson a little bit later and some of those comments are very interesting but but here you have the question okay well what is an addiction you see you you can't really answer the question of addiction unless you actually grapple with the question of of telos of purpose of meaning is is the purpose and meaning of a human being to have a great to to have to be deliriously happy and have amazing have an amazing emotional you for sense of euphoria and Peterson of course wades in with it his his most common example of cocaine well you can do a lot of cocaine and just you know have a very short life and just be deliriously happy until you overdose and die well is that the purpose of a human being you see all of these questions are nested within far bigger stories and and purposes about what in fact is far bigger stories and and purposes about what in fact is a life what is the good life now you can get into some Dallas Willard through this and I'm not going to play any of his videos on this video but these are the questions that Dallas Willard just keeps asking people he's saying well you can't answer any of these questions without asking basic questions about what is the good life what are people for that gets for that gets very you can't answer that question without a worldview which is which is why materialism just gets shallow fast because you're left trying to wade in the pond of human experience and what these grand stories what religions do and ideologies to a degree we'll get into them a little bit later in this video is is they give they give the context for the human being now Peterson so then I Peterson notes in a number of times and the the Peterson search engine is no longer up and I used to use that all the time so I kind of miss it but I'm sure someone was just doing it out of the goodness of their heart and was costing them money and at some point they pulled the plug on it or maybe it was copyright people I don't know so I couldn't find in maps of meaning or the biblical series or any of those some of these passages where Peterson talks about the fact that one of the one way to one one way for people to leave addiction or to be freed from addiction is by having a religious conversion experience and this is essentially what 12-step programs what AA has majored in they if you look at the 12 steps they're they're pretty they're a pretty it's a fairly systematized way of delivering what you know a fair amount of Christian theology underneath them what what what the first step does is kind of locate the human being and and and figure out where the human being is because if you figure out if you can relocate the human being in a in a much more healthy much more true sense in terms of the persons where they stand in an existential ontological natural order some of these smaller calibrations within us such as how much we drink how long we play civilization some of these things will be ordered more correctly and in fact the whole life will be ordered more correctly if you look at if you look at say situations where certain substance abuse issues have become rampant in a civilization often it's after trauma and and this guy will actually talk about this a little bit later in the in the rebel wisdom video that that trauma Bessel uh vander kock i think that's his name the body keeps the score terrific book if you haven't read it talks a lot about trauma talks a lot about his focus isn't so much on addiction his focus is on trauma uh my taste focuses on addiction but he gets into trauma and so he gets into how these two things are related and a little bit later david's gonna ask him about young and about that but so peterson talks about the fact that one of the ways that you can break addictions is with a religious conversion now that's complicated because as many people have discovered let's say they were an alcoholic they went into a 12-step program they had a religious conversion maybe they went all the way over into christianity i've known people i've met people in churches who started out in 12-step program wanted some greater definition to their higher power in a sense they wanted a richer fuller world that they could inhabit so then they came into the church some people once they in a sense licked alcohol they could easily come into the church and and live within recovery recovery fairly easily other people might have found in a religious conversion a temporary reprieve but they they they kept having slips they kept backsliding into their addictions and and they lived within a continual struggle with their addictions sometimes less victoriously than others let's use that language so so this business about addiction and the big story is is in fact a very interesting and difficult one now peterson in this clip talks a bit about addiction and telos and this i think is from one of his biblical lectures i found it on a clip site through the rise of the smartphone and my question basically relates to procrastination and task delay needless task delay specifically see and you might ask are these addictions and it's like well we wouldn't categorize them as addictions but they certainly are are cravings with negative consequences and given the unprecedented level of distraction that we have in today's world i just wanted to get your perspective from a psychological standpoint on other than cleaning your damn room what would you suggest to a student who's looking to overcome these things well i think with any let's call it addictive process i mean email is powerfully addictive right partly it's a slot machine and i mean that technically so when you pull it's that's a very this is probably a good illustration at the early parts of his his his status rocket rise because he starts getting tons of emails and then which ones do you open and which ones do you respond to variable ratio reinforcement schedule if i remember correctly and it's very addictive because if you pull on the slot machine arm enough you will win and you never know which pull will reward you and so not only is that addictive it's very hard to extinguish that and so and the backlog of emails i've got i'm not feeling much addiction towards i'm sorry many of you have written me express your condolences i deeply appreciate them and hopefully i can get back and and respond to all of you personally but it's it's uh yeah i'm not feeling a lot of addiction towards email in my life at the moment emails like that because there's always something beckoning and now and then it's a jackpot and social media is like that because you know people are posting interesting things and so well how do you overcome an addictive process and partly you do it by replacing it with something better right so when now this idea of replacing it with something better is actually a there's a there was a reform there's a 19th or 18th century reformed pastor shoot i should have queued this up this is why i do powerpoint to have this stuff and i thought about this this morning basically what it talks about is that and this is before a before any of this therapeutic language basically it used theological language and it essentially said exactly what peterson says here is that if you have a problem in your life the only way to dislodge that naughty problem like an addiction is to find a stronger problem to drive it out and this in fact is weighing on jesus parable of cleaning the house that once you clean the house if you leave the house empty seven more demons worse than before will come in and inhabit it and in fact i know this with addicts there was a good friend of mine who who was a man who had been in recovery for decades from alcohol he worked the 12 steps and he had done the 12 steps for many years and a kind of reached its limits for him and he decided he needed a richer story world to live in so then he joined this church years before i got here and you know such a wonderful human being but his addictive nature his addictive nature held out when he passed away there were something like 12 000 lps in his house that his poor widow had to figure out how to dispose of some of them were valuable many of them were at an equal number of cassette tapes and cds so he was in fact addicted to music and then she found a a toolbox and this was never a handy guy who worked with things a toolbox that was full of screwdrivers and and she finds this and it's like he was addicted when it came to screwdrivers cameras there there was 40 or 50 cameras and and thousands of pictures he was addicted to photography and in fact he was quite overweight he was addicted to food his addictive nature carried on and you know you might say well you joined the church everything should have been great well no that's not how it works in the church everything isn't great it's it's much more like living in your 12 step routine only the church has a far broader field of view we're not just simply focused on you know whether or not you're drinking but but we're hopefully we've broadened out the field and we're looking for shalom in more areas of life and ways to maintain that goodness but part of christian theology at least within my tradition is that we remain sinners until we die and and our we are perfected finally by grace not really by works and that then is represented theologically so but peterson's point here i think is is very important oh what's the guy's name is it sibley i can't i can't recall but but talked about the fact that a a new you need it if you want to drive out addiction you need a stronger love to drive it out okay and and that then displaces it and i think you can represent this psychologically you can represent this in terms of brain chemistry it's it's been represented in terms of stories and people will you know people have been experiencing this forever in in all kinds of ways people study drug and alcohol use they often make an elementary mistake which is to try to figure out why people use drugs and alcohol that's that's not a smart thing to wonder we know why people use cocaine cocaine directly stimulates the systems that produce positive emotion it's like so there's no mystery there the mystery with cocaine is very very simple why don't people take cocaine all the time until they die that's the mystery really because you can get isolated rats to do that so and and and isolated rats so so what's interesting is that here's the inclination that perhaps even rats need a bigger story to live within and and you might say well how much of a story can a rat handle well not much but isolated rats they need community otherwise if you isolate a rat suddenly you can you can you can increase the out the possibility that that rat will become an addict well that's interesting for some people alcohol has the same kind of effect except it's mediated by opiates but more often what people have to do to get themselves out of an addictive process is to find something better to do to replace it and so i would say the problem with the gadgets and i mean they're amazing things is that they interfere with they proximately interfere with medium to long-term goals i would say see now again we're dealing in some of the same ways with with maté here that okay so what is the good what is the good that human beings were made for well we can stack up goods and we can calibrate intermediate goods like san harris well well well-being well we can say that to to to to stop after one or two beers so that you don't become abusive towards your spouse or you don't become neglectful towards your children or you don't lose your job well that's a good and and we can say that that's a good but when we start expanding this outward we're going to have big questions and we need big stories in which the good should be located and it has to be bigger than just my emotional sense at the moment which tends to be the the materialist and the atheist keep bringing meaning back well i can experience wonder oh okay you can experience it but but is that does that experience connect to larger purposes does it connect to something which is beyond yourself does it connect to something which is large enough to devote decades of your life towards which is more important than just doing cocaine until until you're until you die and so i think the first thing you have to do to bring them under control is figure out what it is that their use is interfering with it has to be something important so you think well i i want to do something important what is that oh it could be personal maybe you want to have a relationship you want to get married you want to have kids you want to have a career that's meaningful you know you want to have a life you want to have an abrahamic adventure and be the father of nations let's say well you can't be ratting away on your cell phone and doing that so i think i think part of it is to set your sights high and and make a plan and figure out who you could be and see if obsessive utilization of smartphone fits into that vision of nobility one of a friend of mine there's an old christian definition of sin which is well what's what's your definition of sin it's a god damn waste of time it's damned by god because it's a waste of time it's a it's a love of something now civilization is a fine game to play but if civilization destroys my marriage and destroys my career well it becomes a sin and that's where mate gets into the question of addiction well what are the negative consequences well how big a negative consequence well i wake up a little grumpy the next morning because i didn't get enough sleep because i stayed up too late because i just had to play one more turn of civilization it's you're getting to sin but it's not a big sin well if i destroy my life because i play computer games well now there's a bigger loss but again now we're getting into the bigger questions of value and of meaning and of story now here in this next clip peterson talks to talks to oops oh no i didn't i didn't put it in well maybe i've got it up here in the queue yeah russell brand and and talks to russell brand about well about the 12 steps and how to this is from another uh clip channel 12 steps and the model for handling addiction i've written about myself in my book recovery because i want to see what you think of it like so like the 12 steps have anonymous fellowships which i if i were to belong to them i wouldn't be able to say i belong to them without breaching their code of anonymity but uh what's positive about uh this approach to addiction is as we have discussed off mic that it creates community like the other people that have got a similar endeavor in fact it was young that identified uh this this solution and he said that like people that have got chronic addiction issues will struggle to change unless they have a spiritual realization of some kind and the support of a community well the spiritual realization component that's actually supported by the relevant addiction literature one of the classic cures for addiction is spiritual transformation and the hardcore scientists have have laid that out as as a reality in the addiction literature i agree because to use more secular language around that a spiritual transformation could just be a change of perspective a renewal radical change of perspective yeah from and typically in my experience that's from a self-centered view a self-obsessive view about getting your own needs met a solipsistic narcissistic perspective of life is see now he's using predominantly psychological and philosophical categories and peterson keeps wanting to push him towards the theological and this again because of you know peterson in that conversation he had at the an rind institute i think talked about the fact that when he one of the things that he discovered as he was doing as he was doing clinical work was that people would only get better once you got down to the theological level of conversation is this uh is just an adventure where i go around trying to accumulate and accrue to oh wow i'm here to be of service that's of the transition right right microscopically but in addition to a community like having connections between one another the the 12 steps themselves i think are an interesting model for transformation and shouldn't be overlooked and in fact what my book was about is can could that method be transposed to anybody who's interested in change so i wanted to talk to you well in fact the the 12 steps is already transposed in so many ways i mean all you had to do all all these other recovery programs had to do was just slide out alcohol and put in narcotics or overeating or sex or or one of these other you know video games or you know whatever it is the 12 steps already in a sense transposed it out and and made it more theoretical so that you could more easily slide things in and of course taking out all of the sectarian knowledge and turning god into a higher power that about strips it about as bare functionally as as you can about that to get your perspective on them the first step is acknowledging that you are powerless over your addiction and your life has become unmanageable just admitting this is i don't want to be in this situation okay so two there's two parts to that admission one is that you're in trouble yeah and i guess there's three you're in trouble and it's serious things could be better and you don't have the wherewithal at the moment to make them better and and that's a really nice that's a really nice distillation in my opinion of christianity at least in a sense protestant christianity remember yung was the son of a reformed minister rather unhappy one but the son of a reformed minister and so when i talk about misery deliverance gratitude in my sermons well this this is a lot of what what this is so the thing that's interesting about that is there's a kind of radical humiliation and humility that goes along with that so you say i have a problem yeah and what i know at the moment isn't sufficient to solve it that's misery great because now you've opened yourself up to the possibility of learning something yes you say well i don't know i don't know enough to fix this it's like okay well you could learn but now you have to turn your life over to a power higher than yourself that's deliverance and then if you work through the rest of the 12 steps a lot of them's gratitude and one of the things that's so interesting about people is that if they decide they have a problem and they also notice that they could learn the probability that they will learn goes way up that's very interesting you've actually conflated the first three steps there in your analysis of the first one because the the first one is admission that there's a problem the second one is recognizing that things could improve like kind of believe that power greatness could restore us to sanity it's interesting how a power greater than ourselves can restore us to sanity gets translated into recognize that in a sense i can improve things there's a contradiction there because that that you know a power greater than myself can restore me to sanity and i think that's exactly where you get the christian idea of well prayer okay i am going to give myself into this power now now we get into the question about okay will power versus illness and i think part of the reason a went to the illness thing is that locates us as a recipient in in a in a in a secular frame rather than an agent and i think that's part of the reason that language has worked well with a and the third one has made a decision to turn our life and our will over to the care of okay now we get the agency in and and you see so if an ideology is a crippled religion a really worked hard not to cripple christianity in its application so you both have recipient i have to turn my life over to someone greater than myself but there's decision in there and and it's this a lot of people like to reduce calvinism to determinism which i think is an unfair reduction of calvinism but but part of this conversation is always hinging on this question of okay i have to turn i have to turn my life over well is that choice there you have the arminian calvinist conversation when i turn my life over is that me doing the choosing or is this this god choosing to to meet to do this and of god as we understood god so like you know yeah yeah we could talk about that from a secular perspective well we could talk about that from a secular perspective and say well there's a there's a higher order moral principle that needs to be brought into the situation and you sort of describe that right at the beginning of the question because you said well what partly what you do when you move state from a psychological perspective is move from a viewpoint of the gratification of immediate desire and and maybe the accumulation of things as a marker of success to the notion that no you actually have a higher purpose and that higher purpose might involve being of service and that higher purpose this is a broader story this is a bigger story to live within it's bigger than my immediate pleasure and and as we've talked about with peterson before we are very willing to exchange i will suffer for the sake of purpose you know we're in many ways we're we're also bringing in victor frankl and if you've never read victor frankl man's search for meaning it's a very worthwhile little book to read and victor frankl in fact established a whole school of psychology about this that he found people that were suffering well get meaning so victor frankl goes to the concentration camp because he's a jew in nazi germany and he's there and he begins to observe and well he's there anyway he might as well find some meaning in his suffering so he begins observing what's going on and he begins to recognize that those who had no purpose died and those who had purpose survived and and in many ways their purpose needed to be outside the camp because the nazis were so brutal that they you know that they they intentionally humiliated and took away purpose and peterson talks about bringing the sacks of you know dragging the sacks across the yard just to destroy purpose and so frankl figures out that with purpose people can again nicha too endure almost every almost any if they have a why they can endure almost any how or even what and and so frankl what he did with his patients was then okay well let's find purpose in your life you're you're a mother find purpose in being a mother you're a you're a you're a you're a doctor find purpose in being a healer now we're back in augustin's territory because we say okay but if you find all of your purpose as a mother becoming a mother can be idolatrous so what you actually need is something at the top of the hierarchy that is incorruptible well what should be at the top of the hierarchy well god well because god you know for all kinds of various theological reasons god is incorruptible by definition because he's perfectly good so he can't be corrupted god is the only safe thing to have at the hot the top of the hierarchy because you can't bribe him and he won't use you outside of good purposes and so that's why in a christian schema god is at the top of the hierarchy and not you because this is where what russell brand was talking about at the beginning of this if you are at the top of your own hierarchy now suddenly you will become servant to vary to all of your desires and even something like alcohol can become your master and and so what you see here is that in this conversation about addiction very quickly this natural law perspective that says that there is an order to human reality that there is a story and it's not an arbitrary story but there is a there is a structure defined by story represented by story which which has ordered loves that if followed correctly can actually produce shalom not only in the small calibrations but cycling all the way out into the large ones that's what we're talking about here and again you can you can watch the russell brand jordan peterson conversations i thought were excellent now ali starts the first part of the conversation and then david picks him up later and and david talks to to matei about young now where i'm going with this this is you know gonna be long but i haven't done it for a while what's interesting about matei to me is i think he gets a lot right about addiction but i don't know when i listened to him and maybe it's unfair i haven't read his book i don't know much about him maybe in a longer conversation maybe if i'd had a higher resolution of him i'd be able to treat him more fairly so i want to be very cautious because i don't want to treat him unfairly but the way in which he talks to me exposes the weakness of the secular frame now he's going to start talking about young and he's going to wander over into peterson and you talked before about the the realm of the hungry ghosts and that's a buddhist metaphor do you find the jungian framework to be useful the idea of the shadow and integration of the shadow now now david and ali use a lot of the shadow work and they do a lot of that in terms of their larger purpose for their channel and the men's work that they do and so on and so forth so i'm not surprised that that david would ask this question matei's answer was kind of interesting in this work well we all have our shadow side uh which has to be integrated i mean there's a part of me that's full of rage and hatred and jealousy and envy and and now what's interesting here is that now i don't know a lot about young but i've been slowly educating myself in young the shadow is not just wrong and and when i when i listen to people talk about the shadow i hear them saying shadow the shadow is bad in young shadow isn't bad shadow is the opposite side of the persona well what's the persona the persona is the face that we create that seeks the approval of those around us okay and the shadow are the elements of ourselves that we wish to hide because if you're going to have selection well here's the bigger story there's a bigger story going on around you and in that bigger story in that bigger morality there are things that are approved of and things that are disapproved of tim keller in his book on preaching tells it makes a very interesting story that if you were a viking your persona would be a viking persona you would if you were a man you would be large and you would your this is how we imagine vikings to be might be fair or unfair to the vikings but you know i will i will suffer no injury to my dignity will be we'd be ready to be violent in a moment so on and so forth that would be the vikings persona well the viking shadow side would then be well i just beat up that poor schmuck and his wife and children are now suffering and kind of feel bad about that that's on his shadow side well today it's almost the reversed if you're walking down the street if you're a if you're an urbane new york male who's very concerned about toxic masculinity you're going to be a masculine you're going to be a male a male figure of emotional availability now nichi could to could could pop in here and say yeah you're only doing that to lay that get the you know to to have sex with the checks but anyway so what i'm saying here is that shadow does not mean simply evil shadow and persona are connected and they're connected not only in terms of the individual but they're a reflection of the society that the individual is with all right so when we talk about integrating our shadow we're talking about the fact that okay well we've got these things in us which don't which are unpopular in terms of the rest of the society and so therefore we hide them and this this business about hiding and trying to keep them down we never fully hide this this is then fertile fertile ground for addiction so shadow is not just evil shadow is that which society or whatever the group that you are associating with is discouraging yet yet you're still you still have these things and you have to figure out what to do with them so you know this is all a very complex game it's not just simply good and bad it's it's very complex and it's very tied into the larger stories that are going on around you sometimes homicidal fantasies that's just a part of me nothing wrong with that as long as i'm aware that they're in me and they're not me see see and even and i would love to probe him a little bit more on some of this because i don't think he's quite fair to young and and i think he's he's also adopting a rather his his persona is showing in this answer i'll say it that way my problem with yunganism however is that it describes these qualities to the shadow side just like an archetypical thing they don't talk about trauma very much whereas i think and this is why point out in my book in around the fungal ghost is that these dark impulses in people and the need to escape from them actually arise as a genuine human experience they're not simply part of human nature now this gets really interesting and this gets really complicated because on one hand the science of trauma has been very effective and i think you know best vessel vander kock in terms of the body keeps the score wonderful book on trauma which i have read i haven't read this guy's book i would like to read this guy's book we'll see if i get time to it there's way too many books i would like to read and so yeah young young didn't know a lot about trauma that's partly a function of when he's doing when he's doing what he's doing a lot of the awareness of trauma and the dynamics of trauma have come later and so you know we can we can forgive young now he's talking unionism so the followers of young but but these questions of you see the question of trauma is not dislocated from all of these other deeper questions of ought and ordered loves and right and wrong people are now i mean part of the peterson conversation has been that people assert that they are being traumatized because their gender expression is not being validated and affirmed by others in their community and important people in their relational matrices okay so that then is trauma and and when i listen to matei i almost get the later when he's going to talk about peterson i almost get the sense that he says well what we need to do is avoid trauma well now we're getting into the jonathan height coddling of the american mind conversation where we say you know if you look back on say pre-human world culture evolution is a lot of trauma nature is red in tooth and claw for a long long time and and this for many people then causes very difficult questions about the goodness of god or the existence of god now we suddenly get into our modern realm and we think well we're going to be able to engineer a world in which there is no trauma well now we're getting theological and eschatological again because we're almost saying well you look at biblical eschatological terms while there's no death or drying dying or tears or even sighing and that's something that i've been thinking about lately because for example when i'm i was driving with my family to the to the funeral and it's processing the grief of my sister every now and then i would sigh and when i would sigh my wife would just put her arm out and you know rub my shoulder she'd hear my sigh what do we do when we sigh we're often processing pain well these questions get very big and very hard and and matei almost imagines again one of the weaknesses of the present secular state which is well you have to bring heaven into this frame you have to eliminate trauma from people's lives really how are you going to do that because one person's assertia is another person's trauma there really are the outcomes of trauma and that trauma is experienced in childhood and in my view unless you deal with the trauma you're not really dealing with the shadow side and again peterson would it would be interesting to have peterson have a conversation with this guy because peterson would contest some of these things it's one thing to acknowledge the shadow side it's there but if you look at the unless you but but again see i don't think he understands what at least my understanding of what the shadow is for the for young which is the shadow is the opposite of the persona the shadow isn't simply evil or the bad it's it's because of the social construct in which we live it's the pieces of us that hide and so the viking would hide his tender side and the modern urbanite would hide his his viking side and and so then the idea of integration is that well you're going to have to you are part viking and part sensitive person and you're actually going to have to do the hard work of figuring out when it's important to be a viking and when it's important to be sensitive and to integrate both of those things into your life you look at the traumatic basis of it so i do think that freudanism and even yunganism yunganism is much more sophisticated i think than freud is and has much more meaningful things to say about human functioning for all the great insights that they both had and i learned a lot from both but they both ignore trauma and i think the trauma is the missing piece in modern psychology and modern education modern medicine i would love to hear more about this because really can can trauma be eliminated in this world as it is and is is that are we knocking on the door of of jonathan height's criticism of of safe spaces and and what he has to say about cognitive behavioral therapy where the important thing is to make people stronger and so i think that without looking at trauma speaking of the shadow side remains somewhat shallow interesting and you're you're from canada yeah one of the the the biggest um phenomenon of the last couple of years has been jordan peterson yeah what have you made of of him his rise and what it says about the culture that people are so thirsting for what he's talking about Peterson first of all is very bright extraordinarily articulate and then some now part of what's difficult about asking let's let's assume that gabord matey is a high status person who's got a he's an md he's i'm sure he's he's writing books he's he's got a day job he's doing all this stuff how much jordan peterson does he really know probably not a lot usually people like him have maybe had a chance to read or just skim through 12 rules for life and that's part of the problem about jordan peterson having conversations with people that really i think in all fairness peterson is the kind of thinker that if you really want to engage him you need to have a pretty high resolution view of him otherwise and maybe that's true of all of us maybe i'm having i'm i'm dealing with matey unfairly because of my low resolution view of him that's part of the nature of being creatures in time and space but you know he'll go on here he's a compelling speaker so he's an attractive figure in some ways when i read him i sense a lot of suppressed rage in him right in fact i think his voice is choking with rage a lot of the time it's interesting because he talks about rage that you have to deal with that i don't think you'll understand just how angry he is i find this comment very interesting because it's always tempting to play armchair psychologist with someone through a book and maybe your comments are are fair and accurate maybe they aren't but so peterson's full of rage i have no idea maybe he is but i found this observation just very interesting and this and and if you look at his websites the comments are full of rage now i think in terms of the larger community it's a little bit easier a little bit fair and i think part of that is true in terms of part of what you know peterson the peterson phenomena is a combination of the man and the moment and part of this has been anger anger for you know loss of male privilege let's say anger for a loss of white privilege let's say anger for uh we're feeling chaos and we want to hit back so i'm not i'm not ready to diagnose peterson psychologically and play his armchair maybe i do that with his armchair pastor but uh like in terms of the phenomenon in terms of the audience yeah i can see that by his young acolytes now that's an energetic thing that it's his energy that draws people as much as what he actually teaches oh i should do in words that fudge on energy oh that that word is used that word is used a lot like spiritually secondly he teaches repression i mean he he very rightly takes an issue where somebody mandates a certain common language and he very rightly and righteously says the power will not be dictated to about what language i'm going to use well good for him i'm all in favor of not mandating language on the one hand on the other hand he basically advocates repression in his book he talks about how an angry two-year-old child now before we go too far in this suppression is a conscious decision to push down something repression is an unconscious decision can we make a decision unconsciously to push down force away or avoid i did he mean suppression needs to be sit by themselves until they get over it rather than understanding why a child would be angry at age two and this to me gets well maybe i'm i'm uh maybe i'm an angry man too but when i i read peterson in terms of yeah peterson is saying well what you're doing with that two-year-old is teaching that two-year-old to master and order their emotional world and that's what we call socialization and and i've known parents who have never wanted to cross their child or suppress their little spirits and what they often created were children that were really annoying to be around i've known some of these people long enough that a number of their children have grown up to be you know decent human beings and so whereas i'm much more of an advocate of more the petersonian old school teach a child to control themselves that would be suppression but also i think i when i listen to maté and then maybe again i'm being unfair with him well what are you teaching see this gets into the tricky thing of dealing with addiction because on one hand willpower alone willpower alone theologically isn't the way to actually handle an addiction suppression is not an effective tool and in fact almost the definition of addiction is that suppression hasn't worked and so what peterson said in the earlier video very much in terms of wish i could remember that i think it was at eight it was a he was a reform theologian you need a stronger power to come in and drive that other thing out now again that is a that is representational language and it is and it is language of a story and as jonathan peugeot tweeted a few weeks ago science is just as much a heuristic as storytelling they're all representations i think that's the that's the takeaway from the don hoffman the don hoffman work but you need something to drive it out well part of building that up is in fact the work that peterson advocates in terms of childhood socialization is that you you set the child down and you say okay you're going to master your emotions you're going to master your appetites you're going to master your will now there might be some things that come along that you cannot master well then we turn our lives over to a higher power because there are things in this world that we can't master but there are other things in this world that we should master and again i think maté maybe he's not doing this maybe i'm just reading this into him is is indulging in the overly aggressive egalitarian thinking that says any sort of hierarchy is illegitimate and tyrannical and whereas peterson would say all hierarchies have the capacity for tyranny hierarchies also have the capacity for good order and in fact hierarchies are natural and normal and necessary for even the small calibration flourishing of life what frustrations are having and what human contact they need to help them move through that anger he says we press the anger so he's all about we press the anger as far as i could say and it's very interesting how he talks about children he talks about little varmints and little monsters and so on i know that's meant to be humorous but it's also a certain way of thinking of the young human child so fundamentally i see him as an agent of repression repression or suppression so it's interesting too here where he draws he well you shouldn't call children like that well it's very very interesting that the subtle dynamics of language with respect to the the larger world view conversations that we are processing today children are sometimes we call them little varmints and they're also image bearers of god and and what happens in a fully formed religion is that you're able to in fact keep both ideas present and both ideas in balance he posing as an agent of libertarianism not to mention he's got this being his bonnet above what he considers to be seems to consider to be conspiracies by left-wing intellectuals they seem to be his bet noir being a left-wing intellectual myself i like to talk to him sometimes what are you so upset about jordan what are you so afraid of he should watch his videos he'll tell you what he's so afraid of he'll tell you what he's so afraid of and what he's so upset about you know he talks about these bloody marxists and and and he points out very accurately all the horror that occurred under so-called marxist regimes particularly in the soviet union he's absolutely accurate about that but then he promotes christianity shall i tell him about the mass murders that occurred in the name of christianity do you really want to compare the murders that occurred in the name of christianity versus the murders that occurred in the name of marxism are those numbers you really want to hold against each other should i tell him about all the millions that were slaughtered in the names of the gentle jesus in other words let's be fair about it uh he seems to pick ideologies to attack and abhor and embrace other ideologies that are just as murderous in practice sometimes it's a much more interesting question now what's interesting here is marxism and ideologies and peterson says ideologies are crippled religions and what he means by that and what he means by that is on one hand ideologies have not had a long-term tested and benefited the created creating a well-roundedness and and so what you tend to have with religions are a so let's say times when christianity gets murderous well there are elements within there are resources within christianity to critique and counteract that murderous side and and so what happens with religions because they've been around a very long time is that you start to get balance and when christianity gets out of balance as it did let's say in the time of the of the reformation and the bloody religious wars between catholics and protestants i mean things started to happen then to try to to try to correct that balance without without losing it so up christians you know the person who killed me was a christian therefore christianity is wrong the person who killed me is an atheist therefore atheism is wrong you've got to kind of discern these things and weigh these things and so when peterson distinguishes an ideology from a religion he's basically saying that that religions they can become ideological too but but religions have within them the resources to have a better a more well-rounded critique of itself so that when they get out of balance they can they can work themselves back into balance they carry with them a telos and purpose without authority from above and often without examination that's what happens in ideologies and especially secular ideologies that what all of these ideologies are they're asserting a telos well let's say nazism is racial purity or evolution of racial identity let's say marxism is a material material utopianism an evolution of class consciousness and achievement okay well there are reductions in these ideologies which are probably fatal that and you reduce a human being let's say with nazism to their racial identity or you reduce a person let's say with marxism to their class identity well people do have racial identities people do have class identities but but to say that these are their defining their defining elements is to reduce a human being and i think both of these both of these attempts failed partly because the reduction itself failed and and people can't be reduced to these things what religions try to do is is maintain much larger identities and distill them down this gets into the fairy tale conversation to skill distill them down into incredibly time tested well compacted ideas such as i'm cleaning up peterson's language here christians are image bearers of god now image bearers of god is an idea that is so compact and so well tested see when i criticized peterson's divine spark image bearer because image is located in a variety of things and bearer okay a bearer is different from an asserter it's someone who has been has received something i mean this is just so time tested and tightly packed for for thousands of years that it's it's durable and it stood the test of time and it's there for a reason and and this is where ideologies continue to topple over and they can't withstand time because in kind of a darwinian sense they're tried and they fail they tried and they fail and and that which has come to us in the form of religions are things that have endured be and they've been over time they've been refined again i often refer to alistair mcgrath's book heresy where where he looks at these ancient christian heresies and he sees how well heresy and theology heresy and orthodoxy are kind of pairs that refine together you you didn't know the right answers to questions until you tried and failed with worse ideas well well jesus received his divine nature well they worked on that for a while said no that can't be it so so then you have orthodox christology and then you have and then you have the idea of the trinity and then you work on that for a while and it takes hundreds even thousands of years and these things keep getting tested and and communities embody them and and even these foundational things peterson talks about that in his in in one of his sections in the easter the five-part easter conversation these these things become the foundation that get expressed in communities and and if you have a poor foundation the weaknesses of that foundation will be seen over multiple generations of human being and tried over time and and so this is some of the logic of theology and why theology works the way works the way it does and why ideologies just continue could just continue to fail now watch the whole rebel wisdom interview the whole thing is is worth watching and um you know i'm very interested in reading matei's book i don't know if it's quite up high enough on my hierarchy to to read it lately i've been reading when i was in massachusetts for the grief for the living in my mother's basement for the the death of my sister i i picked up again c.s louis's grief observed and then that got me thinking about joy davidman and so then i picked up this biography which was written just a few years ago about joy davidman and i'm finding it a fascinating and timely read because joy davidman in the early 20th century was an ardent woman liberationist and she was an intellectual leader in the american communist movement she was an outspoken atheist and and she has a very interesting conversion and the the whole book is a fascinating study in in so many things that are that pertain to the jordan peterson conversations that we've been having she becomes a christian she's not a very good christian she wanders off into elron hubbard land and dianetics for a while and gets tangled in that she basically decides to set up her husband for adultery and stalk c.s louis and manages to marry him and i mean the whole story is just a i mean c.s louis's story is very interesting but i think hers may be more interesting still and because of all the hagiography all of the the desire to turn c.s louis into a saint now i'm as big a fan as anyone i know of c.s louis but you've got all the the muddledness and complexity and and sinfulness of human beings in this story and i i appreciate this biography because she doesn't sugarcoat things both both joy davidman's strengths and and her weaknesses and and where she just did wrong where she just wronged her family where she wronged her husband and her husband was i i didn't have a good appreciation of bill gresham until this book and i i think i am dependent upon the book of course and to to whatever degree the book is the book is true and relates to the the history of them but you know it's a it's just such a believable story in terms of what messes what amazing messes we human beings are and in that story there's there's marxism and there's atheism and there's liberationism and there's alcoholism and there's all of these things wrapped in together so i'm not finished with the book yet but i've my my book's always right on a hierarchy and when i get caught on a book like this if it's very timely i i can't let it go so maybe i'm addicted to books but i haven't lost my job or my marriage over my addiction to books yet although there there are times when my wife gets a little upset because you know do you really want to talk to me or do you really want to read that book so these are these are things these are things one deals with but here maté is talking about marxism and well he's oh he's a left-wing intellectual okay but here's the funny thing about marxism which which the book nicely illustrates that that so many people wander over there because they're and myself included in my younger years well-meaning but simplistic response to the inequality and suffering jordan peterson i think has a devastating critique of that where he shows that inequality is way deeper than capitalism and and what's interesting about this book is that joy davidman and bill grisham these were you know these were card-carrying members of the communist party and they embraced that idola that that that ideology as a way of answering the deep questions in their lives both of them as atheists and then they both then wander into christianity and they're not perfect christians but they're you know they're being sometimes held up by christian press as ideal christians to be emulated but their lives weren't always that ideal in terms of a christian in terms of a christian frame but but what's interesting is that marxism marxism is so susceptible to money of all things and affluence and i'm old enough to remember the cold war and the stories coming out of the soviet union and the corruption of these high communist leaders who are living in affluence while the the bread lines and the stores are empty of consumer products and and you look at the chinese situation where they're practicing communism and well but capitalism is just a heck of a lot more fun because there's so much more stuff to it and so they try to maintain one party rule while you know completely abdicating this this critique of capitalism and wholeheartedly embracing it or are most of the way embracing it and and you find this in joy bill grisham enjoyed davidman's life when they start making a little money they buy a big house in the suburbs this is just after world war two when the suburban movement just gets going and they they join a mainline church and they hire a maid and you know communism goes out the window once they get a little bit of money and that reminds me of peterson's quip about we wouldn't have as many leftist profs if they were paid more and i kind of think he's really got a point because marxism seems to be destroyed by prosperity capitalism swallows marxist through basic human desires well then the question is is addiction the bane of secular capitalist affluence that when we take these things with our heart's desire when we become the center of our world the center of our lives as russell bran says well suddenly we're eaten by our own desires in other words you need a hierarchy and you need something at the top of that hierarchy and whatever's at the top of that hierarchy cannot be corrupted and and when you've got a system like that when you've now you're dealing with all of the elements you've got a community around you you've got something at the top of the hierarchy you've got a system like that you've got a bigger story to live within well you know grisham and and david min were by no means perfect people but well suddenly you begin to recalibrate things on a small scale and then hopefully as you continue to to work it and develop it and pursue it in your life it gets larger and larger and larger too now i don't want to necessarily echo what i think peterson's weakest element to his work is which is again and again he'll say well we can overcome these things well let's overcome all we can absolutely but i'm a calvinist and i believe in the age of decay that there's a lot we don't overcome we don't overcome death we don't overcome we don't finally overcome corruption and this is where the balance language okay we want to keep these things in balance balance is never consummation balance is always an approximation to be as good as we can get it within the confines of this frame which are far larger than us we get back into eschatology we look at ultimate goods what the purpose of things are our renovation into something as c.s lewis said the likes of which we would be tempted to worship if we saw it on the street and and that's in a sense where i think why we have difficulty talking why we have difficulty talking about addiction why we have difficulty dealing with addiction because finally just as in the wisdom of the 12-step program you need a you need a power greater than yourself and there's an again there's an element of power in it which means it can impact us down here but but there also is an element of authority in it and now if i go back to my little to my little diagram that i've been working the square has to be complete or the rectangle has to be complete there's there's there's authority from above how things ought to be you have the unification of heaven and earth with empiricism from below and you have the past and the future all coming together and that's when we begin to experience i think the shalom that we were made for so there's a few comments maybe an hour and a half's worth of comments so someone mentioned on twitter look forward to look forward to my i forget what word he used but uh yeah i if i'm away from this for a while i get a lot of ideas and just got to get them out let me know if it's let me know if it's helpful um again love the work that that rebel wisdom is doing very much enjoying their interviews and uh much love to to david and ollie and um and yeah it's fun fun stuff so let me know what you think in the comment section