https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=ALh3SUheJsY

 Good morning, Internet. At least it's morning here in California. I know it's afternoon on the East Coast. And Rick, my manager. Are you my manager, Rick? I think Rick's my manager. Rick's also the producer of this fine program. Rick also produces the Livingstone stream. So there are all kinds of titles for Rick and makes him absolutely zero money. But Rick says that next week. Well, he said we should do it. I said, well, let's try it next week. Next week, we'll do our question and answer, not on the discord. But on YouTube directly. I don't know exactly how Rick is planning on this. Maybe from the chat room. Maybe because everybody's been in that chat stream and never getting their questions asked. But that's Rick's idea. So next week, we'll try that. But don't worry, discord will be back the following week. I assume I haven't looked at my calendar. So a few people have gathered in the recorded voice chat. Chad the alcoholic has, you know, we got to get Chad the alcoholic and Griswold Grimm and the randos up over a thousand subs. We really do. Chad, if you're not watching Chad, the alcoholics bridges of meaning news, you're really missing out. And in fact, this week, as Grimm Gris noted, I tweeted out a terrific imitation of the other symbolic world from Chris Pacow, as Chad the alcoholic likes to say. And Jordan Peterson himself retweeted my tweet. So that video got over a thousand views. Way to go, Chad. So Chad is doing some real fun work. I decided to, I needed to have a deeper conversation with Chad. So that's coming next week. I'm also having a conversation with John Vervecky next week. So that should be coming out. And I got another, I've got a conversation with Dave from the German bridges of meaning estuary. And I'll be talking to him next week. So we'll have some interesting conversations coming out next week. So there was a little bit of channel promotion. Aren't you proud of me, Rick? I'm actually trying to act like a better YouTuber. Rick gave me the thumbs up. All right, onto the questions. Shane, whatever it means to be conscious, if we are part of the body of Christ, hands, feet, toes, hair, to what degree and in what ways are, ought, we be able and responsible for knowing and participating in the conscious perception and the action of the body as a whole? Body of Christ is a metaphor. Now we are in Christ. And I would say there's probably some collective consciousness with respect to being in Christ. So that's a cool question. I don't really have an answer. So I'm going to break my tradition of spending 45 minutes or an hour on the first question and just say, that's a cool question. I don't know. We'll give it a little thumbs up and move on. Gavin Palmer has also been doing some commentary. And Gavin Palmer has a really cool idea for crowdsourcing email that I have to pause myself and pay some attention to because it could potentially help my email woes by letting all of you read certain kinds of my emails. Boy, I don't know if that's going to go. I get a lot of, I don't know, I'm not going to go. I get a lot of emails from people who are sharing personal things. So they obviously won't send it to that email address. But so Gavin, Gavin has a YouTube channel. He's doing some commentary on me and Grizz. I really like the way this little, so the randos have been around a while and I think they're still going strong. I've watched some randos videos this week. I thought their video treatment of rise and fall of Mars Hill was absolutely amazing. I might say that's a great video. Absolutely amazing. I might spend some time and even do a commentary video on that video this week because I thought it was so good. But of course, the randos have been around a while. They're now old school. They're established. But you know, Grizz, Griswold Grim and Chad the Alcoholic and Gavin Palmer and Mark LeFavor, these are the young kids on the block in YouTube land. And I'm so happy to see Mark's new channel. I have to dig into his videos. They're reasonably brief compared to mine. So if you haven't gone out and found Chad the Alcoholics, Bridges of Meaning Hub channel and Grizzwold Grim, Grizzwold Grim, he's a spooky, scary critter. So I really like him. Perfect for the season. He's in the comment. He's in the chat room too. Yeah, the randos should invite Grizzwold Grim on. That would be really cool. Of course, we've got Merrill and his conversation with Peterson. I haven't even listened to that whole thing. I should though, because I'm very convinced that that's an important thing and definitely worthy of attention. I'm a father trying to do something, trying to do some cognitive outsourcing while learning more about God the Father. Yeah, that's a great question. It's really funny. It's sort of a strange... So the video I released this morning, that really messy, sloppy video about rationality rules and morality. I see people sometimes that I think, wow, they're a good father. And I see that because they seem to say the right things. And they have the kinds of conversations that I think have been... That television has told me a good father does. And so that has... This is totally Grizzwold Grim stuff. There's this dark mirror feedback loop that we have going on that is probably of the devil. And that has really worn me out. I mean, I'm not saying that I'm not a good father, and that has really warped what it means to be a good father. There certainly isn't only one way to be a good father. The heart of fatherhood is obviously male love for his children. And this of course comes from our father above. And oh gosh, this stuff is so hard, but it's a great question. And I would say if you want to be a better father, pay attention. First, pay attention to your children and your wife and your family, and pay attention to your friends and others as they father and try and absorb some of the good mapping from them and try things out and see how they go. What does God the Father want for his children to be like him? To grow up into their maturity, even into their individuality, to have reciprocal broadening in their agency, and to be able to, well, you can read in the Sermon on the Mount, the generous, lavish giving of the Father given to an undeserving world. That's grace. And he wants us to be grace givers, like he is. But that's not in a sort of a facile, nice way. That's good fathers challenge their children to grow and put boundaries around their children, and sometimes frustrate their children. And in that frustration, drive them to be greater than they would be if they had no father. So I remember Peterson's Genesis discussion about the father being willing to sacrifice his child to the world because the child is not his. So there's a woman in my church who lost a daughter when the daughter was a young adult. And she always tells young mothers and fathers, those children don't belong to you. They belong to Christ. And she's right. The first question and answer of the Heideberg Catechism, I am not my own, I belong body and soul and life and in death to my faithful Savior Jesus Christ. And that's how we are. So it's true. I personally think the answer may be connected with Shane's question above regarding growing the body in this world. There's a lot of mystery in all of this. And if you read something like the book of Colossians, and we are to grow up into him and become his body. Yeah, I think you're right. I think you're right. Those are all good questions. Pray for my feet and back. Amen. Jordan Peterson has stated that the term meek and the meek shall inherit the earth is a bad translation because Abraham fought a war and that this does not describe being meek. Do you think every virtue is owned by every patriarch in equal measures? Jacob was not meek, he was humbled as he grew. Abraham was not, well, was Abraham meek? I mean, Jordan also likes to make the point that he lived in his father's house until he was like 75. So I think the reason Jordan can't understand the beatitudes, specifically with respect to that beatitude, is number one, he is not understanding the technical language in terms of the Old Testament tradition around the humble and meek that look to God for their support and God hears their prayers. If you read the Psalms and the prophets, you find them referred to again and again and again and again and again. And when Jesus says the meek shall inherit the earth, that is part of these inversions that Jesus is claiming in terms of the in-breaking of his kingdom and it's turning the world upside down. And so Jordan is trying to fit that into his more, his Nietzschean infused imagination. And so he just gets it wrong. I've made two videos on that years ago and I know a lot of people really like that because, like Jordan's interpretation, because it gets at the whole masculinity crisis and I gotta mute my watch so it doesn't buzz when my family sends messages back and forth. Boy, this is so stream of consciousness. So I know a lot of people struggling with masculinity really love that because in many ways, Luke was making this point, I think, well in the Rando's video about Rise and Fall of Mars Hill, the church is feminine and in a way it should be because the church is the bride of Christ and it is our masculine savior. Oh gosh, this could get like a sloppy wet kiss really easily. The church is there to receive her masculine savior. We are all part of the body of Christ, the bride of Christ. And now those of us who are men have to figure out what masculinity within this feminine space really looks like. And I appreciate that he, Peterson, likes to accentuate strength and boldness and power and all of those things are good and right as they are. But with respect to that verse, he's just wrong. He's just wrong. It's a cool idea and the idea he has isn't wrong, but it doesn't apply to that verse. And as a Christian minister, you deal with this stuff all the time. We have all these inductive Bible studies where you read the Bible and you go around the room and everybody says what they found in the verse. And that's actually not a bad way for people to sort of engage in the Bible and get interested in it, but it isn't a good way to do biblical exegesis. And so Peterson finds this and he says, oh, I know what this is. What Peterson can't see is the, radicality of the masculine Christ owning his bride and loving his bride and fertilizing his bride. So that might be one entrance into why the meek inherit the earth because the masculine Christ has fertilized his bride and his spirit goes out and continues to have its way with the world. So, boy, that sounded a little PG-13. Here we go. Zito wins the prize for the longest ever question here. And I don't know how you got through Joey, but here it is, let's go. What does the pattern of salvation look like in the world? Wow, that's a great question. It's so obvious and up front. I don't know why nobody's ever asked me that. I don't know why I've never thought of it in that term. And now you go on. In other words, what does a genuine Christian community look like? Wow. It's sort of like the question of a good father. What's a good Christian community? Descriptive words are obviously things we know we must wield and employ and try to come up with to help each other in this upper register wordy level. But if you really want to explore genuine Christian community, you have to enter into Christian community. Any abstraction of it is always only an abstraction. So that's a disclaimer right from the start here. Is it game A, Christendom, Constantinian Christianity, or game B, Apostolic Pre-Constantinian Christianity? Well, here's the thing. When you frame the question that way, you're gonna have the Peugeotians and some of the Orthodox. I can't say all the Orthodox because I don't know that many. You're gonna have them all up in arms because they're going to say that Constantinian Christianity is the culmination of Pre-Constantinian Christianity. I think another way to frame this would be game A, Christendom, Constantinian Christianity, or game B, Protestant, Revolutionary, Anabaptist, Christianity, Anarchist Christianity. And this gets into the whole question of is Christianity a revolutionary religion? And I answered that in a video recently where it's complicated because in some ways, C.S. Lewis leans hard on this framing. The world is under the occupation of the rebels. And so in some ways, it's both game A and game B. It's game A in that, as Peugeot likes to point out, reality lays itself out and the rebels are rebelling against reality. But it's game B in that Christianity in a rebel context is an insurgency against an insurgency. So there you have the inversion. My observation is that Peugeot's affirmation of hierarchy and Constantinian Christianity is equivalent to game A. I think that's right. Described in people like Jordan Hall and Daniel Smectenberg and what we see in the history of Christendom is not so much the workings of the Holy Spirit establishing a church to redeem the world or just different principalities and powers. Angels, demons, gods, et cetera, vying for power and control. Just as a country or a city can be thought of as an angel, demon, god, an institution like the Roman Catholic or Orthodox Church or the billion Protestant denominations can be thought of as these spiritual powers working in history. That sounds about right. And we know from the Iliad, the Old Testament and St. Paul, the gods are ambivalent and not always very bright. And I think that a quick look at the endless heresy hunting, political power struggles and schisms in the church history should make it obvious that the process is too divided and too dumb. That's because it's our process. And at times blatantly evil can get that way to be unambiguously the work of the Holy Spirit. This is really tricky because if you go all the way back to the book of Genesis, where the whole Bible begins, which in many ways is the foundation for the whole story, the culmination of the book of Genesis is Joseph with his brothers at the death of Jacob and Joseph's brothers trying to play a game to think they need to stand as good side because Joseph is gonna get at them and get revenge on them for the horrible way they treated him. And Joseph lays down this line, you meant it for evil, but God meant it for good. And God always wins, he does. So in some ways that's the heart of Christianity that God always wins, God wins in the end. It can be no other way. So kind of this framing of game B, game A, game B, I think it sheds some light and illuminates some things. But when it comes to application, history is, how can I say this? How can I say this? So in my adult Sunday school class this week, I'm going to get into the question of Paul the Roman instead of Paul the Jew, because the hotness in New Testament studies for the last generation has been the reemergence of the Jewishness of the Bible, shock of shocks. Shock of shocks, it's all written by Jews, Old and New Testament, both. So, oh, the Bible's Jewish, we've just found that out. Paul is also a Roman, he's a Roman citizen, and that sort of has been viewed as some neat little legal trick that gets Paul out of a jam in the book of Acts every now and then. But I think we have insufficiently pondered Paul's experience as a Jew in the midst of Rome, because in many ways, as I've now spent the last few months doing a lot of thinking and reading and studying about the book of Acts and about Paul, I've come to the conclusion that the heart of this is in fact the reconciliation between, in some ways, between Jerusalem and Rome. And Athen gets thrown into the mix. And all of these tensions that you raise in this question are in that question. So, part of part of what I'm gonna throw out in my adult Sunday school class is going to be the observation that C.S. Lewis makes in his book, Miracles, on what London is. Because C.S. Lewis says, when I think of London, I think of Euston Station, which is apparently a big train station in London. Now, C.S. Lewis didn't have a driver's license, he didn't know how to operate a car. C.S. Lewis was astoundingly the, almost the the caricature of a hopeless professor. He couldn't do all kinds of things, but all he did was read books and talk, that's what he loved to do. So, London for him was a train station. And he says, well, I know London is not a train station, but when I think of London, I think of that picture. And so, part of why I read that is because we have to try to get our mind around Paul the Roman, we have to get our mind around Rome. Gosh, Rome. The foundational city of Western civilization for over 2,000 years. How can we get our minds around such a thing? The world is simply too big. And so, we create these hashes and mythologies and pictures and narratives and images in order to be able to wield it and interact with it and engage with it. And so, there's, so I'll switch to Tolkien land. When at the end of the Lord of the Rings original trilogy, because The Hobbit was corrupting, and it sounds like Amazon will be even more of a corruption. At the end of the Lord of the Rings movie trilogy, there's this big scene with Aragorn and that Minas Tirith and the tree is blooming and the crown is placed upon his head. We are going to have realizations of Christ's Lordship over this world as part of our journey. There will be moments like that. There will also be moments of the crucifixion in this world. There'll be moments like that. And until the consummation, until Christ is all in all, until what we call the second coming, until that happens, we will always live in that tension. Christ will be the crucified King. And so, the Christian church will always have moments of game A and moments of game B. And that part of why I think the Gospels, the canonical Gospels are genius is because they hold that tension all the way through. We had our men's Bible study the other night and we had Matthew 11 and Matthew 12. And Jesus comes to, Jesus says of Capernaum, which is basically the place that he's been living, the center of his ministry in the Galilee where he's done all of these miracles, where his disciples are living, where all of this stuff is going on. And he's saying, Capernaum, if you had listened to me, well, because you didn't listen to me, it will be better on the day of judgment for Tyre and Sidon. A little while later, he says basically, the generation that is listening to me the generation that is listening to me, it'll be better for Nineveh than it is for them. And it's like, well, why? Jesus, you're enormously popular. Everybody's following you around. They're hanging on your every word. They're watching your miracles. They want more and more and more. And you tell them, you tell your fans, you have absolutely no understanding of who I am and your attention and your worship of me is insufficient. Wow, there's a buzzkill. No wonder you're gonna go down to Jerusalem and get crucified. It's amazing it didn't happen in the Galilee. And there's a bunch of stories that suggest exactly that, that at least on one occasion in Nazareth, it took something close to a miracle to avoid him being killed for the kinds of things he said. And that tension is maintained in the gospels in an amazing way. And given the fact that these gospels were written by four different people, accumulating stories from lots of other eyewitness sources, the best way to understand that is that Jesus was that way so much that even an account of him bears that witness so powerfully that as Tom Holland has noted, these four gospels accomplished a trick. Unlike any other body of literature in all of human history, to represent Jesus in such a powerful way across the span of cultures and through the sands of time. And everything has to do with this tension between game A and game B as you said here. I would say, I'm going on to read the question some more. I would suggest that genuine Christian community, that which saves the world looks something like what is now being talked about in game B, which is non-hierarchical, even anti-hierarchical community of people built on love, charity, and equality between male and female, Jew and Gentile, something more akin to what we see in some places in the apostolic pre-Constantinian period. Now, one thing you have to recognize is that the image of Christianity in pre-Constantinian material, in terms of history, that's a hugely debated area. We've got some church fathers, we've got Eusebius, and then we've got increasingly some archeology and some really interesting stuff being written in the last generation of historians about this, but we don't know that much. And what I hear coming through your question is sort of an image of things. Now, I can't help but read what you're saying here and not think of our friend Julian and his Hutterites, because this is exactly the Anabaptist project. Lutherans and Calvinists, and their descendants who are now Lutherans and Baptists and Calvinists and Evangelicals, as Molly Worthen pointed out, are sort of apostles of reason. And our emphasis has been, how can we articulate? How can we verbalize what we find in this book? That's a valuable thing, preaching, it's good. Anabaptists asked, how can we shape this into a community? Now, there's in some ways a real commonality between the Anabaptists and let's say the Orthodox or the Roman Catholics or any, with respect to this attempt at embodiment, but as you noted, some of the tensions between them are very much the difference between game A and game B, which makes it unsurprisingly that over the last few months, I've heard more and more stuff from Anabaptists and anarchic Christians complaining about Peugeotian game A Christendom. Yeah, those tensions are all in there. But, and you're right to point to the hierarchy versus equality. And again, I go back to the statement I made before, when you read the gospels and when you listen to the teachings of Jesus in the gospels, the tensions between hierarchy and equality are on full display. Jesus is the name above all names. And Jesus says to his disciples, you'll have no masters among you because you have one master and you are all brothers and sisters. You have radical hierarchy, radical equality. And so it should not be a surprise that we've seen all of the variations over the last 2000 years in Christianity of attempts at hierarchy and attempts at equality that we've seen. And in some ways, wokeism is a radical attempt at equality, which partly because of the complete lack of Christian formation and many of its advocates completely falls apart because they're just simplistic about desires in a way that you won't find in Christian communities like Anabaptists, Hutterites, where they know all about individualism and desires because they deal with those things every day when it comes to doing the dishes or reputation or going to work. I mean, there's something about living together that just really exposes us to each other and our fallenness is on close display. But I think we have to take a look at the post-reformational Anabaptists and multiple attempts at intentional Christian Protestant community and compare that to, let's say, the monastic movements because what you find that on the Catholic side of things are all of these different orders, trying to make the difference between the two. And so I think that's a very important point is trying to do all of these different orders, trying all these different permutations to try to get at what Christian community looks like. One of the genius, Sam, even though our Sam, and I sound like Frodo there, but he is our Sam. And our Sam is when I was watching the Rise and Fall of Mars Hill video and every time I take time to watch our Sam, our Sam is a genius, he really is. Where can you find a heretic who knows all this stuff? I mean, it's because of Sam's heresy and he knows so much about church fathers and he knows so much about theology. So it's one of these weird things that you run into. So, and for all of that makes me believe that either, when Sam stands before his Lord, Jesus will say, are you sure I'm not God, Sam? Sam, are you sure? And Sam's gonna worship. Now Sam would probably come right back at me and talk to me about bowing down and what that means when I point that out. But our Sam is a genius. And one of Sam's genius virtues is honesty, which there's a reason why in this age, probably in every age, honesty is a core virtue. I mean, in some ways, Jordan Peterson is hated for his honesty in some things. And Sam is hated for his honesty in our Trinitarian community. But when Sam made the point that, basically about the evolution of sexuality, that if you read Church Fathers, they're pretty anti-sex and there's a lot of Plato and Greek dosatism that's sort of infiltrated those cultures. And part of, I mean, the sexual revolution really started with Protestantism in some ways. And when Sam said Martin Luther was the first sex positive, it was the Mark Driscoll of Reformation. Sam has a real point. Sam is a very sharp cookie. So, these are some of the issues that get involved in the search for Christian community. And again, you have to look at the Roman Catholic monastic orders. And I'm sure some of the Eastern orders, but I'm hardly familiar with Roman Catholic monastic orders and far less familiar with the Eastern Church's monastic orders. But monastic orders are all communities attempting to live life together. Now, most monastic orders are celibate. Hutterite communities, they have married couples, I assume. And we gotta find Julian a wife. And we just wanna see Julian standing next to that. Nice young German woman with that, you know the kind of dress that they wear. I kid you, Julian, I kid you. But I would imagine Julian is eagerly anticipating at some point finding a wife and raising a family and enjoying the exploration of his sexuality in a monogamous relationship with his wife and celebrating that. So, all of these tensions, all of this stuff. And that's why I say, just like, tell me what a good father is, wow. Explain in words Christian community. Well, why don't you look at monastics? Why don't you look at Anabaptists? Why don't you look at Geneva? Because there's an attempt of trying it at a city scale. So, and all of these tensions between game A and game B, hierarchy, equality, it's all seeded by Christ. His spirit has gone out into the world. And all of those tensions, again, they're all the gospels. I've not come to bring peace but a sword. Yeah, it's messy. And I think at the end of this age, when we see it from a different perspective, you know, some Dostoevsky quotes come to mind. Some Tolkien quotes come to mind. All of the messiness that we're in now will seem not only glorified, but even productive in sort of the way that Joseph talks to his brothers. Joseph talks to his brothers and says, you're focusing on us as horrible young men when you sold me into slavery and caused, talk about a horrible injustice. Talk about brutal suffering that I, that Potiphar business, that was a low spot, okay? But here I am, number two in Egypt, saving the world from famine, and you're thinking about yourselves. You meant it for evil, God meant it for good. And so at the end of all things, I think that's what we're going to find. And I know it's an audacious and some will accuse me of being tone deaf for saying such an outrageous thing, but the dynamics between game A and game B, we're not going to lose them because they're built right into the core of all of this stuff. Basically the Constantinian Christianity of hierarchy and power top down versus pre-Constantinian Christianity, let's just call it a, I'm not in any way convinced that pre-Constantinian Christianity was all about equality. Read the New Testament. Paul goes around and Paul doesn't get the group together and say, okay, let's put our chairs in a circle. All right, who do you think should be the leader here? Well, Titus, do you think he's a good leader? How about Timothy? Maybe Philemon? No, Paul lives in a hugely hierarchical world and Paul goes around naming leaders in each place. And often the leaders are the paterfamilia of the house in which the church, or in my case, why I think women folk can be church leaders, Lydia, that Paul accepts hospitality from. So no, Paul was not this egalitarian. Paul had, and just read Paul, and read Philemon, very short letter, one of the most powerful letters in the New Testament. Philemon basically says, or Paul basically says to Philemon, I could order you. And Paul pulls that card all the time in his letters. I could order you as an apostle. Oh, he understood hierarchy and he understood status, but this is the crazy way in which Jesus inverts status because it's the highest status that brings you to be the servant of all. And is that egalitarianism? No, it's fully hierarchical, but it's the kind of hierarchy we long for. And again, back to Tolkien, I mean, it was a little drippy when Aragon sort of bowed before the hobbits. It's kind of like, oh gosh, they're gonna mean that too. I've always been waiting for clip channels. I had no idea it would be Chad the alcoholic and Grimwold Grizz who would be making my clip channels of all of my silliness on the internet. But anyway, no, it's both and, and that Peugeot is really genius in describing because I haven't really found anyone who can sort of describe and illuminate those dynamics better than he does. But even he illuminating them doesn't hold a candle to seeing them lived out in human flesh in monastic communities and, or in families, to get back up to Gavin's question, because in some ways in the Protestant tradition, the family is the little church. And so I'm hugely cross pressured when it comes to all of these questions about headship. And I wear my cross pressure proudly because I think all of these issues all come out of the tensions in the gospel that we see in bold display through Jesus Christ, who in John 13 gathers his disciples together, strips down, takes a towel, starts washing their feet, and Peter is horrified, says, never, you're not gonna wash my feet. Then you can have no part of me. Okay, then wash all of me. Peter, you're not getting it. The feet are enough, okay? But this is our Lord. This is how Jesus is both the King of equality and the King of hierarchy. He's Lord of all, and all includes hierarchy and equality. So no, those tensions aren't going away. And I don't think you can really, I mean, it's such a Protestant thing to do to sort of blame hierarchy on Constantine as if that's when it comes in. Any reading of Christianity before Constantine shows bishops and overseers, and they were in some ways reflecting the world. They were living in, while at the same time radically undermining it, game A and game B both together. But it's a great question. I'm gonna keep reading it, because it's really good, even if I keep disagreeing. Constantine Christianity of hierarchy and power top down versus, I'm not gonna say that, equality and charity bottom up. If you understand the word charity, charity is not equality. Charity is those who have giving to those who haven't. And if you wanna see that in action, watch people, I don't want your stinking charity. That's so American. I am some, I will stand on my own two feet. Yeah, okay. Until you can't. Sorry if I'm being rough on your question. If Christian community truly is viable and salvific, and if people like Hall and Schmachtenberg are correct, then it must by necessity be equivalent to game B. I wouldn't look to Jordan Hall and Daniel Schmachtenberg to be experts on Christian community. I sometimes, when I listen to their stuff, I gain keen insights from there. They're plenty smart. But in terms of this kind of stuff, they're products of their culture. And part of what is beautiful about living deeply within the church, like our Sam, our heretic, is being informed by the church of very different cultures and centuries just affords us wisdom. Where are we? Perhaps the church emerging from the ashes of Christendom, freed from tyranny of principalities and powers against which the gates of hell should not prevail, turns out to be mythological game B after all. Now, it's the ending of the story is the ending of the story, and it's already in the Bible. It's Christ coming down as very much game A, riding a war horse. This time, he ascends the hill, this time, he ascends the hill of Zion on a donkey, and he comes down from heaven on a war horse. That's the story. In some ways, he's already manifest the game B in his first coming, and the second coming gets manifest in game A. Now, again, because of, now I'll switch back into my Calvinist tone, because of our depravity, we can't really be trusted with game A. Only Christ can, and he can be trusted exactly for the reasons of Philippians, too. So, I highly recommend conversation touching on this more, and then there's a YouTube link that I will pull it up. Restoring the World with David Bentley Hart. All right, I'll like it, so I'll put it in my like things, and it's from Forms Podcast, Universal Restoration Accomplished by Lion Thru. Oh, this whole, this whole Sophiaism that I get from grail country, and I don't know nothing about it. I just know it's all wisdom. Ooh, it's wisdom, ooh, it's our new hotness. So, maybe it's great, I don't know. I'll have to figure it out. For a good book on the relationship between slavery to institutional principalities and powers and the fear of death, which is one of the perennial destructive forces behind the repeated failure of the attempt at genuine Christian community. See Richard Beck, ah, Richard Beck, Slavery, Richard Beck is an interesting guy. Before I ever found Jordan Peterson, I was a very avid reader of his blog, and if he's got comment sections that go back, you'll find me commenting on his blog years ago. He's a very interesting guy, and again, this is part of the reason that I am, so I am in some ways from the Christian Reformed Church's left, which makes me conversant with the side of my denomination that sort of aspires to be mainline, even though the mainline is continuing to display its bankruptcy. But that doesn't mean I'm anti mainline or I'm anti progressive. I'm not. I think Christianity is finally and fundamentally progressive. I think what they get wrong is their soteriology. And so whenever I hear someone say things like, it's our job to bring the kingdom, I'm thinking you've made yourself an idol, because it's Christ's spirit's job to bring the kingdom. And the kingdom won't finally be free of this tension between game A and game B until we see our savior riding down from heaven on a war horse. Then we know that, all right, it's game over, A and B. And then what next game God has for us, we'll know then. But it'll be better than this game because that's how good games go. So these tensions and anyone who, if you're see it, and again, it's not about balance between game A and game B, between hierarchy versus equality. It's not about balance. It's about integration. And that's what you see in Christ. Because in integration, you can keep going up the scale of resolution and it just gets higher and higher and better and better and more and more in both ways. And balance is so two dimensional. And that's the way this goes. And so what you discover in Christian community is that radical egalitarian Christian community reveals hierarchies. And hierarchies reveal equalities. And that's the whole image about resolution further up and further in. And that's what you see in Christ. He says the most audacious things in the gospels. I mean, again, people are like, they don't believe in the virgin birth. And it's like, that's what you're bringing to the table? I can show you dozens of things he says in the gospels that any smart shrink would look at and say, what kind of human being makes statements like these? So that's why I have no problem with unbelievers reading the gospel and says, I just can't buy this. I have a lot more respect for that than, oh, it's just so nice and it's just so full of wonderful. He was a wonderful teacher teaching us about, and then they go on to parrot all the things that they believe. Is that, no, you haven't actually read this. It's the things this man says about himself in the gospels. Yeah, I'm surprised he wasn't killed the day after his 30th birthday. It's just, but there he is. And C.S. Lewis points that out. So it's a great question. Well, he got a postscript, there's even more. According to Peugeot, Platonist that he is, hierarchy is inevitable because it's how consciousness lays itself out and thus must correspond with being itself. Interestingly enough, that is only, that is only how consciousness lays itself out from what Maggie Ross calls self-conscious mind. See the excellent and much recommended silence, a user's guide. The basic point is that we see from this perspective is a distorted and a limited view of reality. And that which sees reality as it really is, is instead what Ross calls deep mind. That is why having an experience of God is nonsensical to Ross. Since experience is always interpretation and thus self-conscious and idolatrous. To me, your postscript sounds 100% true. We can't help but see with ourself, which is this astoundingly complex organ of seeing. But ourself is the limitation. And so we can't see God. Because to see God in that way would kill us. It would destroy us. Because we're too small. It's like, well I'm going to fit the whole ocean in a bowl. Well guess what happens to the bowl? Say, okay, well I've got the bowl and I'm gonna fit the ocean in a bowl. So, well how am I gonna do that? Well I'm gonna have to, I'm going to have to create this giant pressure thing to put, okay, just keep pumping up the pressure until you can fit the ocean in a bowl. The bowl's gonna explode. It's gonna destroy the bowl. So this is a great point. But the point turns in on itself about every point that we make. And this is where things get really mystical and weird. This anti-hierarchical perspective. But the problem is we don't, the point that she makes so powerful is exactly the point that Christianity has always said, God is incomprehensible. We cannot comprehend him because it's like the bowl trying to capture the ocean. Can't be done. Now, I've been really hard on you in your question, Zito, but it's an absolutely astounding question. And I can tell you're quite conversant in the rebel wisdom side of things. And I just want to applaud your question and for writing it all down here and sharing with us because you've made us all better by your question. And I wouldn't, in a sense, I want to compliment you by giving this question so much time because it is such an excellent question. And because you are raising and beautifully articulating the thoughts of many and you're representing them well. And so it's something worthy of treatment. So even the rough blunt way that I addressed the question, anybody who knows me knows that I am nicest to people that I don't know well. And I am often more blunt and frank with people I do know well and really like. So awesome, awesome, awesome. Thank you for asking it. Oh gosh, oh gosh, they keep coming. All right, end of questions for this week. Remember, in case you came late, next week I'm going to take questions from the YouTube chat. And Rick has to figure out how that works. So that's Rick's assignment. So Rick will figure out how that works because he's the boss. All right, he wishes he were the boss. A lot of things would be different if Rick were the boss. He'd say, yep, that's right, they would be. All right, hey Paul, in a recent conversation with author, historian, Thaddeus Russell, James Lindsay talks about the way that wokeness parasitizes the various ideologies in the liberal paradigm. These include not only social justice movements but now even neoliberalism and neoconservatism. This is why you find old school Marxist and left wing journalists like Glenn Greenwald and Matt Taibbi on the outs. It's a scary melding of American exceptionalism, unfettered capitalism and Maoism. Not to mention the moral subjectivism you commented on on the super sacred self, the secret sacred self. Why do you think liberal institutions are always both susceptible to left wing ideology but constantly stamping out left wing movements? Conversely, how ironic is it that liberal institutions that once favored the political conservative Wall Street, the church, CIA, FBI are now targeting right wing populists as terrorists the way they did black liberation movements like the Panthers in the 1960s? That's a great question. C.S. Lewis makes an observation that when he read history he would often note that when people are having a conflict they could hardly ever see what was common to them both. That to later centuries would be immediately obvious. That's what we've got going now. In some ways, well number one, we're clearly at one of these seasons of cultural inversion and scrambling. And again, Peugeot has some really nice ways of talking about that. It's clown world sometimes. It is so clown world right now. And people can't see themselves and they can't see each other. This is a great question. I would really have to sit down and talk a long time to try and get through it. I've already talked a long time about the question before. It doesn't surprise me that we see someone's making, someone's gonna make Rick get his exercise today. Sending super chats. Rick, why aren't you running down here with the super chat? Rick, Rick's making hand gestures. The reason why, I think this would be a great question Tom Holland and Dominic Sandbrook. And Tom Holland would sort of play his role of saying it goes back to Christianity. And in a lot of ways, it goes back to the game A, game B dynamics of the previous question. Because in some ways, we're still trying to get a touch, get a handle on hierarchy and equality. And figure them out. And we're in this moment of inversion where, and I was thinking about the other day how fascist, first of all, to try to figure out what on earth we mean by that word, listen to the rest of history's episode on fascism. Basically, they spend a whole episode on it and they come to the conclusion that this is just a word we use to describe people we don't like at the end of World War II, sort of in the same way we've made, we've turned Adolf Hitler into Satan. And we no longer, well, Satan's fictitious, but Hitler is real. So, we're living in a strange age. We're living in a strange age. And part of what the wokeists can't understand is that when you try to fight something, you give it strength. And the conservatives are sort of making a lot of the same mistakes now. And actually a bunch of people recommended that latest Jordan Peterson podcast, which I listened to last night. And sometimes I start listening to these things and it's like, well, I'll put on the sleep timer on my podcast app and I'll definitely fall asleep. Darn it, I listened to the whole thing because it was too interesting. But I'm not gonna make a commentary on it, at least not yet, unless some idea emerges in my mind. But I really liked, part of the really wonderful thing about these, this IDW corner, even though a bunch of IDW people aren't really good at being IDW, is that they're sort of leftists who have recognized the limitations of their leftists, their leftism. It is amazing listening to Bret Weinstein and Heather Heying sound like conservatives on their podcast. It's freaky. And Jordan Peterson now waving the flag of conservatism and it's like, dude, you're not a conservative. Well, you're kind of one now, but, and that's happening all over the place. And part of it's happened in me because I'm sure a bunch of people really don't like me anymore because I'm not the good CRC progressive that I was supposed to become. I'm me. So yeah, exceptional, American exceptionalism, unfettered capitalism and Maoism. Yeah, it's just simply not gonna work. And that's why, I mean, everybody was freaking the heck out about wokeism and I had my freak out moment too, but the more I thought about it, I thought, this isn't gonna get that far. When Benjamin Boyce posts the news story about Black Lives Matter, I look at a lot of these activists and I say, they're not going to ever, they'll be a storm for a little while, but they're gonna go away because they don't, they're not in any way serious as political actors I've seen in the past, or they're not in any way serious like the kind of seriousness you need to join a Hutterite community or to join an observant Jewish Hasidic community. I mean, these religious communities, they are totalitarian in certain ways. And the only way in this consumer world you actually give yourself to them is if you're serious about it. And there's this performativity that is going on in our political social ranges that is just, you know, I would fight white supremacy if it wasn't so darn inconvenient. I'll do it when the TV cameras are up and the weather is good. That's the kind of social warriors we find today. So yeah, most of these revolutions would crumple the day they couldn't pay for their wireless contract. It's just not serious. That doesn't mean it won't do a lot of damage, and it isn't doing damage, but it'll fall apart. The amazing thing about the Dave Chappelle episode has been for the community that really mainstreamed the language of fragility, they are the most fragile people around. They're all anger and bluster, and then many of them wind up in a pile of tears. Well, thank you, Rick just delivered the super chat. Thank you, Rick. So if you wanna keep Rick slim, send lots of super chats. Forces him to walk across the church, and we're also, you know, detreeing some Canadian forest here. John, do you view the increasing political and cultural polarization as in the long run, good or bad for the church? Do you think it will separate wheat from the chaff and lead to more tragic divisions in the body of Christ or a mix of both? Both. I think it's almost always that way. There'll be good things and bad things that come out of it. And I, you know, in terms of the Christian Reformed culture, I very much want to lean against polarization. So I've got my friends on the CRC left who, you know, we just have to, we just have to, you know, first it's the local option for same sex marriage, and then we all understand the camel's nose, but then it's gonna be, oh, this is a justice issue. And you know, the whole dynamic is gonna go in a very predictable way. But my friends on the CRC left are my friends on the CRC left. I don't want to not be in church with them. And my friends on the CRC right are my friends on the CRC right. I don't want to, I don't, I want to be in church with them too. I want to keep the family together. And I think part of why I want to is because these questions can actually drive us deeper into knowing Christ and separating Christ from a lot of the inanity that is coming at us from the outside. So that's why I want us to have a better confessional conversation. I'm thinking of the mushy middle evangelicals like More, More and French. That should be a law firm. In the next few years, they will probably be forced to choose a side. Galli was one of those ones too, and he went to Catholicism. Also, why do you think the Charism, okay, well, I don't know that More, More and French are mushy. I can understand why they're trying to do what they're trying to do. And I actually have a lot of respect for someone who was willing to sort of step out and voice an unpopular opinion and take the hits. So I thought Galli's, I thought Galli's piece was really good. And I actually thought French's response to it was quite good too, because yeah, good point. David French made some good points pushing back on Galli. So I just wanna see better pushing, pushing that produces light. And I actually think that people like Beth Moore and Russell Moore and David French and Mark Galli, all of these people have within them the capacity to have a really fierce disagreement and do it productively. That's what I want. So I love it when they go at it. And I think the more they push on each other, the less mush they'll be, and the middle can actually be the place where we could actually learn something about the extremes and maybe hammer out something that broad ranges that people can find useful and habitable. So I'm glad for the conflict. People have been walking around thinking other people are, all of the young evangelical progressives working for Mark Galli are like, wow, yeah, he wrote that thing against Trump, ooh. Yeah, but Mark Galli also was a fan of Jordan Peterson, wrote about him, spoke about him at least a few times. So I look at Mark Galli as someone who's willing to have a conversation. And someone who's willing, I mean, just as the fact that he goes to the Church of Rome, that took guts. So in a very Peterson-esque way, it's very easy for people to just complain about the people they don't like quietly to other people. And now there's a time to, there are some people that I wanna talk about that I don't talk about because they're in the CRC. And maybe someday I'll have that fight, but I'm not necessarily gonna have it on Twitter because Twitter is what it is. But I appreciate that more and more in French are, to use this horrible phrase, speaking their truth and having the fight. Let's have the fight because I think these people can do it and do it well. And they can say their piece, they can argue strongly, and they can continue to, it takes a lot of mutual respect to have a really hard conversation where there's way more light than heat. That's what we want, that's what we need. So good on all of them for going out there and saying, I think Gally's full of crap about this, good. Gally just said, I think these people are full of crap about this, good. Let's get all the crap out. And we're all gonna find, everyone is full of crap at least some point in a 24-hour period. And what maintains our health is that we eliminate it. So there's a nice vivid image for you. We're all full of crap, let's eliminate. And sometimes we're diuretics to each other and we gotta be that way. Boy, that's a horrible thing to say. There I said it. Also, why do you think the charismatic movement so often gets overlooked in these discussions? Amen, thank you for saying that. These people are like, oh, the church is so racially segregated. Have you seen the Pentecostal movement? Do you go to their churches? I think in some ways they are overlooked often for the same reasons the Anabaptists are overlooked. Because all of these wordy think spaces that I certainly am a part of and that we love to produce and we love to have our fights in the middle of, it's all this thinking. Pentecostals are like, if we're gonna talk a lot, we're gonna speak in tongues, baby. Somebody should interpret. But the Pentecostals are about doing. In a sense, Pentecostalism gives modernity the finger and says, I don't care about your status hierarchy. I'm gonna be slain by the spirit. I'm gonna run around and act like a chicken and you can bring your cameras in and laugh at me and I don't care because you are not my God. And so there's a kookiness and an insanity to the Pentecostal movement that I praise God for. And I love it, even if I laugh at it and every now and then mock it. Because I found that Pentecostals can take a joke. Good on them. At least most Pentecostals can take a joke. So you are absolutely right here. While all of us reformed magisterial Protestant types are having our deep discussions and our wordy, heady things, they're just out like, yeah, we're gonna take over this world and we're gonna do it by power and not the kind of power that governments have, but the power of the Holy Spirit. And it's gonna be game A in Pentecostal land. And God bless them because they are doing it. I love the Pentecostals. Galley was discussing, despite its considerable influence, those authors claim the future was either elite evangelicals or reactionary Doug Wilsonianisms. Even Galley made only an oblique reference to it when he mentioned Charisma Magazine. But Galley, here's the thing about someone who works in the magazine industry. They look at metrics and so he knows. And what he said about that was, oh, I wanna get in the New York Times. Oh, okay, well, that part of Blue Church, Blue Church is very magisterial Protestant. Mainline, it's all magisterial Protestant. It's all thoughts, talking. And again, I'm part of that. The Pentecostals, they're like, we're doing it. And the Anabaptists, it's like, we're doing it quietly. We don't, we can be up there in Manitoba, raise eggs, well, dumpsters. So no, you're exactly right, the church is huge. And our little spats are our little spats. Oh, crap, 45 minutes left, gotta keep moving. But mention, the Charismatics are deeply anti-institutional and grassroots and you'll never see Bill Johnson or Mike Bickle get an op-ed in the Times of the Atlantic. You are exactly right, you will not. And you know what, they don't care. And maybe some of them, somewhere in their heart, they'd be kind of like, oh, well, the New York Times would be it. But no, Bill Johnson will not show up in the New York Times. They might write about him because their church has become a political force. Oh my goodness, they're all gonna vote Republican, what are we gonna do? But no, they're not gonna look for Bill Johnson. At the same time, they're culturally diverse and the most egalitarian with women in office. That's exactly right. I mean, all of this women in office stuff that the Christian Informed Church was doing, it's like, oh, what's her name? Oh, why can't I think of her? Joyce Meyer, you know, it's like, oh, Beth Moore. Joyce Meyer, Joyce Meyer. If you don't know who Joyce Meyer is, you have the internet, go find her. She's a really big deal. Now, is Joyce Meyer my cup of tea? No, but she's a really big deal. And that's been going on right from the start with the Pentecostals because the Pentecostals in that way are super, well, if you got the gift, you're gonna do it. And we don't really care if you're a man or a woman. So, God bless the Pentecostals. God is always way ahead of us in all this stuff. And it's like, we get all these things in a corner and we're all anxious and is it gonna happen? And God's like, you know, most of the world you're not seeing. And I'm in charge, you're not. Would you please start trusting me? Would that be too hard? In the words of John Van Donk, would it kill you to start trusting me? It does kill us to not trust him, but anyway, great question, thank you, John. Caterpillar 345, Paul, a couple of questions regarding your 11 October video, Wokeism is about transcending the constraints of the physical world. I don't understand your discussion about the secret, sacred self. You seem to talk about it as if it's something negative that we should not aspire to be different, to be a different self. I recently read an article in the Art of Manliness giving a brief summary of Kierkegaard's three selves that seems to be true to my personal experience, the concrete self, who I am now, the ideal self, who I want to be, and the true self, the self that God wants me to be that transcends the ideal self. I would agree that we have a self that we aspire to religiously and that our God would have us become, old man, new man, so the secret, sacred self is still a thing in religion expressed differently or different focus, yeah. The secret, sacred self is sort of the religion that emerges when you can no longer believe that your life is with Christ in heaven. So in this conference that hopefully we'll have someday up in Thunder Bay where I'll finally get to meet in the flesh John Vervecky and Jonathan Peugeot and we'll have some conversations between the three of us there. I wanted to preach on Colossians because I'm a preacher so they're gonna have me preach in Urban Abbey and so I said I wanna preach on Colossians. I wanna preach on this text about our life is hidden with Christ. That's a weird thing to say. And I never really was turned on to that text until I heard a Tim Keller sermon on that text and that just sort of recast a whole bunch of things for me that sermon did. So I look around at people and they're all trying to find themselves. That language has been with us for a while now. Okay, well where are you looking? Well you have to look inside. All right, well how does that work? Oh boy, I've got a very vulgar imagination. Mirrors and stuff to look inside. Not a pretty thing. Rick threw a fit. If you follow my Twitter thread it's all about chocolates, right? Where is this self? And stripped of Christian ontology, a biblical worldview, people are sort of imagining, well where is this self that you're becoming? Well it's, and they have no idea. And so it's secret. But it's sacred because that's their whole duty. Their whole purpose in life is to become their true self, their new self. So, and what I like about your question is you have exposed the fact that we've been talking about trying to figure out what our self is for a very long time. And that's good. And like the most recent manifestations of it I see in sort of blue state, sort of new agey central California where I live is, well this is my true self. Oh really? Well, what do you mean by this word true? And authentic. You know, so the new season of The Bachelorette just started. Boy, red letter day. I want everyone to be authentic. What the heck do you mean by that? And this is why HGM's work is kind of interesting to me. Pro-felicity. So I kind of poked at, I kind of poked at our friend Andrea with the bangs on Twitter because she always posts these, I mean she kind of dresses up in these period things and takes a picture. And it's really cool what she does. I really like what she does with that. And, but it's an exercise in pro-felicity. And it's like, we're trying to discover who we are, what we are, why we are. Dogs don't have this, apes don't have this, cats don't have this, mice don't have this. What's with us? Well, it's partly because the upper and lower registers. So, you know, the secret sacred self is sort of the new ageish blue state quest for authenticity. And as the quest for the historical Jesus, as someone once quipped, it's all of these scholars looking down into a well, seeing a shadow or reflection of themself. And it's shocking given the fact that we're not only looking for the secret sacred self, but we're doing this while we're having a meaning crisis. And we're having the meaning crisis basically provoked by the idea that what I am is 100% the result of the psychological, sociological, economic, physical, biological, genetic, cultural sources of my being. So in other words, there is no such thing as a self. I'm just part of the whole show, as C.S. Lewis says in Miracles. I am a product. And if you are into math, what is a product? It's the end of an equation. That's all I am. There's no there there. There has to be a there there. So it's the secret sacred self. And so even though I've filled my life with stories from Netflix and television, I'm shocked at the fact that I just look like everyone else in the culture. Again, Grim Grizz looks at plenty of the stuff in his channel. At 105, Keith mentions choice in relation to identity. Keith was describing how the oligarchs and the transhumanists want someone's identity to be fluid and decided entirely by choice. Yes, but look at Sam Harris. What does Sam Harris say we are? We are nothing. You think Calvinists are determinists? Not like Sam Harris. At least I'm determined by my God who is sovereign and free. For Sam Harris, we're simply determined by the whole show. I assume the counter is that PVK would propose to have an identity in God and Christ. That's right. He gives us a new identity. He gives us a new name. He gives us new robes to wear. Our identity comes from him. We discover that the Redeemer is also the creator. Not only was I made from the bottom up to be my unique self, I also comes from heaven. Maybe that's where, when I talk to John Vervecky about this, we're gonna have our transjective because the emanation and the emergence come together in me. I am where heaven and earth meet in a way. That's very Peugeotian, both brothers. But I still don't, but don't I still have to choose to make that my identity? Yes. And in that way, the dog never chooses to be the dog. He just is the dog. But you're the, you're right at the crux between the upper and lower registers. So you have to choose in body, soul, mind, and strength. And that's what love is. Choose to obey and to look to submit to God, yes. And to become who he's made you to be, to put on your new clothes to be restored. And in Pauline terms, to not be subject to the epithumias, to the desires that want to have you. And that's what reciprocal narrowing is, to become just simply the subject of those desires. And so liberation is a wonderful word, but we're liberated into our identity in Christ. We're liberated from the old self into the new self. And it's new Adam. It's not new whatever. It's who you were made to be. I've been watching Survivor and it's really bad because it's like, gosh, I want in on that show. Gosh, I want to play that game. That's like, gosh, I'm 58. I'm not in great shape. I wouldn't last long on that beach, but boy, it looks like fun and I'm way too ugly for television. But I have to, I have to, so like, why didn't I get it? Why didn't I think about this 20 years ago when I was younger? And well, I just have to understand who I am and what I am and what I was made to be and be at peace and how Christ has made me and to lean into the me that he is changing me to be. That is my true self. My true self is found in Christ. It's not somewhere inside that I somehow have to march through all sorts of identities to try to discover. Oh, there'll be some of that, of course, but I'm found in Christ. My life is in him. And when he comes on his war horse, he brings my true self with him. So yeah, it's all this stuff. It's really great stuff. Thanks for the question. Zacharias, one of the reasons I brought up Scott Adams and the simulation theory is because when justifying the good possibility, he will often say that doesn't mean a super race of beings are gods. And that maybe the universe is just eternal, which was the belief in science prior to the Catholic priest and the physicist who discovered the Big Bang Theory, which was a win for theists despite the 1962,000 battles between young earth creationists and the science community. Now, Harvard physicist is saying we were made in a lab by an alien race between the Gnosticism of modern physics and the Gnosticism of modern gender and sex theories. We are mere years away from people saying true materialism has never been tried. You know, the point that was made by Zito, made by Maggie Ross, this is part of the reason we keep finding simulations. Howdy Paul, howdy Chad. Riveting question here, a real mind blower. What's your stance on cheese only pizza? There's a really good video on the internet of the weird Al Yankovic song in which cheese pizza is deeply connected with constipation. So every time I see a cheese pizza, I think about song. There's my answer. Cheese pizza's for children. It's a lovely thing. It's really hard to make a good cheese pizza that adults will like, at least Americans. Richard, I'm going to attempt to weave together several things here. I hope I can get it out and you can unravel it. Oh boy. I want to address your dimension of your same sex marriage stance, the one which many discuss as a slippery slope argument. And I want to sort of put this in dialogue with some of the evangelical history that you've been sketching. I listened to the Progressive Evangelical podcast, The Liturgists, yes, whose host is friends with Ra Bell. For a while, about three years ago, their Genesis podcast did a lot to prompt my deconstruction. And from that and other things, I appreciate the part they played in my life. But I've paid attention on and off to their online forum and I've seen that the posts have shown a gradual descent into a sort of mushy new age thing. Yeah. When people say that they're basically find Bible and Christianity non-viable. This is a point of this, this is a point for the slippery slope argument in a way. And you can make the same point with the main line. But my question is this, I listened to your conversation with Nick and I was struck by what seemed like his commitment to live out a true discipleship to Christ. Yeah. Nick Lone from Canada. I thought if these sorts of people make up the left in the CRC, how could someone like Nick want a church split? They don't want a church split. Nick does not want a church split. At all. There must be a compromise that avoids the pitfalls of women in office debate. If they have one, they should bring it forward, but they don't because their solution is currently local option. And local option was exactly where women in the church office started. But in this case that you see the left of the CRC is being in a similar position to the progressive evangelicals, because that's what they are, slowly slipping into a secular wokeness, question mark. Yeah, that's really kind of what's happening. I think for some of them at least, maybe most of them. Because, yeah, I want to be careful because these people are my friends. Or do you think that there is a general desire on their part to integrate their compassion for the situation of homosexuals into the Christian life? All there absolutely is that. And this is what I've said all along. That the same sex marriage debate in our culture and in our churches is indeed a product of Christianity. And this is part of the reason I really like Tom Holland. Because he sees this and articulates it clearly. The culture war debate is a Christendom civil war. If you go all the way back three years to my first videos, it was a point I made again and again and again and again and again in my early Jordan Peterson videos. This civil war is started by Christ. Love your neighbor all the way up to and include your enemy. Embrace the outcast. Jesus gets this from the Old Testament prophet. But that puts us on a collision course with the way some of identity has been currently construed. And so, well, it just sets us up with this. And these kinds of conflicts always come. And they are our challenges. And we have to figure out how to maybe do better with them than some of our ancestors have done with their conflicts. Now, I don't expect that at the end of Synod 2022, or whatever Synod, sort of, if a Christian Reformed Synod tries to do something other than continue to compromise, which is its own, leads to its own tragic outcome sometimes, at some point you have to make a stand. That's part of life. If at some point a Christian Reformed Synod takes a stand, I don't think the losers of the vote will be hung after the Synod. And that is a good thing. So, very much my friends in the Christian Reformed Church that deeply believe, sincerely, that the right move of the church is to affirm and embrace. I totally understand that because there's a piece of me that is right there with them. My favorite video of Chad is his Consciousness Congress take on the Mel Gibson movies. That was great, I love that. I'm gonna make a clip from, I'm gonna make some clips from Grizz's and Chad's channel for my clip channel. I wanna do that, I hope I find time. Because I am so torn by this thing, because I have some really good friends who are gay in the CRC and have been struggling on both sides of this for all of their lives. And they're now men in their 50s and 60s. I went through 12 years, 13 years of elementary and secondary education with a little cluster of about 100 people going to Eastern Christian on the East Coast. And of course, it's the fact that now, years later, I discover, guess what? Couple of my classmates were gay, didn't know it then. And they sort of had to shut up about it then because in the 60s and 70s, it wouldn't have been cool to say that and to disclose that, to come out. And that breaks my heart. Because they had the secret struggle and the secret burden, that breaks my heart. And they're my friends, they're like brothers and sisters to me in some weird way because of my strange growing up in Eastern Christian. And of course, I want them to find happiness and romance and fulfillment and why should I be able to enjoy these things and them not and be welcomed into the church. So when I talk to Nick, I totally feel like I'm not in the church, I totally get it. He talks about his brother and his sister, I totally get it. It's like, why not? Why not? For Pete's sake, what's our problem? Why not just say, of course, but there are some other things going on that I have to think through. And so there's my consciousness Congress doing its work. This is what we have to do. Expedience is something we need to watch because it would be enormously expedient to just affirm. And so that's why more and more in French and Gali, I cheer them all on, push hard against each other. Gali wrote that thing, fire one back, but do it the right way. And I think they are. Now you might disagree, feel free to disagree. Don't be mushy. But there's also time and a place for that. And so Twitter isn't the place for a lot of those spats, but there might be places in the future, we'll see. We'll see what comes. And of course, Richard, I mean, your story is so interesting. Richard came out and met his parents, what lovely people. And of course, Richard's been extremely transparent, but my friends at Eastern Christian, they couldn't deal with these issues like Richard can. And so who do we have to thank for that? The gay liberation movement. Yeah. Yeah. And I think the fact that we can talk about it now is better than 40 years ago when they had to stay in the closet, couldn't talk about it. So, and that gets back into this, the earlier question about, which earlier question was it? You know, where I talked about Joseph and his brothers. Yeah. So great question. No real good answer for you, but thanks for asking it. Treesap2, not just Treesap, but Treesap2. Hi, this is my first posting here. Yeah, I haven't recognized you before, welcome. I like your little logo. I hope it is the right place to get questions to you. It is exactly the place to get questions. Again, Logan, next week, you can just put them in, probably the YouTube chat or Rick will have some clever way of doing this that makes it all better. Just like the pumpkins and leaves and stuff blowing on behind the graphics here, Rick's responsible for all that. Y'all know if I'm in charge, what it looks like, it looks like my videos. While listening to your discussion with Jonathan Peugeot and John Vervecky, I noticed that both of you agree that the incarnation was the miracle that gave all other miracles importance. Why not the sacrifice that Jesus, the Christ made, as described in Luke 22, 24 or the resurrection? In other words, you're asking if we put the incarnation in a hierarchy as opposed to the crucifixion and the resurrection, that is a good question. I think it shows the limitations of our hierarchical thinking. Now, obviously you don't get to the crucifixion or the resurrection without the incarnation. That's a big point in its favor. So I like Richard Foster's Streams of Living Water. It's over here somewhere in my mess of books. Because what that book nicely shows is the different, the different, even though Christ's body is divided, he expresses himself clearly, his manifest glory distributed through the different parts of his body. And the orthodoxy, for reasons of its history, has always been really good at manifesting the glory of the incarnation. Protestantism has been really good at manifesting the glory of the crucifixion. Is anybody sufficiently manifesting the glory of the resurrection? Pentecostals, maybe? Maybe that one waits until creation 2.0, I don't know. But our God is good and he is smart and he is generous. And we have no idea what he has in store for us. And I can imagine a lot of good things just on the little wisps and hints of what he's going to do for us in the new creation. And given how small I am and how big and generous and good he is, he's going to, it's going to be amazing what he does. And I can't wait to see it. And that kind of joy, oh, that kind of joy is coming. It's coming. So I don't know if I'll put these things in a hierarchy like you maybe I did by what I said, but I'm like Joe Rogan, I'm a chattering monkey. But how to, they're all tied together, the incarnation, the crucifixion and the resurrection. Part of why I think we framed it that way in that talk was we were talking, oh, JP Marceau said of Jonathan Bichot, we were talking about C.S. Lewis' book, Miracles, and his wonderful chapter, The Grand Miracle. And Lewis in that chapter nicely weaves in the incarnation and the crucifixion and the resurrection as this eucatastrophe that through which he saves this world. So great question. Thanks, Tresap. Thanks for asking. This is the way to ask questions. It's a good thing. Troubler of Israel. Yeah, there's a bunch of you out there. When I enter estuary.hub in my browser, I keep getting the message that the site is for sale or not activated. Have you given up on that project? No, I just, every time I go to GoDaddy and I try to point that to John Vendonk's little, someone has to help John Vendonk with his website and then help me point that domain there. I'm a, I love doing what we're doing right now and I don't like administration. And I'm the pastor of a small church, which means I get stuck doing some administration that I really don't like. And so lots of stuff I should do, I don't wind up getting done and the church suffers for it. So same with estuary, the same with the discord. So, yeah, I think I put, and let me check on my screen. I think I've got the John Vendonk's, yeah. HTTPS colon backslash backslash sites.google.com slash view slash estuary hub content slash home. That's Vendonk's quick and dirty Google site directory of estuary groups. And if at some point someone wants to put together the estuary hub site, I'll turn over the domain. I don't care. I just grabbed it because someone wanted like three grand for estuary.org. It's like, that's a little above my means right now. So estuary hub, that one was, price was right on godaddy.com. So I grabbed her. So yeah, hopefully we'll get that working. Night Annie Cringewalker, I'm Lutheran, but I think I'm not sold on Sola Scriptura that many Protestants subscribe to. Christian Forum, Forum of Subscription says, you don't have to buy into necessarily that the doctrine is worded in the way, in the best way possible. So give ourselves that wiggle room. Ultimately, there is no book of books in the Bible that specify which ones are inspired and which ones are not. We rely on sources outside the scripture to define scripture. On that topic, how should we approach the books that ancient churches outside of the Roman tradition, outside of the Roman tradition have? I'm thinking about books that the St. Thomas Christians in India enjoy, such as the Acts of Thomas, or Enoch for the Ethiopian Church. Yeah, there are a bunch of those books. These churches are as ancient as Western canon, but we seem to have disinterest in exploring their traditions that have been passed down since the apostles. Sometimes you find them referenced in the Western canon, such as Jude, quoting Enoch. Yeah, that's a fun passage. And so the question I have is, how should we approach these distant Christian siblings who agree with us in the ancient creeds, triune, God, et cetera, but have different books? Well, the Belgian Confession notes of those books that the Roman Catholic Church likes putting in their Bibles, but the Protestants like excluding, but these books can be read for profit. And I think we can extend that to many other books. Shouldn't look at my phone when I'm talking, because people call me and it's like, oh yeah, that number, I have to call them. There's another little administrative detail I have to take care of that I'm avoiding. Rick can't do it all, you know? I think, love your neighbor as yourself. Part of the reason we're distant from these churches is we don't have them around us. But if they move into your neighborhood, you might develop a relationship with them. So I can say something ecumenical and magnanimous, like let's embrace all Christians and then, you know, who embrace the Trinity or the Apostles' Creed or something like that, and that's fine. But how real is that until I know an Antiochian Christian or a Ethiopian Christian or have, and this is sort of what's happening in the Americas, suddenly there's a church here that reads the Gosp, that reads the Book of Eunuch as scripture. And maybe I develop a relationship with members of the church or the priest or the, you know, someone in that church and suddenly we start talking and comparing notes and learn from each other. You know, that's been happening. So a good friend of mine, Kevin Adams up in Lincoln, you know, entered into a really wonderful relationship with the Orthodox priest there and became good friends with him. And, you know, that led to all kinds of interesting things for Kevin and for his friend. And I think that's the way it is. And I think this kind of union is best done face to face, person to person. And, because once you start getting into all this machinery of modern ecumenism, ecclesiastical fellowship, I mean, I'm not gonna say that all of that is unimportant and God bless my colleagues who work in those areas. But where the rubber meets the road is usually right here in the local neighborhood when we're doing stuff shoulder to shoulder. So that's the best I can give. Sola Scriptura sounds like a goal, but we first need a way to determine what is. Well, I think Sola Scriptura at its heart is the recognition that the church needs to continue to be refined and purified by scripture. Now, I understand, I had this conversation recently with someone, so you really don't have the Bible as we know it until third or the fourth century. We have the church before that, so the Roman Catholics say, ah, see? Scripture flows out of church. They've got a good chronological argument. But when you see how the Bible functions and you watch Roman Catholics use the Bible, I could say, look, because remember, all those reformers were Roman Catholic before they were. Look, church flows out of scripture and we recognize the church by scripture. Oh, that's a good point. So when they say Sola Scriptura, they're really trying to say, we elevate scripture above other elements of the tradition. And I think it's partly our left brain modernism that wants to get really specific on some of this stuff and specificity is good. But I think in the context of the Reformation, they have a pretty good idea of what Sola Scriptura means and especially in its historical context, they had a point that there's accretions develop over time and scripture can sort of be that scraper that cleans off the church when too much stuff has come onto it and you need it to really go through the water well. So you scrape that hole and you get some of those things off and you say, now we can make some steam to go into some new waters. There's an image. Daniel, is Pastor Paul here? This question from our local audience. Pastor Paul is here, but at this moment, he's unavailable because he's talking to Discord land and Daniel will likely be available when Pastor Paul is ready for him. So my life with Daniel. Is he in the building? He's in the building. He's in the building. He's in the building. He's in the building. He's in the building. He's in the building. Is he in the building? No? No, Rick's making hands. Rick and I need to learn sign language. So anyway, look, we've gotten through things. Good. And I've talked the whole time. Bad. Any questions from the room? Why do you keep giving our buddy Hans Neuler a pass? I mean, come on, you're gonna go at this guy. Well, how should I go at? What should I go at him about? You haven't read all my extremely long comments about all his ridiculous, like, look, that it was okay that killing illegitimate children was okay. And he apparently never changed that view after coming up with his philosophy, moral structure, ethic, whatever it is. I would say therefore, like it's a bad moral philosophy and ethic and his experiment to, because science was quote successful, to usurp philosophy and then not, and then have philosophy not be the quote, handmaiden of religion is a failure. And like, it hasn't been done since him. I don't know why people are still trying. Like maybe it just can't be done. I think that's a good argument. I think that's a great point. I don't know how many of the other comments you read in my video, but a number of people came out in the comments and basically said, eh, he's not really being fair to Kant on this illegitimate child thing. I agree with you 100% that Kant's approach to ethics and philosophy has been a complete failure. And the, you know, what sort of really grabbed my attention about the rationality rules video, especially once I started getting into Hans Georg Mueller, Mueller, I just have an American throat, is, it's so weird how in some ways, the new atheists are trying to run around in the mantle of Immanuel Kant, and they would want nothing of it because he's a, he's a Christian Prussian for Pete's sake. Not that I don't think it's Prussians, but Immanuel Kant is who he is. And so this project of, rationalism has and continues to be a failure in many ways. And I think you're right that, oh, I, you know, let's give, let's give Herr Mueller his credit and that in that video about Kant's ethics, he basically goes through and says this deontological approach, we would simply not embrace what Kant said. And then to have, I don't remember if it was Gad Saad or Michael Shermer or Peter Boghossian basically decry the loss of a deontological approach with respect to ethics. I thought, what are you guys thinking here? Because again, when I look at these celebrity atheists, I see basically people marching in with a vague Christian ethic of love. And, yeah. And attacking Christianity with its own ethic, which is like, hey, fair enough. We Christians have been doing that with each other for a long time. So game on, but at least Christians admit the source of our ethic to say that this somehow just derives from rationality. It's just laughable. So now your point is right. So, I don't know. Well, I really want to dig into some of these questions and someone in one of the questions about profelicity, someone in YouTube comments basically said, what's this profelicity BS? It's just persona. And that's a good point. We have used this word persona for a long time, but there is, there are these questions of self and identity and the secret, sacred self that is being fueled by, and this is partly my interest in Grim Grizz right now, fueled by this hall of black mirrors that we are living in. And, you know, I was thinking about the fact that for most of human history, with the exception of perhaps the reflection of a still pool, we didn't have good mirrors. Once, you know, in a sense, the development, the technological development of high quality mirrors in some ways, things really start changing then, because then we start looking at ourselves. So, what's going on? Rick, Rick put up the, what have you put up there? Rick, are you seeing if you can put up the YouTube live chat and the Rick's getting ready for next week. So, Griswold Grim is an ABC, the ABC one, two, three, four, five. No, as always Mark, you're sharp and you've got a great critique. And I always gain wisdom from your voluminous comments. But I read, I try to read as many comments as I can on my videos and almost right from the start when I started my channel, I could see that you all leaving comments in my videos were teaching me a ton on lots of different levels. And so I, you know, I've been deeply blessed by all of you. So, and so watch Mark LeFaber's channel. Mark is, I actually, I haven't sent out the message, but I wanna do a chat, a group, I wanna do a group video with Chad the alcoholic, Grimwald Griswold Grim and Mark LeFaber. I want the four of us to do a video. How's that? You guys up for that? Yeah, that sounds good. That sounds fun. Navigating patterns, Paul. You gotta say navigating patterns so that people can find me. Navigating patterns. Good golly. Because I like, yeah, the four of us, because I like the mix, because you got Mark and his sterile, head shaven, whiteboard behind him, didactic, earnest. And then you've got Gris smoking his cigarette with his cannabis shirt and the blurry camera and the crazy things coming in and the rats of NIM and this liberation army. And then you've got Chad the alcoholic with his mask and his, I thought that'd be an awesome video if the four of us made it together. So we'll schedule that out. That'll be fun. You can't leave Petcow out of this though. Cause he's really- Okay, we're going in Petcow. I don't know, I don't know Chris. Okay, Chris can come in too. Yeah. Oh, Chris's was great. Yeah, see Chris and Chad and I did a chat for Chad on Chris Petcow's channel. So that's another, I don't know. I like this foursome better, but Chad's awesome. And so is Chris and I love Gris. So I'm all in Paul. I just want to close out the last thing I said. I like this idea of mirrors. I think that part of the problem is people want to be one thing, right? They want a single identity so that they can fit in their ethics and also assign ethics to other people because they only have a single identity. It makes it very easy. And that's where this profelicity thing comes in, right? But we're not one thing. And I like this mirror idea. I'm gonna have to think more about that. I've been chewing on that in my head. And also I now have a dragon on the door. So I'm no longer just a whiteboard guy, just to warn you. Good, good. Well, so we are many. And I love Chad's video of this, of Braveheart and his consciousness congress at war. I thought that was, I loved that. And, but we desire to be one. And the church is many. I mean, this is just Peugeotian stuff. You know, the church is many. And Christ desires that we be one. And so we are many, but we desire, integrity is the, you know, the coming together. So yeah, it's an amazing world we live in. All right, so it's 12.02. Any other questions or comments from the voice chat and the Discord? So next week, next week, I'll y'all on Discord land if you wanna meet in the, where are we gonna do this, Rick? Are we gonna do it in the questions in the chat on YouTube? Is that the plan? Okay, that's the plan. You're gonna have to figure out a way to not, cause we're gonna have more people than in the chat. And so it could still, yeah, exactly. So you're gonna have to figure that out. So, you know, that's, and which, so that technical challenge, I think is exactly why YouTube in their capitalist fervor developed the super chat so things can get sticky. So, but, you know, super chats, for those of you who don't know, YouTube takes about 35 cents of every dollar of a super chat. So that's why YouTube is encouraging super chats. And we have to do what we can to get a bunch of these little channels in our community up above a thousand subs. So, because once you get above a thousand subs, certain things in YouTube get unlocked. And that gives, you know, some of these guys, some other possibilities. First comment that Griswold Grimm asked here was about, and we'll, I'll look at this after. Oh, it doesn't even, I can't even go back that far. Basically, if I enable the membership thing in YouTube, now I, you know, I've had such a internal conflict over the questions of how I participate in YouTube financially. I personally have YouTube premium because I hate ads. And the other day I was setting up something with Rick and so I just set a computer that was not, I was not logged into to just run ads, to just run a Jordan Peterson thing because we needed sound in a room of a man talking. So I thought, well, I know a guy who talks a long time on the internet, I'll put on a Jordan Peterson video. And then YouTube starts serving up these ads and it's like, oh, this is just horrible. I don't know how anybody watches YouTube. Without a premium account or an ad blocker or something. But I don't have a membership account. You know, they have like these membership things and if you join it, then you'll get like, you'll get videos that not everybody gets to have. I know, you know, people do that with Patreon and stuff too. For me, that's just counterproductive to how I use YouTube because I want my videos out there for you to see so you can comment on them so I can learn from you. So you can be, you can tell me exactly what you think and you can tell me that I'm all wet and you can correct me and you can give me new ideas and perspectives. So that's why I don't like putting things behind a paywall. And because what I get from you, well, certainly those, you know, some of you support Patreon and now with the AdSense on the channel I really appreciate, I mean, if someone asks if they really wanna support the channel, give to my local church because they pay my salary. I'm in their office. But what I really benefit from this channel is your feedback, your comments, the relationships. You know, when I watch that, whenever I watch a Randall's conversation or any of these little sub channels and I can't possibly keep up with all that content. But I just, that to me is the benefit of this whole thing that we're all thinking together and we're growing together. And it's not just thinky brainy new idea stuff becoming smarter. No, we're growing in our knowledge of each other and via each other, our knowledge of the world and in a Christian frame, our knowledge of our Lord and the body of Christ. And what's amazing is that, well, who knows how long YouTube lasts but people can jump in on different times and places and join now. So I've got another Randall's conversation coming out. I don't know if I might post it tomorrow. Another Dutchman, another Dutchman. I love that Dutchmen are watching this but a wonderful Dutchman named Renee. And so that conversation is coming out soon. And so, yeah, you all are a blessing to me. And I have, I'm sure been far more blessed by you than I've been able to bless you. So I thank you for your time and attention. I thank you for the comments and the interaction in the channel. And again, the biggest tragedy of this is I can't possibly because of the scale know all of your names and hear all your stories. Just this week, one of the guys from City Life found a poor guy out in the parking lot trying to find his way into Fortress Living Stones. And he was a listener who was driving through from Oregon to Southern California. He's a Seventh Day Adventist. He brought me a book as a gift and we just sat down and had a nice little chat for 20 minutes. And that always makes my day. So thank you all. And thank you for your time and attention. And okay, Rick, you can end transmission. Thank you.