https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=MJibDRPZLHs

 And, Paulo, why don't you tell me a little bit about yourself? Sure. My name is Paulo Munoz. I was once known as Game Diviner on Twitter and a few other places. My website still is up there, but it has nothing but a goodbye message because I left social media about three years ago to release Focus on my family. I'm married, have three children, and I've been working about 18 years as a software engineer. And one of my dreams has actually been to be a video game designer. And about the last three years, I've been actually really seriously questioning if that's actually a good goal or not on the side, because I do corporate development. I used to work for the government and done lots of software programming. And video games has always been like a dream job, but it's been very difficult, especially in the last few years, if you can imagine. There's a lot of political contention online, especially when it comes to the culture. So it's made me really seriously question if it's worth getting into. Part of it has been a reexamination of my own life and my own trajectory. And Dr. Peterson, running into him about three years ago, about 2016, has been actually very helpful. But one of the things I definitely wanted to talk to you about was I've been playing around with some of these ideas of Dr. Peterson. My background was that I used to be an atheist about 18 years ago. And unfortunately, my life came to a screeching halt in the sense that I was facing nihilism and self-destruction and a lot of self-destructive behaviors. Unfortunately, there really isn't an answer in atheism other than why not. There really isn't any reason not to stop. Some people would say, oh, you have other things to look forward to. But when you're in the midst of a personal crisis where you don't feel like you have friends or anything to really turn to, that's where I think atheism really hits that block. There's no real reason you can pull yourself out of it. Because when you don't have friends or you feel like you don't have family, you don't feel like you have anything to look forward to. And interesting enough, that's when I started really, before I jumped, basically, it was, is there any other reason to not do this? And so I started looking into religion, philosophy, and eventually became Christian, and then later on Catholic. That was about 15 years ago, 16 years ago now. And on that journey, eventually it helped mature me as a person, following that path and becoming worthy enough to be married too. That's when I keep thinking, I look at my wife and it's been like, I don't know, almost 15 years now, I keep telling her thank you almost every single day. Wow. And every day she says, what are you saying thank you for? And I said, thank you for saying yes, is what I say every day to her. Wow. I think a lot of wives would love to hear that every day. Unfortunately, I try not to talk too much about that. I know some other wives who get a little jealous about how I treat my wife. Your wife is blessed. Why say anything bad about a blessing like that? And she and my family were a godsend about three years ago, because three years ago I got really involved in the culture war. When you think you're doing God's work and you're doing the right thing, you sometimes lose sight of your family. And that's been something really interesting on my own side journey, but thankfully I was able to pull back, pull away from all those stuff that's going online, focus on them, because my first vocation, of course, is father and husband. So that's something that I think a lot of people lose in the culture war. And so running into Dr. Peterson who goes into saying, clean your room and take care of the things around you first. That really resonates, of course, especially when you're in the midst of all this, you think you're trying to take on the world, but how can you take on the world if your own little world is not even in order? And so I can't tell you how many dishes I've washed and listened to Dr. Peterson for my family and stuff like that. When you say you got into the culture war, what do you mean? That's a long story in itself. Going backward just a little bit, just so you understand a little bit of the culture context, is that about 2012 is where you can start seeing it, but there was a lot of postmodern movement into the video game sphere. I don't know if you're familiar, I think you've been seeing a lot of this in terms of Star Wars and comic books and science fiction, but it actually goes, the first real major battle in terms of the culture war goes back to video games. Because video games were actually the first place where people said, no, do not come here, no, this is not a good place to be. And it starts around 2012. Who said do not come here, it's not a good place to be? Gamers said no to the postmodernists. Okay. Basically the idea was that you had a bunch of feminists coming in, particularly one person by the name of Anita Sarkeesian came in, started saying that video games are sexist, starting with Mario. I mean Mario, if you take the story, he's an everyday plumber who tries to save a princess from a fire breathing lizard. It's the archetype of stories, and she says that this is sexist. Okay. And video gamers responded in great numbers saying, no, that's wrong. And she keeps on going by showing all these different video games of how they're sexist one way or another by using the postmodern feminist lens. Okay. And gamers were pushing back in 2012, but it really came to a head in 2014 because rather than defending video games, the games journalists started actually attacking the actual audience themselves. When it was discovered that there was a lot of ethical problems within games journalism, that they were actually not only helping certain developers under a certain ideological lens, they would only cover these people. They would only give them air time rather than hundreds of thousands of other independent developers who want air time, who want some oxygen to some of the great, great works that they're doing. They'd only show their own ideological friends and lovers and, you know, basic comrades is what they would do. And when that was discovered and uncovered and asked, like, if these were actually journalistic malpractices and to fix your ethics issues, the journalists actually responded by saying, no, you gamers should be over. You don't need this gamer identity. Video game developers should not make games for developers, and all of you guys are sexists. I mean, it was pretty intense because you had about 12 different publications, all of them related to video games, echoing the same, we call it the same rhetoric over and over. It made people actually question that there's something else going on underneath. And lo and behold, they all happened to be of a certain ideological lens. All of it progressive leftism. And so there was pushback, and eventually it actually got out of hand because the mainstream media picked up on the story that somehow all these gamers wanted to push women out of gaming. And so you had the BBC reporting on it, the Guardian reporting on it, Canadian broadcasting going on. I mean, there's a whole bunch of archives of people that this lie that all these ethics violations were really a way to push women out of gaming, which is ridiculous because, you know, I don't know if you've met any gamers, but a lot of them love women and want more women in their hobby. I mean, you have a pretty girl who gets to play video games, like every guy's already on that. So it's like, why in the world would you want these women out? So it's like it was a big lie. And what happened was that the mainstream media got involved, and rather than doing their due diligence, they started blowing up the story about women being harassed out of the video game industry. I remember that. Yeah. And truth be told, like it really, that's what started this whole idea that if news were willing to lie about video games, what else are they willing to lie about? And that was the cultural seed that really started the fake news thing. It was like two years before the fake news became a thing, but gamers were already seeding the ground with this because they were, gamers by and large were mostly anti-conservative because the conservatives were the ones who first went after video games being violent. Right. Right. So a lot of them were like, wait, the leftist media is doing this. You know, who can we trust? And that's where the whole idea of not believing the media really came into fruition was around that same area. But video gamers really won that battle because what happened was, was that in their protest against unethical journalists, they really shattered the ad revenue to a lot of these different sites, especially Gawker. The Gawker Network took a lot of hits and it was finally put under by Hulk Hogan about a year ago, a year afterwards in 2015. But also the gamers got involved by bringing these ethical issues to the society of professional journalists in 2015. So that's the story of it. Well, and it's interesting. There's a little bit of resonance between that and I can see with the, with kind of how the Jordan Peterson story played out because Peterson too, in many ways, politically kind of a moderate Canadian. Yeah. And then he, you know, obviously a few, not too many months ago, takes a lot of shots from the, from the mainstream media. Right. And, and you can kind of see, you know, the, in a lot of ways, a lot of the Jordan Peterson community, you know, where is their home, especially when they get religious, because on one hand, I talked to a lot of people who, because of Peterson, are interested in religion, but they, you know, you'll go and you'll talk to a pastor or a priest and you'll mention Jordan Peterson and a lot of, a lot of them will just kind of be like, you know, never heard of them or you don't have a home with the main line because well, Jordan Peterson is suspect in terms of, well, he's a bigot or he's a transphobe or homophobe, whatever. And over on the evangelicals, well, too much Jung, not enough, you know, not enough clear articulation of devotion to Jesus and belief. So the, it's kind of interesting where you have this, this homelessness by, in this community, because the major institution holders have made decisions that, you know, about what they will and won't permit. So very interesting. And also, I'd like to argue that a lot of people who were originally talking about Dr. Peterson, because of this anti-progressive, anti-social justice network that had formed around gamers, that's one of the things that actually saved Dr. Peterson, I would argue, later on, because normally you'd have a person who steps out of line, you know, then he gets thrown out, thrown out of his, what do you call it, out of his college and whatnot, kind of quietly. But because there was a network of people looking out for stuff like this all over the place, as soon as Dr. Peterson was picked up by any of them, it was spread around, this network of people talking to each other about it. And Dr. Peterson was actually very savvy about talking to some of these people on YouTube and going on their streams very early on. Those were, a lot of those people had gained prominence because of their pushback during this time with gamers. So that's some of the background that was going on. I was actually explaining that to David Fuller at Rebel Wisdom, just letting him know that this was underneath it. That's very interesting. I didn't know anything about that. But now that you say it, some of the people that I've gotten to know in my involvement in this, I can see those connections now a little bit. Yeah, they're all the same people. They're all the same people who have been involved in it for years. And it's a culture that kind of spontaneously came together around 2014, 2015. And really, I think that's one of the reasons if you look at some of these articles, you see sometimes it goes back to gamers are the reason why Trump's president. And the memesters, the people who love playing games with memes, for all gamers, they all tend to be the same kinds of people because they're trying to find their way. And so Dr. Peterson actually has been a really big help to a lot of people, trying to find, in a sense, meaning to what they're doing. And one of the things I want to propose was that Dr. Peterson's analogies, especially when it comes to the hierarchy and divinity, I'd like to argue that, in fact, what he's actually talking about is the Trinity and that video games are actually embedded in the Trinity itself. The reason why I argue this is that you have four different definitions of God that you run across with Peterson a lot. For one, the idea that there's something of transcendent value, that's divinity in general. What you hold is highest. And then there's another one about the hierarchy, the hierarchy and what transcends the hierarchy. And that tends to, the images that he tends to bring along with it tend to go with God the Father. And there's the Logos, the divine individual who goes through and creates order, like habitable order out of chaos or takes down tyrannies with the power of true speech. That's the Logos. And we know that as God the Son. And finally, there's one more that's sort of vague, but it's the thing that brings you to the edge of order and chaos. And what brings you to the edge of order and chaos is the Spirit. The images in the Old Testament is that the Spirit hovers above the waters and that the water is being chaos. It's like what brings you there. And the thing that brings you to the desert, to the edge, and is this right out into the desert for his trials by the Spirit. And the Hebrew people brought out to the desert as well. Yeah, by the pillar of fire. Right. And the pillar of fire during night when you can't see and the cloud to give you shelter during the day. So it's both the thing that brings you out to chaos, but also the comforter when you're out in the middle of chaos as well. But it's continually always bringing you out towards the edges of yourself. It leads you to the unknown. So within that you have, and people have always regarded this like, for instance, the early Christians were saying that these are Father, Son, and Spirit. We know that they are both three different somethings, yet one something. That one something being divine that has to be held in highest value. And what I found interesting, if you take this idea and you run it through all the different heresies throughout the early Christian history, it's interesting that you find that the Icarian heresy, for instance, where you have people saying that the Son, the Logos, is not divine like the hierarchy of the Father. You have an interesting dialogue that the people who, like people would say is a Constantine force orthodoxy in the church, which he really didn't. The orthodox position was that Father and Son were co-equal and of the same substance. They're both divine. But yet the people who held the position of the hierarchies higher turned out to be the emperors, Constantine, and all the bishops who were with that. They were the elitists who wanted the hierarchy being higher than the Logos, the divine individual. So you go through the different heresies of the time and you can unpack an interesting like meta story that both the Logos and the hierarchy are co-equal and of the same substance. And that the Spirit is also there. And further, if you take this idea of Father-Son Spirit, the Spirit, one who brings you out to chaos and comforts you when you're on that edge, is that you get an image of the heroic journey. The Son who is sent by the Father. He is not just sent once. He is eternally sent by the Father and always going out and always coming back with fruitfulness. So the idea is that if that's true, then inside the Trinity is this dynamic of heroism where the hero goes out and comes back again. That's interesting. Yeah. And that's a theory. Yeah, I often, you know, I did a couple of sermons a few weeks ago on Jonah where I took the hero's journey in Star Wars and I compared it with Jonah's journey and then we'll compare and contrast. I've never really thought of that hero's journey in terms of Jesus. Should it be the most obvious thing to think of it in terms of? But because I grew up with the Jesus story as, you know, in some ways the primary story, then the abstraction from the story, which is, you know, which is Campbell's hero's journey is, although his, of course, he has different elements to his. That's very interesting. The further I would say that, you know, the Christian life is more of living, it's not just simply watching, but living within this, living within the Trinity. Yes. That our eternal end is being in the heart of the Trinity. Yes. So we are brought into communion and the Gospel of John specifically, you know, draws that forward. We are not, you know, we don't ourselves become divine, but we are brought into communion with the Trinity. Yes. And there are deep connections there. And each of them are called persons by the Greeks. In fact, if you want to understand the word person was not developed until the Greeks did to describe the fact that these three things, these three divine things are one. Each of them is a person because you can have a relationship with each one of them. And they also have relationships within themselves. Right. So what Peterson's trying to describe is an interesting formulation of the Trinity that I've never heard of before. When I use his language, it also, he also says something about proper being and he describes proper being as in being, you know, on the edge of order and chaos as being the one who speaks the truth of seeking to transcend the hierarchy at all points. When he says proper being, what's interesting to me is that the definition of God under Aquinas is Ibsen as a subsistence, the subsistence act to be itself. God is not just simply highest being. He's the act of being itself, the act of being. He's not just a true thing. He is truth itself. He is not a good thing. He is goodness itself. Right. So that's part, so when I hear that, when I hear from Dr. Peterson, he says, you know, God is, or not, he didn't say God is being, but he says that proper being and using the word capital B for being, it's like, it sounds like he's talking about God. And I think even Dr. Harris, Sam Harris actually pulls that out one time and he says, yeah, you're using the word being with a capital B. And he's suspicious of it, I think, in one of those talks. Yeah, well, Peterson's being, you know, he clearly gets it from Heidegger. And part of, you know, part of the difficulty in terms of talking, talking about God, our relationship with God is not, the difficulty isn't really finding what God is. It's more figuring out what isn't God, because there clearly is that which isn't God. And God is, you know, he's the ground of all being, but he also is, you know, we're not pantheists. And panentheists isn't quite right either. So that when you get to this level, you know, and of course, Aquinas brings in brings in a lot of Aristotle with him, you know, that language, when you get to this level, it gets, it gets really hard to always know exactly what two people are talking about when we're using these terms. Yes. So I want to bounce these around and maybe come up and say, Paul, you're off left field, you might be going into a little bit of heresy here. And the next leap I make, and this kind of is ideas, is that with the idea that you're moving towards the edge of chaos and order, there's a phenomenon in sports, as well as video games called being in the zone. And with video games, they call it flow theory. And so one of the things I started thinking was that if that's the case, the reason why you play video game, and you end up in this flow theory place where you're on the edge of your skills, and you're, and you're, and you're caught up in this loop in the sense is that it's an icon of the Trinity. That's the reason why you're fascinated by it in sports and in games, because you, it's an icon, but the issue with icons and the issue with anything that points towards God is that it in itself can become an idol. Now, when you say it's an icon, that's a pretty complex word, too, because the various different traditions. Can you be more specific about what you mean by that? It's sort of like an image or representation of what God is, and you feel it. And that's the reason why in some ways people say that sports fans have a very religious, like, fervor to them, because it really is a religious experience. Same thing with video games is that people kind of argue that the way people reacted when they, when their identity as gamer was under attack is that it's sort of a religious idea. But what I've sort of extending was that if the experience of being on the edge of order and chaos is a fundamentally religious one, and it points towards what the spirit wants you to be, which is for you to incorporate and become the logos, you know, that's the idea. And that's what I think is happening in the experience of a sport in the video game is that you're you're meant to become the dying and rising hero who brings order chaos like I think you said to your friend that you love to play civilization. You're building, you know, order out of chaos there or you're taking down tyrannies. If you're you know, you're fighting like, you know, if you're in Halo, you're fighting alien tyrannies and what not. But that's what you're trying to you're that's what you're becoming. And the more the game resembles a dying and rising hero, the more likely you're going to identify as a gamer because gamer is sort of like a primordial logos. And the reason I say it's an icon is because it's like the thing that you're seeing. But the problem is you tend to the people tend to worship worship the image as opposed to what it represents, which is which is the problem I'm seeing that some people get addicted to games. Right. That's that's very, it's all very interesting. Not that it's hard to get me interested in things. But you know, Kind of openness, right? But it's very interesting because when you talk about you know this flow state and you connect it with the Trinity. What part of what's interesting about the Bible is that most of this stuff is spoken about in in direct terms and in embodied terms and when you when you talk about flow state it made me think of you know Eric Liddell. Eric Liddell was this early 20th century sprinter. He was a deeply devoted Christian the movie Charitifiers made about him. He you know he had this weird way of running everyone would just kind of you know have their stance for running. He always ran with his and you can see this a couple of scenes in Charitifiers do this. He ran with his head back and with this look of awe on his face and people were like why do you why do you run that way? Because he said but when I run I feel God's pleasure. And and that's I think that's very much what you're talking about in terms of this flow state. And now if you Tim Keller has followed Eric Liddell quite a bit. And and so I get a lot of the stuff about Eric Liddell from Tim Keller. Apparently Eric Liddell was you know died in a Japanese prison camp during the Second World War because they had been a missionary in China. And the stories that came out of that camp are it wasn't really a prison camp. It was just kind of a detention camp. But but the stories that came out of that camp were pretty astounding in terms of his Christian witness in the context of that suffering because in a confinement camp people can get very animalistic. You know it's about my survival. And here's this one guy in the camp that through all the deprivation actually shown more in terms of his generosity and his kindness and his love. You know when you see some of that you begin to appreciate you know what we mean by what we mean by a saint. So that's a these are these are very interesting ideas. I have another one on top of that too. OK well let me ask you a question first. Sure. Why why do you connect these ideas through Peterson. Is it through Peterson that you began to draw these connections. Well it was it was when it was when he was using those images of what the logos was what the hierarchy was that I started really started because I've been trying struggling for a long time to understand if there is a theology behind video games if there's a way in a sense to understand it in the eyes of like what what God what God is through it. Because there are a lot of people who basically especially Christians especially you say oh yeah I was thinking a video game about God and add Noah and make it Mario and he's jumping around and stuff like that. And I'm like it's really it's really cheesy almost blasphemous. And like I don't know if you heard about this one there was a left behind video game that they made. And like what you're doing is like you're actually like you're giving up propaganda path pamphlets of people to convert them and they don't convert you can actually you can actually shoot them and I'm like how's this games helping at all. And like almost every single I mean one of the reasons I also look at it is that the social justice people who have come in and said no no we're going to take video games and make it more woke and more diverse. They do the exact same thing that the Christians were attempting to do like a decade earlier we're trying to make video games more Christian. It's like you don't love and respect the medium you just use it as a means of propaganda and I'm like there's got to be something deeper to this. And not only that but I also I also like just because for myself like I've been a gamer for years and I see it I see it in my kids and how you know especially when Dr Peterson talks about how games are like a pre-nation form of ethics. And I see how my kids play games and I when I started looking at through that lens and I realize you know people people are yearning what people are doing all the time they're playing video games they're yearning for a life where they're actually where they feel like they are making an impact that they're saving the world that people want to do that. But you know the nascent like messages that in order to save the world you got to start by cleaning out the rats in the basement before you start fighting the dragon you know you got to clean out that and start small and you know that's this is all this comes together in one place and I'm like you know this is it's more than just simply that you make a video game it's a Christian message. It's like no a video game by its structure is the heroic journey and it's also one of the reasons I've seen a lot of the social justice press and video games say things like fun is problematic. Well the reason why fun is problematic is because they see that actually feeds into this idea of the logos and spirit. So they try to remove any sense of fun any of this sense of flow from video games and that's what I'm seeing actually in terms of like the culture war they're actually trying to remove what makes games moving both in art and art form. And one of the things I found one of the ideas I want to present you like the idea on top of that is in order to achieve the flow state in order to achieve this idea of like of actual achievement this something I was looking through through another person Dr. Jane McGonigal she's a game designer who's been talking about how to use a lot of these games and games and game theory in real life. She was dealing with a concussion and with her concussion she had a hard time concentrating she had a hard time doing anything. So she actually made a game out of her suffering in a sense to understand how to beat it and the game was basically this is like first of all you take a challenge mentality then you add rules you have a goal and you have a goal. And you have feedback systems that help help you understand that like okay so it's basically Dr. Peterson was saying this 12 rules it's like I took this older work of her talking about game theory and looked at Dr. Pearson's 12 rules and they've mapped one to one. The idea is that you need a goal in life you need to find goals small goals big goals big quests and she called them quests and she called them power ups that help you achieve those things and she called them battles that you bite like her in her it was the concussion she was fighting. So she would have to battle the concussion battle the noise and there were small battles and big battles and she set it up like a game. And then I was thinking to myself like well what does God do with us in terms of the Old Testament like he he gives people a goal the promised land he gives them the rules of 10 commandments he gives them a life to live out and out in the edge of and the edge of nowhere which is the desert. You know it's like the whole structure of the of the Exodus story is in a sense a not to trivialize it but it's a game it's a challenge. And if you but the first thing in order to what Jim McGonigal on both Jim McGonigal says what Dr. Peterson says is the first thing you got to do is accept it as a challenge. You can't run away from it you have to accept it as a challenge it's you that it changes around being a victim to being a conqueror. And that's one of the first things that both that both game design as well as as well as Dr. Peterson's work said it's like you have to accept the challenge and then you have to accept rules which is actually the most interesting thing every game everything you do for fun always has a rule set. That's right. Well, a couple of couple of thoughts came to me. Number one, you know, gamification. A lot of people have been looking at gamification as a way in a sense to hack ourselves. We have there's a there's a task there's a task we need to do we do this with small children. I remember when my wife was trying to get we have five children and so there's no way you know two adults can keep up with with all five in terms of things so we turn housekeeping cleaning their room into a game and we found especially with some of our kids, you know, gamifying a number of chores, you know, suddenly performance improved dramatically. And so there's a lot of, you know, there's a lot of gamification going on in terms of so one of my sons has that Robin Hood app for you know and so you've got the gamification of the stock market. And so gamification. On one hand gamification is a really clever way. Well, it's based on a recognition of a lot of this inbuilt stuff that Peterson has obviously woken us up to a lot of this inbuilt stuff that that archetypes, you know, that are very deeply connected with archetypes. And so if we have a particular goal, if we can gamify the things that we know we need to pursue that we know need we need to accomplish in pursuit of that goal. We're much more successful in achieving those goals. That's clearly there. Here's, here's a deep irony about Here's a here's a deep irony about I think games and this, let's say the archetypal stories that we see in Star Wars Tolkien so on and so forth, even in the Bible, and then Jesus. At the beginning of the Gospel of Mark, Mark is as efficiently strewn with miracles as any of the Gospels. Jesus is healing people in order to defeat Satan. Okay, that's one of the, that's one of the big themes of the Gospel of Mark. Okay, that's one of the, that's one of the big themes of the Gospel of Mark. Now, If you're playing Call of Duty, you know, a lot of first person shooters. The, the, here are the questions. So we've got we know successful video games are successful because they, they deeply connect with us in very prime and very, I don't want to use primitive and very, and they, they, they grab our limbic system, I'll say it that way. Incarnational. Well, yeah, they, you know, and television shows, art does this well, you know, I also enjoy watching The Walking Dead, and my wife can't stand it. So I have to watch it alone. But, you know, why, you know, and then, and then, you know, why would a Christian pastor like The Walking Dead? Well, it's apocalyptic. So you have the Book of Revelation and the Book of Revelation could be gamified quite well. The irony in a lot of this is that the Jesus, Jesus followers don't win by gunning down their adversaries. Jesus followers win by forgiving adversaries. Now, the difficult thing is that there's so much in terms of Christian discipleship that is, that pushes against the limbic system. Right. You know, you look at the Seven Deadly Sins, a very, a very anti limbic list, you know, gluttony, lust, avarice, pride. I mean, we are, if you look at basically how we're wired, you just kind of invert that and you have the Seven Deadly Sins. They don't do any of those things like, oh, fasting, you know, you can hardly imagine a video game that this is a video game about fasting. Yeah, that doesn't work. Doesn't work. That's where I think a lot of video games are missing. It gets to the limit of the icon because at some point you can't just simply say, oh yeah, I'm going to make a game about this. No, it's no longer a game. It's a relationship. So you can't do it unless, like, I act as if the resurrection is real. You can't, you can't, you can't give up your life for a game, but you can give up your life for a person who's real, who you know is there. So that's where the relation, that's where the icon fades away and it becomes, the icon is more like this is the idea. And you can, you see how it brings happiness on an earthly sense. But we all know that there's something greater than it and that behind that is a person. And this is not a, it's not just a simulation. It's not a trivialization. That's where it becomes, that's where it becomes faith. Right. Well, I didn't say, I didn't say all of that in order to criticize video games. No, I see. They're very natural. They're very natural to us. And the art form, I think, is in its infancy. Right. And, and when I say it's in its infancy, I don't mean that just in terms of technology, but I think it in terms of us understanding what the art form is for. Yes. And, you know, this, you know, given, given where immersive realities, virtual reality, enhanced reality, given where all of this is going, in a sense, we're going to have a wisdom power arms race like we have with weaponry, where, you know, video games are going to be able to indulge our Olympic system to degrees, you know, not imagined when I first started playing SimCity on my, you know, my Intel 286 back in the day. But, but I think there's, there's, I think it's a, I think it's an area of huge potential. You know, even the particular games I like to play, which are God games, you know, Civilization, SimCity, things like this. That says something, and it says something about us and, and I think it's quite likely that at this point, we probably are at the level of someone in a cave with some colored charcoal, beginning to make sketches on the wall and the firelight. And that's the, that's the level we're at right now in terms of this, not just in terms of the technology, but in terms of, well, what is this medium for? We, it's, it's, it's at hand, that's very Heideggerian, it's at hand for us to use these games to indulge our limbic system. Because what probably we haven't, we've only begun to consider is the redemption of this medium. Because if you think about, okay, what's the redemption, what is redemptive use of, of, of sculpture or painting or music look like? We've had those mediums for a, we have had that media for a very long time and, you know, the conversation is still very much emerging. And now this media, this medium is so, so new. And, and your comments about flow state, I think are, are really, are really helpful and, and right in that we begin to touch on something we're made for. And a lot of, there's a lot of existential fear in terms of game developers, where they fear that what they're making are giant time wasters. Yeah. Yeah. And that's what then a lot of them, that's what a lot of them feel. But if you, if you take a look at the medium and see what are these people, what are they practicing? I mean, people will say, I hate busy work, but they'll spend hours and hours a day, you know, sorting candy and sorting jewels on their, on their phone. It's like, you know, why do you do that? Well, because there is something inherent in us that likes to order things. And if you see that underneath and it's, it's not, it's not so much of a time waster as it is a kind of temporary relief that you, that you can participate in the ordering of the universe, even in a virtual way, it's satisfying to us. And that's what games represent is like, now that's, that's a small part. You're just ordering the universe in a very small way in those, those mobile games. Then you get to the, you're willing to die and rise again over and over again to save the universe, to save the princess, to save the kingdom. And that's something that is in the higher order of video games that you see. And then for yourself, like you order a primitive civilization and bring it up into its greatness and heights. And that's, that's us inside yearning for the divine, for us to manifest this into the world. And for a brief moment in time, we can manifest this in the small virtual space. And this is what our destiny is. That's what I feel. That's what we see in the small virtual space, our eternal destiny in God living in the Trinity. Now the question is, how do you move from there into the real world? And that's where you get into Dr. Peterson's work and all these other people who are greater in a sense that they make the argument that yes, you can move from there to here. This is how you do it. You start small, start humble. You start with doing little things out of doing, it's not about doing great things, but little things with great love, which is St. Teresa the little flower. You start with small things and people are resonating with that message about cleaning, cleaning your room. And that's pretty much it. I'm just saying like also that the video games you play are saying the exact same thing in a different way. It's as you said, it's more limbic, it's more embodied. It's more using our flow state inside. So I mean, I'd argue that, you know, sports sports do the same kind of thing. We practice tribalism in a healthy way. Hopefully it's a healthy way. You know, you, you have your colors in one side and the colors on the other side and you're seeing them play, play the game. And there's drama because there's rules. There's drama because there are people who are fighting against each other temporarily. But it's all in the spirit of the game and you find the greater humanity in that because you're practicing in a sense what you were made for, which is achieving a goal, aiming at a goal, cheering people on because they hit their goals and they're doing it within a rule set. So another thing again for your own life, you need a rule set. You need a purpose you need and you need and you need to have honest feedback. And that's all built into the structure of reality, which is which resonates within the Trinity because of course all of reality resonates from what God is who is creator who creates all the everything, all the things. So that's that's part of what I'm arguing. And I'm just also I'm worried that I might be stepping off into heterodoxy. But I mean, like you said, like, you know, you have some evangelicals who hate you and everything. But the more I look at it, I'm like, if this sounds orthodox to me, at least that's what I thought. Well, you know, any here, almost all heresies are created on the frontier. I hope I'm not. If you Alastair McGrath has a terrific little book entitled heresy and and the takeaway of that book is that it's really worth a worthwhile book reading. You learn some really nice early church history. But it also illustrates that the in some strange ways, we don't we don't discover the Aryan heresy until we begin to we don't discover the Trinity, apart from first stumbling into the Aryan heresy. And so I think your concern about orthodoxy is well founded. But you're probably not going to know your heretic until you do something significant and 100 or 200 years later, someone declares you as such. And and so the you know, I'm not I'm not in any way trying to discourage you from looking in the past and trying to orient ourselves with respect to, you know, with respect to the church's teaching to you know, that's that's the path. But because that if you if you're making a road, the road behind you orients hopefully for the road ahead. So your your motivations are good. But it's, you know, I guess what, you know, what I'm on what I'm thinking in terms of in terms of this is if you can imagine a computer game that enhances our capacity to endure suffering, you might in fact create the most Christian computer game I can think of right now. Actually, I would argue that there's actually the studies that people who play video games, in terms of like they're dealing with a trauma, it actually does better than opiates in terms of relieving pain. And there are some video games out there, for instance, one of them, I don't know if you know, it's called Dark Souls. It's one of the most difficult video games made at the time. And what happens is that people who have either PTSD or depression when they play the game and they triumph over it, because it's a very difficult game, the game is not welcoming at all. It tells you to turn around. It tells you that your that your efforts are fruitless, but you still go and beat it. The game the game is unforgiving. But when you beat it, a lot of people say that the feeling that they went through, especially when they're pushing through depression is very similar to the feeling that you get through the game. It kind of embodies it in the game structure itself. A lot of people who have pain, like for instance, children, this is something I know if you know about, it's called Child's Play, I believe his name is the what he called charity, is that they give video games to children who are dealing with like severe diseases, especially cancer. And they allow them to play video games and give them lots of video games to play with, because it helps deal with the pain. That makes sense. Yeah, and it's actually better than a lot of opiates is what they say. So it does help us deal with suffering to know that there we are achieving some sort of goal. If you shrink it down to a microcosm. But you know, in terms of the Christian story, like we know, and if you believe that no matter what you're suffering, it does mean something, but it does help to have a visual, which is what the game helps. So but at the same time, like, you know, we do know that no matter what we suffer in this life, it is meaningful, it will have meaning into eternity. And that's where you diverge in a sense that you transcend, that's it, you transcend what the game is telling you. And you know that this is reality itself. And that I would argue is that is the greatest thing is that as a Christian, you would know that everything you do in that game is a reflection of what reality really is. If you just apply it the right way and you give it to God. And that's what I would say definitely in terms of as an Orthodox Christian to say that that's what you need to do. And as a game designer, you have you have a great vocation in the sense that you're creating this opportunity for other people to participate in this mystery. Well, it's a I mean, game design is an astounding palette. Yes. You know, when you think as compared to many of the other media we've had for art game design is an because it integrates time. It's an astounding astounding integrates story. It's an astounding palette. And and I think I think it's it's going to require Christians to think deeply but also explore and ask a lot of the questions you're asking. Yeah, I think it's gonna be more than just simply if you know, paint Jesus into the picture. No, it's gonna be a little more than that. I'll put no in there or something like that. You know, Christian movies are so often. Yeah, because it's a it's a failure to it's a failure to under it's a failure to deeply understand and then embody. You know, one of the most one of the one of the most interesting Christian movies is Willy Wonka and the Chocolate Factory. You know, the gene. I don't know if I saw the new one, the gene Wilder one. Oh, that classic one. Yeah, it's a morality tale. It's you know, it's it's it's a pilgrim's progress in many ways. And I've, you know, I was for a while I was using a lot of movies of sermon illustrations about 18 years ago, 17 years ago. And I use that movie a lot because there's there's just so much in it. And I you know, that's it's going to be it's going to be fascinating to see where how video games develop. And I think there's just like with any powerful medium. The more power it has, the more temptation it has, the more power that swings both ways. And that's part of the criticism. You know, I do see, you know, sometimes if I have episodal fan, I have episodal fascinations with civilization, I'll play it, you know, for a couple of weeks, I'll play it a lot. And then I'll step back and ask myself, could it could that time have been better spent investing in a book rather than creating these, you know, little civilizations that, you know, I get to a point and I wipe them out and I start a new one. And then I think about stewardship in terms of, okay, I'm going to start a new one. And I think about the fact that I'm going to start a new one. And then I think about stewardship in terms of, okay, what, what is the stewardship of time that I have for the sake of, you know, other for the sake of God's world now, virtual worlds are part of God's world. So, we're just beginning to think about these things. And so I really appreciate your interest and devotion to thinking this through. I don't, I'm sure there are Christians out there working on it, but I don't know anyone else. I've asked questions and I've had a hard time finding anyone who's actually doing that kind of thing. And if anyone, anyone you know would actually be willing to like talk more about in terms of game design or whatnot, that's something I've been exploring for a very long time. But for myself, the only games I'm making are for my kids have not been able to publish anything and I will publish a small game, $500 off of it. Nothing really big or anything like that. But it's mostly just for myself as an artistic expression, but mostly that's what I've been thinking about was how it, how it relates to God and what it can do to help dignify the human person and what it's my calling in that, if not just something to say it and maybe possibly someone will help someone down the line. Well, all of these projects are way bigger than any of our individual lives. We're making cathedrals, right? Yeah, that's exactly right. And, and, you know, I don't know how many, I don't know how long it will take for, you know, there are, you know, there are already potential masterpiece video games that are emerging, I'm sure. Oh yes, there are. And, and no, I think Cathedral is the right image. But we, we, you know, we've, we've simply, we've, we've simply not done, we've simply not done any real work on it. And maybe, you know, maybe via this someone will see it and, you know, put some stuff in the comments section, but it's a, And I think Peterson is probably a very helpful conversation partner in this just because, you know, I wouldn't be spending this time with him if I didn't think he was a very important thinker. And he's been an incredibly helpful thinker to me, just opening up new vistas of things I hadn't thought about. And so for someone like me who's high in openness, I mean, this is, it gets me into a flow state, baby. And that's what, you know, that's what happens. Well, if you have any more like, you know, places or books that you run into, you know, feel free to shoot me an email. I'd love to know if there's any place that you might run into with this pattern, especially in terms of the Trinity and anything like that. I'd love to learn more. Have you done any talking, you know, You know, Calvin College, which is my alma mater, does a lot of, because of its Kiperian past, does a lot of thinking about, you know, applied Christianity. And I don't know if they've done any thinking on this, but I would be surprised if there weren't a group of people, of Christians out there asking similar questions to what you're asking. Right. If I could find, if I could find, if I could find, if I could find, if I could find, if I could find, if I could find, if I could find, if I could find, if I could find, if I could find, if I could find, if I could find, if I could find, if I could find, if I could find, if I could find, if I could find, if I could find, if I could find, if I could find, if I could find, if I could find, if I could find, if I could find, if I could find, if I could find, if I could find, if I could find, if I could find, if I could find, if I could find, if I could find, if I could find, if I could find, if I could find, if I could find, if I could find, if I could find, if I could find, if I could find, if I could find, if I could find, if I could find, if I could find, if I could find, if I could find, if I could find, if I could find, if I could find, if I could find, if I could find, if I could find, if I could find, if I could find, if I could find, if I could find, if I could find, if I could find, if I could find, if I could find, if I could find, if I could find, if I could find, if I could find, if I could find, if I could find, if I could find, if I could find, if I could find, if I could find, if I could find, if I could find, if I could find, if I could find, if I could find, if I could find, if I could find, if I could find, if I could find, if I could find, if I could find, if I could find, if I could find, if I could find, if I could find, if I could find, if I could find, if I could find, if I could find, if I could find, if I could find, if I could find, if I could find, if I could find, if I could find, if I could find, if I could find, if I could find, if I could find, if I could find, if I could find, if I could find, if I could find, if I could find, if I could find, if I could find, if I could find, if I could find, if I could find, if I could find, if I could find, if I could find, if I could find, if I could find, if I could find, if I could find, if I could find, if I could find, if I could find, if I could find, if I could find, if I could find, if I could find, if I could find, if I could find, if I could find, if I could find, if I could find, if I could find, if I could find, if I could find, if I could it'll explode bigger than it ever has before because it goes back to the heart of who God is. Yeah. Well, yeah, I'll, you know, we're gonna, let's post this and see what we can find. You can't be the only one asking this question. I guess there's always got to be a first, but given- Hopefully it helps somebody. I hope it does. Yeah, but you're asking good questions and I wish I was a more helpful conversation partner for you, but you're asking good questions and I want to encourage you and I would send some emails out to some people who are teaching. Actually, I know I do have a friend. He teaches at, I think he teaches at Central Michigan. His name is Martin Lear. He was a classmate of mine in all through grade school and he teaches computer game design and he's a Christian. He's a member of the Christian Deformed Church and he's a friend of mine. So I am going to send this video to Martin and I'm going to put you in touch with Martin and he's- Thank you. No, because he will be on this and he might know- This is important. This is good. I have to sign off because I've got conversation- Full schedules. This afternoon, but- Thank you so much. I sure appreciate this conversation and if it's okay with you, let's plan on posting it. Definitely. I'm going to also send this to my friend, Martin, and we'll see if we can, and I'll send an email with you and him in it and we'll see if we can get a little conversation going. Thank you so much, Paul, and good luck with everything you're doing and God bless you. Well, thank you. Bye-bye. Bye-bye.