https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=Kw_WqQOfHCQ

 All right. Good morning. Good morning, internet. Good morning, Bridges of Mean Discord server. Good morning, anybody who's streaming and watching. Today is April 29, and we are here for the weekly Bridges of Meaning question and answer. And I can see that the questions just keep getting harder. I don't know how long we can do this until I just have to throw up my hands and say, I can't answer questions like these. These are just too hard. So Michael asks, you mentioned how in Jonathan Pujo's Enoch video, he describes Cain's act of building a city as a type of garment of skin, which is a barrier between man and God. Could we therefore consider the traditions and trappings of the Orthodox and Catholic churches as garments of skin, creating barriers to believers coming boldly to the throne of grace, which is available to all believers through faith alone in Christ Jesus? So we take Jonathan Pujo and we hit him with a favorite saying that Protestants use. The garments of skin, so I've been listening to a lot of Pujo lately again because he's put out a lot of videos and I have a video almost ready to go out, except I forgot to hit the record button for the last 15 minutes, so I have to redo it this afternoon. We did a conversation anyway. This garments of skin thing, I've heard Pujo talk about that for a while and you can hear it and you can sort of apply it, but the implications of it tend to sink deeper and deeper and so when I realized that, okay, so of course there's the garments of skin that God gives Adam and Eve after their exile from the garden and then if you listen to this video that I probably will release it Monday, let me see. There's a site called YouTube, I don't know if any of you ever heard of it and you can watch videos on it. Oh no, not my videos, we want history. Oh, fine, fine, fine, fine, fine. Yeah, this video right here. Oops, okay, an honest conversation with Jonathan Pujo on First Things Foundation and this was a great conversation that Pujo did and so I actually have a commentary for the full thing that I'm gonna release probably Monday and he talks with, what's the guy's name? It's a very interesting guy. He seems to major in overseas mission work but Pujo gets into the garments of skin thing and all of these layers of technology. Technology with Paul Kingsnorth is brewing up to be a big deal obviously in terms of how Christians should stand with respect to technology. That conversation is brewing and basically there's two schools, one of limitation that's sort of the Paul Kingsnorth school and Paul Kingsnorth is reacting to the using technology to solve the problems of technology. That's sort of the thinking of a machine and the life of the machine. So garments of skin then are sort of the human beings continue to add to these layers of garments of skin and that then becomes the city. And Pujo makes a very interesting observation that in the book of Revelation, God, it's sort of like, he doesn't say this exactly but this is how I'm understanding it. It's sort of like what happens in first Samuel eight when with the judges, you sort of have all of the institutions wrapped up into one, into the judges or sort of chieftains and Israel comes because Samuel's sons are corrupt and says, we want to have a king just like all the other nations. And Samuel doesn't like the idea and the Lord says to him, you know, give him a king. It's not really you that they're, oh, okay. It's not really you that they're rebelling against, it's me. And so all along the way, there's sort of a an adoption of garments of skin that progresses with the storytelling. And in that conversation that Pujo does with let's get named John Hess or something like that, they, it's very interesting because John Hess asks if the enlightenment is a second fall which is a really interesting question. And Pujo sort of makes a very perennialist move in saying in Genesis, there are all these falls. You can understand the fall with Adam and Eve in the garden. You can understand another fall with Cain and Abel. You can understand another fall with the rise in technology that leads to violence. You can understand another fall. It doesn't go this far, but I think Pujo was right. You can understand another fall when Noah gets off the, gets off the ark and plants a vineyard and gets drunk and his son laughs at him. And so Pujo is getting at this dynamic which has actually been in systematic theology about, so there's original sin and there's original guilt. And so there's been a long conversation in systematic theology about the existence of original guilt. And I remember this conversation from my seminary days, one of the best professors I've ever had, Neil Plantinga, that he's the little brother of Alvin Plantinga. He was my systematics professor at Calvin Seminary. He was a terrific professor. If you can ever hear Neil Plantinga speak, do it because he's an amazing lecturer. He's an amazing writer. But anyway, you have all these questions about sort of the perennial, sort of the perennial versus the kairos. This tension is always there. And so is there one fall or do we just keep falling and keep stumbling? And the garments of skin understood that way are a gracious accommodation of God built into his creation for our welfare, despite and to sort of slow us down from the slippery slope of our corruption and destruction, which we normally put ourselves on. And now if you think symbolically when you say, well, the garments of skin sort of are a barrier between man and God, that's a very God number one-ish statement because if you think even just about clothing or your winter coat, what is the God your winter coat is a barrier between? It's a barrier between you and the God of 30 degrees or the God of freezing temperatures, let's say, where your skin would freeze and you would get frostbite. And so God in that sense is a frozen wind and the barrier of skin is your winter coat. And if you sort of play this out symbolically, you can see how the city and the city wall all become these barriers of skin. Now, I don't know if I wanna take the Protestant move that you made because you can either understand Jesus as cutting through those, which I don't think is the right way, but rather Jesus as a bridge, Jesus as the way to. So if you think the way Peugeot was thinking and you look at the Old Testament stories, let's say of the tabernacle and the desert, sometimes we think of the tabernacle or the temple as divine housing, which it is. It's also in some ways divine containment and the entire sacrificial system, the entire ritual system of clean, unclean, pure, holy and common, all of this separation is supposed to enable a holy God who is a consuming fire living in the midst of an unholy people. And that's one way to understand the entire Mosaic code. So you can even understand the entire Mosaic code as in this sense, sort of a garment of skin, because that separation enables a certain kind of contact. So you can't go out into the cold of winter without your winter coat. So the garment of skin enables, on one hand it provides separation, but it also provides contact. And that's the weird way in which sort of symbolic language works. And Christ in many ways is a bridge then. He is, the incarnation is a bridge between humanity and the divine. And all of these kinds of symbolism sort of work this way, where a garment of skin both separates and a garment of skin enables connection. The tabernacle does that too. The tabernacle both creates separation. You have the Holy of Holies, you have the Holy Place, and you have the perimeter, you have the courtyard, which has the altar, and you have a fence around that. So you have all these fences. And in the temple then you have all these courtyards and all these walls. And so these walls, ironically, both create separation and enable proximity. Without the walls, you just have separation, no proximity. Because when something that is unholy or unclean comes in contact with a holy God, because God is God, what that means for the unclean is destruction. And so when you look at the Mosaic Law through this lens, you can understand purifying, cleansing, cleansing with water, cleansing with fire. Well, why with water and with fire? Water and fire are both destructive elements. But again, just like there's always this dual nature to it, they're also enabling elements. Water is necessary for life, but water can drown you. Fire can burn you, but fire can keep you alive in a cold place. And so technology all has sort of this dual mechanism. And Christ is in that way, the perfect, Protestants always talk about Christ as the mediator. And part of what the spirit of the Protestant Reformation was that there was so much, there's so much crust that developed on all of the garments of skin. You have this iconoclastic destruction, which then simplifies. And so you're not going to go to God through all of these saints, you're going to go to God through the one mediator and the Protestants majored in that. In some ways, you can understand the transition that Constantine facilitated. And if you listen to Tom Holland talk about the fact that in late antiquity, there were all these would be emperors trying out one God to rule them all. And then the one that sticks is the God of the Christians. And that then sets up this whole other thing. And in a way, it sets up a cycle that you see in all sorts of things in the world. Rick and I were talking the other day about corporations, how your corporation starts and it's just a few people and your mission is clear and you just have a few people and then you're successful and it grows and grows and grows and grows and gets older and older and older and older. And very quickly, it's just one big fat garment of skin. And all it is doing is separating and it's not facilitating proximity. So then you sort of have a collapse back into simplicity and the whole thing sort of starts again. And you can see these patterns and these cycles in all sorts of areas of the world. So I would understand the Protestant move of getting rid of levels of mediation and just having one mediation in Christ as part of this entire cycle. But then as Peugeot and Richard Rowland note in their universal history, when Richard Rowland sort of tells his story as a reformed Baptist visiting a reformed Baptist seminary, they have these statues of former professors and you go inside and they have former professors' pictures on the walls and their names and in the library, there's a special section of the books of these former professors. And then there have donors and donor plaques who gave to facilitate the seminary on the walls and Richard Rowland says, well, these are the icons. And he has a real point. So what happens in time is these natural processes sort of continue to go and you have the multiplication of garments of skin to the point that they no longer function in the way the garment of skin needs to function. Part of what, what'd you get with these question and answers are the drips and drabs of videos that I haven't been able to do and I just have two hours to get them out. In the comment section for my video on Curtis Yarvin, a couple of people pointed me to the gray mirror substack postings where he talks about circling, which is Guy Sengstock has been on my channel. He's a friend of John Vervecky and they've had quite a few conversations. And what was really interesting about Yarvin's, I only read the first one on the circling, but one of the points that Yarvin made, which was an excellent one was, circling is sort of a way, he said, basically, it's like a platonic orgy. So what do you mean by that? It's intimacy without the sex. And well, that sounds good. According to Mark, we have an intimacy crisis. And so if we have a lack of intimacy, a intimacy deficit in the world and in our lives, surely more intimacy is what is required. And to a degree, that's true. But part of when I learned about circling, I had some of the same sort of responses as I read in Yarvin in that, how much intimacy is best for me? How intimate, with how many people can I or should I be intimate, whether or not sex is involved? Sex is obviously a heightened form of intimacy and nakedness and sexuality is in many ways, obviously, there's no garment of skin there. There's no garment at all there. And so it's flesh on flesh to one flesh, et cetera, et cetera. And even if it's a platonic orgy, am I built for intimacy with groups of people? Now, intimacy comes in layers and there are hierarchies within intimacy and that's exactly the way it should be. You'll have friends that you are very close to and friends that you are not as close to, friends that you share a lot of things with, friends that you share a few things with, you have family members, you have spouses, you have all of your, you have children, you have parents, you have all these different levels, so it's a very complex economy. But the garments of skin are actually necessary in this post-lapsarian, that means after the fall, post-lapsarian context for us. And these garments of skin therefore facilitate the goal of existence, which is God himself. So what we have through time and through context and through history is a lot of moving in and out of these things, a lot of growth, expansion, collapse, and all of this hopefully not just in a vicious circle, but maybe in a virtuous cycle towards the consummation of all things. So one might say in fairness to Orthodox or Catholics that they have communion with God through all sorts of, I gotta be really careful here, because I am a Protestant, with all sorts of garments of skin. So in some ways, the church facilitates in a way similar to a garment of skin, because it, here's one way to think about it. Why couldn't anybody just stroll into the Holy of Holies? Why, well it's the same reason why you don't throw yourself on an altar. If you throw yourself on an altar, you become a whole burnt offering, because you can't see God, you can't stand God's presence. And so what the church does, what the temple does, is facilitate the meeting between us and God. And that involves ritual, it involves separation, it involves coming closer and moving apart. The whole liturgy of a worship service, even in a Protestant church, and even in a fairly low church tradition, like the Christian Reformed Church, Christian Reformed worship services used to begin, God is in his holy temple, let all the earth keep silent. Now, theologically for Protestants, the building itself is not, the communion of the saints, the ecclesia, is the church. It's the living stones come together to be the temple. Now, what happens in Protestants is that you have all sorts of ambiguity and denial, and not tension with respect to things like the building and the pews. With Orthodox and Catholics, they have less ambiguity, they just say, yes, the building is holy, the grounds are holy, and that's why we bury saints in consecrated ground, et cetera, et cetera. So the long conversation between Protestants and non-Protestants is all about garments of skin in many ways, and figuring all of that out theologically. I don't know if that helps answer your question, but I think that's, as I grow in my understanding of Peugeot's work, and as I integrate it into my understanding that has come through Protestant theology, that's how I'm understanding it. I don't know if anybody in the comments section wants to say something about that. I need to take a drink of water. I'm sorry. Jacob is server muted and Father Hugh is server muted. I know, I'm sure that they got server muted because they had noisy mics, but at some point, someone might want to take off the server mute, because I can't imagine me talking about this and not having Jacob say something. I just think Rick is, Rick or whoever server muted Jacob is an anti-Semite, and you're just trying to keep Jacob quiet. I think that's exactly what's happening there. Jacob is now unleashed. I missed what you said. Can you start over? Chad, Chad. I didn't realize I was on, I was on push this out. I was on voice activation. I'm sorry about that. And your view is just so incredibly different from anything I remotely could relate to. It's just interesting. That's fascinating. Well, maybe when I come on your channel, we can, I'm sure you've got, I'm sure you've got an agenda for when I come on your channel. So when we do our live stream. My agenda is to label it Calvinist destroyed with facts and logic. And just to have a chat. And just like all my other destroyed with facts and logic ones. Yeah, nobody gets destroyed by facts or logic. All right. Okay. I've had my drink now on to Chad, the alcoholic has a poem for us. Was the American philosopher jewel, the singer songwriter, correct? When she said, we pray to as many different gods as there are flowers, but we call religion our friend. We're so worried about saving our souls, afraid that God will take his toll that we forget to begin. That's, that's, there's a lot of truth to that. Part of the, part of the, the comment on the Peugeot video that I didn't record after rerecorded this afternoon is the observation made by a friend of mine. So at Living Stones, we're so low church and we're so embedded and the congregation is so set. And in its, in its certain way that we haven't adopted a lot of the other changes that most of our church plants have. Weekly communion and much more liturgy that are quite popular now in the, in, in the minds of those, those young yuppie millennials these days. But one of the, one of the things one of my, one of the church planters said to me was, it says, yeah, all these, everyone who has left my church because they said they wanted to become Orthodox doesn't go to church. And I thought, I completely believe that. Cause Peugeot and that other guy were talking about how, you know, you got all these people like, oh, I watched Jonathan Peugeot all the time and I love Jonathan Peugeot and I'm a Patreon for Jonathan Peugeot and Jonathan Peugeot says, go to church and they never go to church. And that's, that's part of the reason, you know, we have estuary is because, well, maybe there's, there are reasons they're not going to church. They're not ready to go to church perhaps. And you don't just, you don't just stroll into the Holy of Holies, even in churches, even in Protestant churches, God, God has to call you. He has to prepare you. He has to, he has to make, he has a process to make you his own, but you have your part too. So anyway, Eric Younger, hey Paul, what's your opinion of the sects of Christianity, sects of Christianity like Jehovah's Witnesses? They are a very young religion compared to other sects but Witnesses teach a revival Aryan version of Christianity that denies the Trinity and the existence of the human soul spirit. They use old arguments and selective translations that have been disproven by larger Christian communities. They use techniques of control and manipulation that border on cult like brainwashing. So their followers do not question their dogma and never seek out counter arguments or else they face extreme forms of excommunication. They call it disfellowshipping. Cults like the Jehovah's Witnesses and others, Mormon Scientology have been flooding the spiritual landscape with their own publications because the industrial revolution made printing much cheaper and effective. Now the digital age is here and we are more and more techniques to manipulate and control people. I can only see these kinds of cults getting more powerful since the ability to isolate and manipulate a person has become standard practice in the social media age. It's sort of got the duality of these garments of skin because the social media tools on one hand both facilitate the kinds of things you're talking about and give options to counter it. So Jehovah's Witnesses and the LDS, Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, both grew out of this area of upstate New York that was called the Burned Over District. The Great Awakenings went through there and was called Burned Over because everybody had been just touched with the fire of God and some of them got a little charred. A lot of the teachings that you find from the Jehovah's Witnesses and the LDS Church, the Mormon Church, were sort of common little peculiar religious ideas and practices in that region that got popularized by some pretty charismatic people and they have been able to use all of the tools of religion to create these things. Now, I think if you look at, only speak about Christianity, I suspect that these same dynamics can be found in many, many religious traditions. In the long run, most of these people will be absorbed into the larger Christian movements. Oh, nine is calling me. Many of these people will be absorbed into the larger Christian movements and we see this already in the Seventh-day Adventists because 70 years ago, when you could find Christian Reformed publications talking about the Jehovah's Witnesses and the Mormons, the Seventh-day Adventists tended to be lumped in with them and what's happened in the last 70 years is that the Seventh-day Adventists have increasingly been, Seventh-day Adventists have increasingly been, hey, Rick, could you send Naina an email or call her? She's trying to call me about the garbage service because I had her do some phone calls. Do you have her number? Okay, otherwise she can come here and I give you my phone. Seventh-day Adventists are very much now considered sort of part, another denomination in the Protestant world. I think at some point we're gonna see similar things happen to the Mormon church and to the Jehovah's Witnesses that increasingly their people will sort of either be absorbed by the nuns, N-O-N-E-S, which a lot of that is happening, or, boy, Naina's just so determined to talk to me, or they're just gonna be absorbed into other Protestant groups. We've seen this throughout the history of the church. If you read church history, there's just all of the menu options in terms of possibilities of thinking about many of these categories have been tried, and over time some groups in a sort of Darwinian way succeed and other groups fail, and so I think there will be some absorption. And it just takes a very long time, and as you said, these are fairly new. So there's nothing new under the sun. Paul, have you ever thought about taking a nap on those couches outside? I don't know, do you really wanna? The pictures I take don't account for smell. I'll leave it at that. Have you ever, Zan, have you ever had an experience where you believe that you have experienced the voice of God either as a voice in your head or something you have heard through your ears? If so, how do you discern that the voice was from God and was not a product of your own mind? This is a hard question to answer on one level. I've had some interesting experiences. I have never heard a voice that I experienced as audible outside of my ears. One of my favorite, Andy Crouch, Andy Crouch is an evangelical high status author, very smart guy. I wanna bring him into some of my videos. I should probably have a chat with him at some point. Andy Crouch has a great story called A Testimonial in Reverse. If you Google Andy Crouch, A Testimonial in Reverse, it talks about the one time he audibly heard the voice of God and he was a young man and it had to do with a girlfriend and God said no and he went the other way anyway. And I love that story because it's so interesting and I love that story because it is so human. I have a fair amount of experience with people who hear voices. And there's a lot of interesting psychology on hearing voices. Some of the theories involve not being able to differentiate the voices in your head. And so some of the people I know that hear voices, I'll talk to them and they will, I've had the situation that I am in a car with this person and they are hearing voices and they will swear to me that these voices are coming from other human beings in the area and I'll turn and say, look, you and I are driving in this car. We are going down the street. Even if someone was on the street two blocks back yelling at us, you could no longer hear that voice. In other words, I'm trying to destroy their argument with facts and reason and it never works because they will continue to swear that they are, no, this person is saying this and this and this and that's really not in my head. That's like, oh, I'm not hearing it. Part of the framing of this question has everything to do with Cartesian dualism. That sounds way too philosophical. If you notice my rough drafts for Sundays for the last couple of weeks, I talk about Tammy Peterson's miracle and Michaela's miracle and I talk about the fact that she's a woman, I talk about Tammy Peterson's miracle and Michaela Peterson's miracle. Now it's a little, when we get all sciency with that word, we make miracles binary, but we never really use the word that way. You know, someone I could say, you know, when my wife agreed to marry me, it was a miracle that she would agree to marry someone like me. Is that different from the kind of miracle that the Amazing Randy is gonna give you a million dollars for? So there's a lot of stretch to that word. There's also a lot of complexity to this question of God speaking and talking. I would be, you know, I'm kind of a troll, you know that. And so I'd be together with a bunch of Christians and some Christians would talk about how they were praying for such and such a thing to happen or if they could accomplish this or something like that and they'd say, that's a God thing. And if I was feeling really trollish, I would say, oh, you mean like the sunrise? Because the sunrise is a God thing. And the fact that some really wonderful ministry thing happened is a God thing. Is the sunrise a miracle? Yes and no. So I'll apply all of that to this question of the voice of God, because God speaks to us. The psalmist says, the heavens declare the glory of God. Day after day, they pour forth speech. That's what the psalmist says. Well, that's a metaphor. Well, yeah. And obviously when Andy Crouch heard no, it was a good bit less metaphorical. But the point is that this agency that I talked about in terms of God's agency that we often talk about with our Roman Catholic friends, they're sort of levels primary and secondary agency. And so what I'm trying to say is, what I'm trying to say is you need to have it both ways. God can speak to you in the way that he spoke to Abraham, and we have no real idea about what that was like, or Gideon's Fleece. And I was listening to the Rest is History. They were talking about the Jewish revolt in the Rest is History in the first century, the fun podcasts. And then they got to the sections of the little apocalypse and the gospels. And that's always sort of a debate because Jesus seems to give instructions for what to do when the Roman armies come. He doesn't quite set it up quite that explicitly to take Jerusalem. And so then the question is, did Jesus know that a few decades after his life, the Romans would come down and destroy the temple and Jerusalem? Well, what do you mean by no? Did Jesus sit down and write out all of the details of the politics before it came and say, well, if Jesus is God, I suppose he could. But then again, we don't really quite know how that works in terms of details. Another person could say, well, for Pete's sake, look around you if you're first century and you're just watching this, that you're watching the continual frustration of these politics. Who could have predicted that the Russians would invade Ukraine? See, and then we tend to think of all these level jumping that there's some person in a cave in Siberia that said, Putin is going to attack Ukraine. And there's a bunch of scholars that would say, you know, it's probably in Putin's interest to attack Ukraine, but they don't claim any divine intervention. And this is where all of these layers and levels and all of our framework of divinity gets really interesting. So can God speak to us? Absolutely. Does God speak to us through our parents, through the Bible, through the church, through the creation? Absolutely. How do you know? When Andy Crouch heard God's audible voice, he did the other thing and you'd say, well, what about facts and reason? Human beings aren't terribly reasonable. So it's a discussion we like to have, and it's not a crazy discussion, but it never works the way we think it should. It just doesn't. So, is the, read C.S. Lewis's book, Miracles. If you understand that book, basically what he's saying is reason is a miracle. So if you can sit down and say, okay, I look at where, I look at what's happening with interest rates, I look at what's happening with the US supply of homes, I can, through facts and reason, predict when the next housing market collapse is going to be. Are you hearing the voice of God? Sort of. God number one. So, we just tend to like to work with certain narratives and exclude the other narratives. And I'm saying, there's lots of narratives that work. Stor Stefan, Tor Stefan, hey Paul, I wondered about the demonic. This is in some ways similar to the last question. And seemingly lack of awareness of the reformed traditions depends on which ones. You can find certain charismatic reformed groups that love to talk about this stuff. When I listen to the Roman Catholic exorcist, they say that there's a sharp increase in people becoming possessed. They also say that the total amount and probability of possession is still low. But they attribute the increase to lack of awareness and to the rise in occult practices like normalization of magic through stories like Harry Potter and other occult practices. For example, the movements in yoga can be seen as a physical prayer and devotion towards demonic entities which can lead to possession. And I have seen a yoga instructor set free from possession. Thus I feel there are concrete dangers and I wonder how best to deal with the situation of the demonic. As a Lutheran, I wonder how I can approach my community with this since it seems we do not have a tradition of talking or dealing with it. C.S. Lewis very famously said about this conversation, there's two errors one can take to talk about it too much and to talk about it too little. Post-enlightenment, there tended to be a skepticism with respect to, this conversation is just so hard. Because, okay, what is a demon? A demon is a fallen angel. Okay, what is an angel? This is where the conversation in this little corner of the internet gets really interesting because when Jonathan Peugeot said there's an angel to a conversation. And so there's an angel to this addition of the question and answer. And Anselman pushed back pretty hard in the comment section. And I think angel isn't the best word for that. I'd say, and this word works very easily and none of us are gonna, there's a spirit to this question. Now when we say that, we tend to then conceptualize spirit as something which is very immaterial and that's correct. But this conversation and this question participates in a spirit. And we usually just use this language and don't pause on it. And what's been happening in the conversations in this little corner of the internet is now we're pausing on it and we're looking at it with higher and higher degrees of resolution and asking harder and harder questions about it. And so there very much is a spirit to me and there's a spirit to this answer and there's a spirit to this question and there's a spirit to this meeting. And now if suddenly with sort of our materialist picture brains, we start drawing pictures of spirits, which of course you can't do. But maybe you can conceptualize them in a picture and artistically, which maybe you can try to do. And then I talk about one of my recent videos. I said, in this video with John McWhorter, Jordan Peterson is exorcising a spirit from John McWhorter. Now suddenly I've sort of crossed a line because once I use that exorcise word, I've triggered this entire conversation because are we saying John McWhorter is spirit possessed? And I would say the entire spirit of the age is possessing us in certain ways. But now when we talk about a fairly extreme, and I think that's a way to think about it, a fairly extreme example of what, here's the language we use, spiritual possession, something akin to like we find with legion in the New Testament, where the demonic, now we're gonna use this word because we don't have a great vocabulary with it. So a legion of demons possesses this man by the sea to the degree that he can break chains, terrorize the village, live among the tombs, doesn't wear clothing. What happened in the middle of the 20th century is that a lot of people said, oh, that's schizophrenia. We demythologized the demonic. Yet it doesn't go away. I guess our demythologizing isn't working. There are extreme cases of demon possession, and that's what you're asking about. And I am utterly unskeptical about any of that. I would say, now again, this shows our poverty of language. Language is about using different words to express distinctions in a verbal economy or mapping. I can say we are all possessed by the spirit of the age, but that's a different possession. Yes, it is. But it's connected. Now, when we're looking at extreme cases where a person's agency is so completely destroyed by a spiritual entity, we tend to look for reasons how this could happen. Okay, well, now if you pay attention and hang around with certain groups of Pentecostals, some of them will tell you, well, they've gotten into yoga, and that led them there. Okay, well, they've been fascinated by occult practices and that led them there. Okay, and I'm not skeptical about any of that, but a whole lot of people have read Harry Potter and are not demon possessed, and a whole lot of people have gone and done yoga and are not demon possessed. Well, if you look at pornography, that can be a window. Now, look at how we're using language, a window or a doorway that the demonic uses to get in your life okay, but a whole lot of people have looked at porn and are not demon possessed. And then we sort of turn it around and say, therefore, you shouldn't read Harry Potter, do yoga, or look at porn. Now, it may very well be that you shouldn't read Harry Potter, look at porn, or do yoga, but you gotta be really careful with some of these equal signs. So, this actually connects with a question that's coming down a little bit later. So, asking the question of who, in these very extreme cases, gets their agency so possessed by a beast, being that we have no access to through our materialist frame. We can say, well, these are contributing factors. I've also heard a lot of Christians talk about generational windows or doors. Well, their mother or grandmother or great grandmother was a bruja for this group in Santaria, or you have in Native American religions, you have in many different religions associated in Latin America, folk religions, you have all of these connections to brujaria, witchcraft. But yet, so much of the witchcraft and witches that we see out there are sort of larping. But some of them get dragged into the real thing. Well, how and where are the lines? And part of the point is we don't know, because these lines are levels up from us. And so, Christians, and in fact, all the way back to the Old Testament, why this prohibition on witchcraft and mediumship, and why all of this among the Jews, which is really funny, because in the Roman Empire, the Jews are known as exorcists. Well, precisely because of that prohibition with monkeying around with this stuff, and that's why Christians have, and others, other Jews have too, have said, we don't play with these things. And that's excellent advice, and you should take it, and you shouldn't play with these things. Because sometimes you open doors that things come in that you weren't ready for. But that doesn't mean that everyone who gets possessed by these beings is guilty of those lapses either. And this is where I think the general orientation of understanding our place is super helpful, that we live in a world of powers and principalities and spiritual forces, and I don't just mean the kinds of things that we're talking about as demons and using that word here, that are beyond us, and we ought to take care. Don't be possessed by the spirit of alcohol. Don't be possessed by the spirit of addiction. Now, Paul, what do you mean by spirit there? I want you to not put bookends on that, because that word is so broad among us that there's both a spirit of this conversation and there's a spirit of alcohol. And well, Christians, when they drink the Lord's Supper, if they're using real wine, they're drinking alcohol. Yep. So because this is extreme and because it is easily sensationalized and because we are prone to anxiety and fear around certain things, this will always be an area of special interest for certain people. And the general admonitions continue to hold. Don't play around with the occult. Now, Harry Potter, we could have a long conversation on Harry Potter and someone could make an argument that there's a certain degree of peril in playing around with imagery from the occult, even for children's literature. Fair enough. CS Lewis has a witch. CS Lewis has magic. A lot of it depends on how it's put into that world. There's a minister out there who has videos and Karen was talking to him and I don't know if I ever talked to him or not, but we talked about having a conversation where he basically says, you know, you can see the gospel through Harry Potter. We're just gonna have these conversations. Yoga is a great example. Yoga is a spiritual practice that is downstream from Hinduism. And there's a lively conversation. You can find it on the internet. Is American yoga, is American yoga cultural appropriation? Is it demonic? Is it spiritual? I don't do it. Am I going to say, and then there are Christians who try to say at the same time, all of, you know, there's a lot of stretching and strength building and core work, so then there are Christians that try to sort of say, I'm gonna Christianize some of these movements and some of these exercises that we're doing and I'm gonna try to say, I'm gonna try to do this and that and that. And so, you know, we're trying to sort of do these movements and some of these exercises. If you call it calisthenics or something like that, then I mean, you demythologize it. I mean, this is an enormous conversation. I think Christians ought to be careful. And there's many things we have to be careful with, things that really take the majority of us. Money, pride, power, sex. You know, there's a million who fall prey to the common things for everyone who winds up in a pit like you're describing. Yeah, because it's so extraordinary, we all pay attention to it. So, Father Hugh, might you agree, oh, he has hard questions. Might you agree that there's a qualitative distinction between physical determinism and human freedom? That is a really hard question. Because in some ways, so physical determinism would be something like add electricity to water and create hydrogen and oxygen. Is, so I was listening to the Peugeot-Weinstein conversation again this morning, just trying to get ready to do a commentary on it. Is genetics determinism? These are really hard questions. Because part of the, even using the word determinism implies sort of the mental set keeping of variables that are producing a specific outcome. Part of what's getting really tricky about all of these conversations today and the Peugeot-Weinstein conversation was an example of this. Peterson uses level of analysis. Peugeot uses faith to address this question of levels, levels of agency. That's where, it's so interesting, that's where this conversation is going. Do the cells have a degree of agency? Yes. Is it electrical to bring in some of the stuff that I've been bringing in with us? Yes. Is it chemical? Yes. What's the nexus between the electrical and the chemical? Because it's electrochemical. And how does that scale up to the organism that is named Paul VanderKlay and the decisions he makes? And how about the next level up that say the VanderKlay family and another level up Living Stones Church and another level up the Christian Reformed Church or residents of Florin Road and the city of Sacramento or me and Rick in the building and the spirit that is between us. And both of these things are really hard to talk about. It seems to be left out of the seamless cosmic hierarchy of Peugeot. I don't know that his hierarchy is so seamless. I mean, there's, we're talking about, everybody in the United States believes in democracy or let's just say it this way. The United States believes in democracy. If you sit down and think about that statement, if you sit down and think about that statement, on one hand, it seems very true. America believes in democracy. Yeah, that's true. What is America? Am I part of America? Is Curtis Yarvin part of America? He seems to believe in some kind of monarchy. So if Curtis Yarvin is part of America, then does America believe in democracy? Well, most Americans believe in democracy. Well, what do Americans understand by that word democracy? I mean, you just go forever and ever and ever with this stuff. And I don't know that Peugeot's, I don't know that Peugeot's cause hierarchy is seamless. I think what Peugeot tends to talk about are hierarchical dynamics and a lot of other dynamics in between. And he tends to apply those to lots of different circumstances. I would agree with them that our physical environment is hierarchical and symbolic. Is the physical environment symbolic or is the spiritual appropriation of the physical only or often seen to us through the symbolic? Also, we freely engage with it, develop new symbols and technologies according to chosen purpose and values. Absolutely, we are spiritual authors. Does not our amazing success at such creative development of and communication through our physical environment mean that it and not us humans are predictably deterministic? The physical world certainly seems to reliably operate in predictable ways. That's the basis not only of scientific investigation and the technology built upon it, but it's the basis of any child making mud pies at the beach that if you take the sand and it's sufficiently wet, you can have it defy gravity in a way that the dry sand won't. And so in that way, the physical world is very reliable and predictable. Even non-human animals exist predictably in their environmental niches. Therefore, there is a fundamental distinction between physical determinism, okay, now we understand that, and creative freedom. Yes, there's... Yes, there's... This gets into the meaning crisis and even the entire study of psychology says things like, you can, we call it manipulate, as if we've got our hands on people, you can manipulate people to do, for outcomes that you desire. I've been starting to make my way through the last season of Better Call Saul. Gosh, Breaking Bad and Better Call Saul, incredible. They're incredible. Saul Goodman, Slippin' Jimmy, he's really good at manipulating people. And, but yet people are levels up from mud pies on the beach. But there are also levels up from the ocean is a level up from a glass of water. There are ways in which the ocean is predictable like a glass of water and ways in which the ocean isn't. Is that qualitatively or quantitatively? And this is where again, you get back into the levels that Peugeot was talking about, because the quantitative of the ocean at different levels of analysis is different from what's in a glass of water. Even though I suppose if you could measure it carefully, you might be able to measure tides in your glass because the gravity of the moon is certainly pulling on the water that's in that glass. So, but that again relies, and this is where I'm gonna approach the Peugeot-Weinstein conversation. It's really hard to have these conversations because you both want to sort of get on the same level. And part of the point Peugeot makes is that lower levels, Peugeot will probably overstate it, can't see levels up. And I would say have difficulty seeing levels up. My dog, which is on a lower level, sees me, but doesn't see me well. Is there a qualitative or a quantitative difference between myself and my dog? Even that distinction can get fuzzy between qualitative and quantitative. And in many respects, the whole conversation between Weinstein and Peugeot hinges on this statement of faith that Weinstein says that in theory, everything above can be attributable by that which is below. And that very much also gets into what Lewis talks about in terms of the whole show in his book, Miracles. Doesn't that introduce a significant, though not fatal, discontinuity into Peugeot's cosmic hierarchy? Peugeot will want to talk about emanation and emergence and the intersection of them both. And if you look at Peugeot's conversation with John here, they both talk about basically what I talked about, that it's where heaven and earth meet, that things become real for us. I don't know if I've done any justice to your question. This stuff is so hard to talk about. Can we see that there are limitations to what Peugeot was doing? Absolutely. We can't do any of these things without limitations. Is Peugeot helpful in helping us see a bigger, truer world than before we listened to him? Sure. Can we grow when we see pieces of his system that perhaps is in error? Sure. That's why we do the conversation. Human freedom, so this is where, again, Lewis in his book, Miracles, is interesting because Lewis would say human freedom comes, is a gift from above. And Oscar isn't here anymore, but Oscar would very much get into this question right now about human freedom coming from above and the freedom that comes from below. And Lewis would say that human freedom is a gift from God, and that in some ways, in this conceptualization, you're going to run the risk of, again, having a hierarchy of being. But we sort of use being as a variable. But we sort of use being as a variable because we don't know what being is. Because being itself, in some ways, is is-ness. And the name of God giving at the burning bush, I am what I am, I is what I is, sort of, talking about this in philosophy for thousands of years, and Christianity, since we've had Christianity. So is it the seeds of the logos? I'll do it in English instead of Greek. Is it the seeds of the logos? Do I have more seeds of the logos in me than my dog? I mean, that's sort of neoplatonism that's borrowed from the Pythagoreans, and you get that from the lectures, those good lectures that Wheaton College posted. So, you know, human determinism, human freedom, these things just keep fascinating us. Bridge of Meaning question. Someone preferred to retain anonymous, and they were edited for anonymity and clarity. Thank you, Joey. How can we best help someone who is being hurt by their attempt to help others? In this case, the asker has a direct family member that he cares about whose life is being destroyed by a third party with addiction issues. This is an astoundingly common question. Often, I don't know, this is anonymous, so it may not apply, but I can tell you a story about a mother with an alcoholic son, and the mother, it could be a father, I could tell you. I think of two cases right now. In one case, it's a father and a son. It's another case, it's a mother and a son. And the parent is an enabler. Oh, they've tried to send them to rehab or maybe even went through rehab, and didn't take. They don't wanna see their son out on the street. Who would? You know, if one of my children, you know, and when you've got daughters who are addicts and sons who are addicts, looks very different because there's always both a vulnerability and an asset that women have that men don't have by virtue of the sexes. And I see this playing out on the streets all the time. The people I see living on the streets, many of the people I see, almost all of the people that are on the streets for a long time, mental health issues, substance abuse issues, or both, often both. And they finally, their family members had had enough because you can't live with a drug addict. You can sort of live with an alcoholic if you're willing to have them destroy your life. And so a father and an alcoholic son or a mother and an alcoholic son, they're paying, they're letting them live in the house. They're cleaning up after them. They're feeding them. They're doing all of this just so that their precious son doesn't wind up on the street. And then what happens is that the care, usually as they age, as they get older, run out of money, the care for their son or daughter that is an addict bankrupts them. Maybe they spend all their strength on it and they fall ill. And then sometimes the siblings step in and say, enough. You're going to the hospital or you're going to a home and you're going to the street because siblings will make harder decisions than parents will because parents, it takes a lot to see your kid on the street or to see your, and again, I see it all the time. And I say, I see the family members and I watch the dynamic and it is hard, hard, hard. Often there is no helping others out of this because on one hand, you don't want to enable the enabling, on the other hand, it's not really your job to stop the enabling because when you sort of step into that, you step into the codependent enabling circle. So you learn boundaries and let's say it's your mother that's helping your brother live the life of an addict or an alcoholic and your mother says, you have to come out of this. And your mother says, you have to come over to the house to clean up Fred's room. No, I'm not. Well, he's your brother. Yes, he is and he should clean his own room. You have to give me money because Jane wrecked her credit and has all these credit card bills and no, I don't. No, I don't. You have to go and bail your brother out of jail. No, I don't. Well, don't you love your brother? I do but bailing him out of jail isn't gonna help him. Maybe you will bail him out of jail because you know, okay. I deal with these questions all the time. There are no easy answers. You have to learn boundaries. You make a decision and you hope it's the right one and then after you've made the decision and you figured out it was the wrong one, learn from it and make a better decision next time. There are no easy answers. Just do what you can to not rob the person that you love of their agency and be careful when you try to interrupt the consequences of their misuse of their agency. You know, there's a lot of folk wisdom about people have to hit rock bottom before. Sometimes, sometimes not. I see people living at rock bottom. I mean, most of the homeless people around me here are doing drugs. The paraphernalia is around, the behavior's there. Sometimes I see them doing the drugs. Am I enabling by letting them be here? Well, the truth is that's why we're building the fence because I can't be here 24 seven to get people off here and calling the cops isn't gonna be a viable solution and, and, and, and so I work in the mushy middle. But how do you stop someone from being self destructive and they're enabling of another person? Most of the time you can't. Don't participate in it. Go ahead Chad, you probably have something you wanna say. Sorry, man. Yeah, I'm not trying to be rude and funny here, but there are really great resources. There's like family groups. So you have like Narcanon, like that's for folks who are family members of say, maybe heroin addicts or just drug addicts. And then you have Alanon and that's, was there a family groups for family members or friends of alcoholics? There's like Palatine. I mean, there's, so there's a lot of really great resources. They basically, you know, do the same. They do like 12 step programs and they have sponsors and they're able to glean help from people who have walked through a similar path. And so those are really great. Like I sponsor a few different guys whose wives go to Alanon and they, it's really cool for them. I mean, it can be difficult, strange, you know, do it to this guy. Anyways, it can be really strange for somebody to go into a program like that, but it can also, once they kind of go, start going through the work, you'd see, oh, oh, I see where I'm kind of missing the mark here. And then, you know, so they all, they work the same steps that we work. But yeah, I would say look into that for anybody who might be suffering with that sort of stuff. And it's free. Yep. The thing is, let's say if you're the sibling of the addict and it's your mother or your father, that's the enabler, you can go to Alanon and try and get your, go with your parent to go there. But usually the parent has to hit rock bottom too. Right, right, right. Exactly. And then so like maybe if you're in Alanon and say your parent's suffering from this enabling or controlling issue, my Alanon sponsor would say, well, you're just gonna have to let them, as you said, hit rock bottom because there's nothing you're gonna do. Just like there's nothing you're gonna say to the alcoholic to change the alcoholic, there's nothing that you're going to say to the enabler to change them. It has to be, the desire has to come from within. And in the two cases that I'm closest to, it didn't end until the, usually the parent, the elderly parent lost their capacity to enable. And the sibling stepped in and said, party's over. Mom's going to the nursing home. Yeah, that's sad. I know it's bad, but I see it all the time. I mean, it's sad, it's sad for, yeah, so the guy that was like our stepfather, right? The guy that I was telling you about in my story, he's still, he's still a fall down drunk. He's not a great person. He's very sick alcoholic. And his mother lets him live in the garage because she doesn't want to be homeless. And all the siblings in the family, I mean, the guy is a pariah. Nobody wants anything to do with him except the mother. And it disrupts her marriage. And it's like, and you know, she gets very defensive. You start trying to tell her, listen, you're going to burn up all your money. Nobody can, she can't hear it. It's just the way that it is. And then, you know, terrible. Watch it all the time. I watch it all the time. It's people. All right, Matthias, three members of the German club here on the Discord server went over Easter to the first and so far only German Orthodox monastery, which was founded in the 1990s by a German monk from Mount Athos. The monks of this young monastery are dedicated to preserving German language and culture and use Martin Luther's translation of the Bible for the Orthodox liturgy in the church. This is fascinating as they value linguistic poetry and beauty over literal correct translations. What do you think of this interesting synthesis of Protestant Bible translation with Orthodox liturgy? I find it fascinating, but at the same time, it is not surprising. If you look back over, if you read much church history, you'll find stuff like this all over the place. It's so hilarious when people yell about cultural appropriation while they're wearing pants. It's like, you're wearing pants, you're wearing pants. You weren't born into this world with pants on. Do you even know what culture appropriated? What about the language you're using? So I find it, I'm not really surprised. It's pretty amazing. It's pretty amazing. That's wild. Chad has a question. I know you've had many friends who have gone through the process 12 steps. I'm curious if you've ever taken a close look at the book of Alcoholics Anonymous, more specifically the first portion of the book that lays out the process. I really haven't. And if so, how recently? And I looked at it 20 years ago. I'm getting old. I'm curious to know your thoughts on it and what you might find useful if any to everyday people, especially those without personal addiction in their lives. Also, if anyone has questions about how it works and would be interested in walking through the work, let me know and perhaps we could set up a weekly time on the server and go through it. It's a group, I think it's a cool thing. My experience of almost everything I've seen from AA has been positive. There's just a ton of wisdom that's built into it. It's so practical and effective in, it's really one of the most remarkable religious movements of the last century or so. It truly is remarkable. And now, how many people does it work for? That's always the same question as sort of the Calvinist question. Well, if you work it, it works. Well, how do you know who it's going to be? How do you know who it's going to work for? Well, you don't. Mom should go to Al-Anon. Will mom go to Al-Anon? If mom doesn't go to Al-Anon, she's gonna spend her life on her miserable alcoholic son and in the end, it'll do him no good. But will mom go to Al-Anon? No, there's just so much, AA has been able to take a lot of wisdom and put it in there and it's been remarkably helpful for a lot of people. Is it a magic bullet? No. If you work it, it works. They got all these campy little sayings and they're just, it's just clever. So there's a, I will say this. In my experience, there is a practical quality to people who have worked the program and often a spiritual generosity that just shines through. It's a program I'm immensely impressed with. So yeah, if anybody wants to look at that, talk to Chad, I'm sure he'd be happy to go through it. It's a really, it's a gift from God for our times. Christian Golden, I was part of the interesting discussion surrounding Exodus 11 and 12 last night with a couple of other folks from this corner of the internet and we were wondering about this. What is the significance of birthright firstbornness in the cultural context of Exodus 11 and 12 and how might it be related to Jesus securing our adoption into brotherhood? Okay. Exodus 11 and 12. I think a skunk got under my house last night and sprayed. I kept smelling skunk all night. Oh, oh wow. Yeah, firstborn. The Passover. The Passover. In the cultural context of Exodus. So firstborn, firstfruits, the firstborn that opens the womb is dedicated to God. What is dedicated to God mean liable to death because giving it to the altar, giving it to the knife is in some ways giving it to God. That's clearly a common cultural religious feature of that time and so the whole tribe of Levi of Levi was a substitution for the sacrifice of the firstborn and yeah, the symbolism of this stuff is just amazing. It has a lot to do with Jesus securing our adoption into sonship, yeah, because he is, if you read the book of Colossians, he's the firstborn of all creation. Now, when you read that in the light of Exodus 11 and 12, suddenly his redeeming sacrifice for the rest of creation and for its restoration, renovation, sanctification makes sense. That's just one of these long themes in scripture that run through that most Christians don't pay a lot of attention to and Peugeot was sort of illuminating and pointing to but I've never heard Peugeot talk about this. But Israel is God's firstborn. Okay, what does that mean? Israel is the sacrifice for the rest of the world. Jesus is Israel. Jesus is the sacrifice for the rest of the world. There's all of these connections that run through the text. Israel is, and you get back into ancient cultures too, why, so when you conquer a city, you can either kill everyone or enslave them, which makes them dead. So what's the relationship between a slave and a son? Well, it's different, but a son is a sort of a slave who isn't a slave because he inherits everything. A slave is a dead person, but not really dead. There's all these weird connections in the Bible that, and these things get drawn through theologically. So Israel, Egypt suffers the loss and the death of the firstborn. Israel is spared because of the blood of the lamb, but that marking of Israel as having been spared, Israel herself is devoted to God in a special way that the nations aren't. And just like I talked about with the garments of skin, on one hand, Israel is spared and exalted, but that exaltation is also a part of Israel being a sacrifice for the world. And so the exalted is also, and Jesus talks about this, the exalted is also the servant. So you have all of these connections running through symbolically these relationships, most of which we're sort of blind to, but the scripture writers were not blind to them. So given the amount of time we have here, is it related to our adoption into sonship? Yes, because then we are heirs because of the sacrifice, because of the one that is dedicated to God, and we are also in Christ. I mean, these things just keep tying in. And so the more you read them and the more you look into these relationships, the more they start to connect. Paul? Yeah, go ahead. I mean, I have people DMing me. Your theology is just so bad, so incredibly bad. Well, straighten me out, Jacob. Okay, so there's the problem of theodicy, which is in a world run by an omnipotent, omniscient God, why do bad things happen to good people? And this is the central, I would say the central problem of all monotheistic religion. But I would say it is so clearly central to Christianity that the symbol of Christianity is the symbol of God. An innocent man suffering, that is the crucifix. And Protestants have so completely lost the whole thing that you get people like Bart Ehrman, who had a doctorate in New Testament studies from Princeton and was a pastor and evangelical, went to Moody, and he tells us that he lost his faith because he was asked to teach a course on theodicy. And it was the first time that he had seriously thought about it, which if you wanna hear my rant, I have a long video on it regarding like, what are you guys doing? Yes, the problem is why does God allow good people to suffer? And there are many different answers in the Bible to that. One of which is because we are imperfect, we don't understand, there's the entire book of Job, there's every answer except the silly ones that Protestants, and I have to blame Calvin on this, give, which is a bunch of ridiculous absurdities around God allowing suffering. No, when you read Isaiah and he talks about Hineabdi, here is my servant, my suffering servant, and you actually read it correctly, you see that what God is saying is yes, currently we have good people who suffer and we have bad people who prosper. And what we believe in, our ultimate faith is that in fact, God will in the end make all right and allow us to understand it. So this idea that somehow either Jesus suffered or Israel suffers or unjustly, and that God is not going to rectify that in the future, that the people who suffer for being good will not be rewarded is in fact, one of the most grotesque ideas I can even imagine. It is a complete imagination of God. I didn't say anything about that. We were talking about, I mean, is it or is it not true that the first fruits of the womb of the field are dedicated to God? Yes, it is true. And what does that mean? That means that they become a sacrifice, the sacrifice of the first fruits and the sacrifice of the first fruits of the womb, but the first fruits of the womb are not put on an altar of the human womb. Completely misunderstanding what's happening. To those who much has been given, much is required. And because Israel is the first fruit of belief in God, of having had God and holiness given to Abraham and our forefathers, much more is required than anybody else. But that's because that is the concept of being chosen. You're the horse that gets ridden. And because the rider of the horse is the creator of the horse, that's the only way for it to be fair. To those who much has been given, to whom much has been given, much is required. But that's only very- But we're talking about Exodus 11 and 12 here. What is the implication of the deliverance that Israel receives that Egypt didn't? That we are God's slaves. We have been redeemed to be God's slaves. An yavd ad-dikud shabrihu. Right, that Israel is redeemed to be the slaves of God. And that's what happens. He asked a question about Exodus 11 and 12. And it's completely consistent with the first fruits. The first born. That's Israel's election. Israel's election, but it's not just to suffer. No, no, of course not. So when you have this concept of Jesus, when you have this concept of Jesus, it gets messed up in so many different ways. If the suffering servant in the end ends up being the leader. Exactly, that's the point I was making. That's the same for Israel. Israel is the slave that is exalted to the highest place. It's the same with Christ. So what I did not hear is that relationship between works and reward. No, I wasn't talking about that. You're never talking about that. That's reform theology. I was talking, the question was about Exodus 11 and 12. What's the relationship between firstborn and there's this weird duality where the firstborn, because it's the first fruits, the fruits of the womb, the fruits of the field, the fruits of the trees, they're dedicated to God. And so they, in a sense, they become a sacrifice. But in a weird way, the sacrifice also becomes the highest thing. How is that weird? No, no, no, that's not what the question was about. No, no, no, that's the thing. There's no weirdness there. There's no weirdness whatsoever there. It's weird to Americans. No, it's weird to somebody who doesn't want to understand that God rewards people exactly according to how faithful in their actions and in their life they are. Yeah. The rewards are commensurate. The New Testament says that too. Lefum tsara agra. Well, it also says that Jesus paid the price as opposed to each person pays the price themselves and God rewards people infinitely justly. Nobody else can pay any price for you, nobody. When the, the parable of the prodigal son, does that parable make sense to you? Only in that the older son obviously wasn't doing what the father wanted. Does it? If the older son was actually doing what the father wanted, then he would have cared about his little brother. Yeah, yeah. Is the father right to receive the little brother back? Yes and no. The no is the Christian understanding that somehow being a repentant sinner is somehow considered better than having been a good person your whole life. And that's just a mistake that again comes from Paul. Well, better in some ways because probably what the repentant sinner has is a wisdom that the never fallen one has never been able to accumulate. That's only, that's his problem because like I like to tell my nephews all the time, and one of my nephews is having his bar mitzvah tomorrow, is an intelligent man learns from his mistakes. A wise man learns from other people's mistakes. And if you need to actually go through it in order to understand the lesson, then God will oblige you, but there's no necessity for you to be ignorant simply because you have not experienced something yourself. You can also be empathic and wise. Yeah, I think that's true, but there's also a certain degree of wisdom that comes through experiencing one's own fallenness and brokenness and having to regain from it. And we don't want that for our kids. Don't get me wrong. Let's say I have- Grace may abound or however Paul put it. Paul, but Paul also doesn't say that that's the reason why we should sin. We shouldn't. We shouldn't. Exactly. And Paul doesn't say we should, but we do. It is very good to be a repentant sinner. It is better to have never sinned at all. Let's say you're struggling with alcohol and there are two therapists available to you. One is a recovering alcoholic and the other has never touched a drop. Which one do you want to see? There's a verse that talks about Shemmin Katet Le Maor, right? Which is oil that has been squeezed or pressed so that it would give light, right? And it is true that sometimes you have to press the olives to get the olive oil out of it. And sometimes you can tell that olive oil has been pressed like that. Again, it comes down to, and there is the opposite thing which Jesus says, which is a bad tree cannot bear good fruit, right? So this constant elevation of the repentance over the just is a mistake. You can take it wrong either way. And I think as particularly Protestant, and it's not true from what I've learned about Catholics and Eastern Orthodox, particularly this Protestant sola fide, like completely destroying the concept of being a good person interpretation of Paul. Is what is destroying us. Well, I don't know that I've seen a lot of Protestants advise their children to liquor it up and sleep around in order that grace might abound in them. That's certainly not how they're applying to Paul. And it's also the case that on one hand, absolutely we should not wander into sin. On the other hand, God does prune us. And that pruning sometimes comes through our own, our own willful disobedience. And he uses that to restore us. Well, I would say he corrects us when we are, I would say he corrects us when we are willfully disobedient, right? Your rod and your staff, they shall comfort me, right? But again, in the end, we have a complete belief in God's infinite justice, which in its infinite justice is also infinitely merciful, which is the complete opposite of what a lot of, and I mean, this is the thing with a lot of Protestants, trying to get a handle on Protestants is like trying to nail jello to the wall because there's 50,000 denominations. I don't know why you want to nail jello to the wall, but I can believe it's a difficult thing. Well, it's, anytime you say something about Protestants, you always get, well, so and so. But all of us, I'm sure, have heard all Protestants constantly talking about how it's not your works, it's not what you do, it's not how just you are, we are all sinners, and being all sinners, we are all equal in our sin. No, we are not. God, and this whole concept of penal substitutionary atonement, I was so glad to hear Eastern Orthodox people say they reject it. The idea that God would let somebody else suffer for your sins is precisely the injustice that all of Ezekiel 18 is positively railing against and is all over the Bible being railed against. And one of the main things which Jews look at Christians, like Jesus died for your sin, which is abhorrent. The whole concept is completely abhorrent, that somebody else, anybody else, should suffer for my sins, makes me feel bad. It's not some, and part of my faith is recognizing that in the end, God will make it right, and that I will suffer for my sins, not somebody else. It is absolutely ethically monstrous to say that Jesus suffered for your sins. Is it okay for an animal to suffer for your sins? No. Yes, yes, Paul, Jews read all the verses that the book of Hebrews supposedly is trying to tell us about before. I was really angry at Sam when I started reading Hebrews, which is one of his favorite books, and it's quoting all the verses from the Bible that I was quoting at him, telling him God does not want sacrifices. That is an exact literal quote from Psalms. God does not want sacrifices. Start reading Isaiah, Isaiah 1, what does it say? Who asked you to bring these sacrifices? Bring the book of Hebrews. So the whole Mosaic sacrificial system was in error? What did Jesus say when people asked about divorce? So was Moses in error when he allowed divorce? No, it was because of the hardness of their hearts and their difficulty. So in other words, you're saying that the whole sacrificial system was in error? I'm not trying to press you on this. I'm just trying to understand you. It was because of the hardness of our hearts. God never wanted sacrifices. God does not want sacrifices. God does not need your sacrifices. And the Bible says that quite clearly. God does not want or need your sacrifices. He created the world. I think it's Isaiah. What will you give me? And where in the world I created, will you build me a house? These are things that Jews were saying hundreds of years before the book of Hebrews. All right, well, we can, you and I can take these things up when we have our chat. I wanna get through a few more questions. So thank you, Jacob. It's very interesting. All right, Ewan, any advice for us weaker brothers that need to stay away from things that aren't necessarily an issue for others? As someone who will be overcome by curiosity and spend too much time reading articles and watching YouTube videos about particularly innocuous topics, I once calculated that I have spent four years of time doing the evaluation of reading encyclopedia articles to the detriment of relationships and responsibility. I've begun to notice that my efforts to stay clear of temptation are often met with well-meant advice to just not overdo it. People seem to have an urge to encourage me to run into danger. Plenty of the older generations of mature Christians who have formed me are completely incapable of comprehending the dangers, I believe that. And they constantly are unintentionally providing me with excuses to continue throwing my life away. How can we weaker brothers integrate well into a community? In terms of shaping your life with a degree of intentionality, so let's say computer games, YouTube, just a little bit of a little bit of a little bit of YouTube, just any activity, it might not be, oh, this stuff is so difficult. There are actually a fairly limited number of approaches to reforming your behavior into the future in an intentional way. One is sort of thinking about the path. So willpower is often what people think about first. Okay, I'm not gonna watch so much YouTube. Okay, that's vague. How much YouTube are you going to allow yourself to watch? What kind of YouTube are you going to allow yourself to watch? And then pick a number. Say, I don't wanna watch more than an hour of YouTube a day. That might be a workable thing because you can sort of decide it and say, okay, an hour. And then after an hour, if you've got the willpower, then you can stop. Maybe you don't have the willpower. So then maybe you set up accountability. And so you have a friend or they have computer programs for this now too. Your computer will shut down if you add it on an hour and then it won't be on again till tomorrow. There's all these little tricks and hacks that you can use to sort of set yourself up for success because not only are we susceptible to a lot of the tricks and hacks that it sounds like you are falling prey to, there are other tricks and hacks that you can set yourself up for. For example, diet. Don't buy what you don't want to eat. If it's not in the house, you won't have the willpower questions whether or not to eat it. Don't have wifi. Limit your computer use to one computer that's hardwired into the internet in a particular place in the house so that you can't have your smartphone. I know bunches of people that don't have smartphones. They just have flip phones because they're not subject to porn. They're not subject to just continually strolling through things. They're not subject to distractions. In other words, set your life up before the willpower has to be required if you're lacking in that willpower. There's tons of advice out there how to curb different things that you just basically want to curb in your life. And I would say, don't shoot for perfection. Shoot for improvement. And then try to improve progressively. Bring in accountability with others. Attics work on these kinds of things. I found that alcoholics, because it's people who want to quit smoking. I knew people who, in order to quit smoking, this person had to get off Facebook. Why? Because they had a habit of sitting there and scrolling on Facebook while smoking. So in order to get rid of smoking, they had to stop doing Facebook. So think through the habits you want to get rid of and look at a lot of the things around the habits. That's one way. There are almost innumerable ways to do it, but they're almost all involve tricks and hacks like this, accountability, and don't rely solely on willpower because your will and your sensibilities are often trained. And a lot of these things I've also found depend on the people you're living with. So if, find things that are enjoyable, let's say if you're married for you and your spouse to do and be frank with your spouse, I want to have less of this in my life. So let's you and I do more of this. Another key thing is you don't just get rid of a bad habit by saying no to it. You're often better, a better way of getting rid of that bad habit is by pushing it out of your life with a better habit. In other words, if you want to eat less of certain things, eat more of better things. And what you'll wind up doing is actually improving. So that's how I'm understanding the question in terms of you've got some habits that you want to get rid of and set yourself up for success before you get to the willpower point. Look for accountability, people that you can be honest with. And for those accountability partners, they need to be people that you can confess to. Sometimes there are people in your life that for one reason or another, they can't listen to some of the truth about your failures. And so if this person isn't someone that you can tell the absolute worst to, they're not the right person. And like with addiction things and 12 step things, it's often good to talk to people who have had the same struggles and have a degree of success because it'll also be harder to bullshit them. So there's just a few things. But there's tons of material out there and tons of wisdom and tricks and hacks and organizations that you can find to help with certain things. Can I say that I was really trying to ask about how to deal with the fact that people, when they find out that I'm trying to not go so much on the internet, the initial response is usually like, no, you should go on the internet more. Or like, no, don't stop doing that. And this is a lot from older people and things like that. It's like, I keep getting stuff from me. Yeah. Yeah. Can I hop on this one? Sure. So, especially because what you're looking at in this specific problem is not specifically a sin or an addiction as such. Curiosity is something that is healthy. So I think that's why you're being encouraged to continue to be curious, encouraged to continue to learn. And those are good things, but you've noticed that it gets out of hand. It gets to a level where you're maybe, you know, everyone's, no one wants to use the term obsessive compulsive about it because the people who have that as a literal disorder, it's very serious. But these are probably similar to obsessive compulsive, obsessive compulsive tendencies. And I would point out that you're probably holding your curiosity and your intellectualism as a great virtue in your own mind. And because it's a great virtue, you're gonna have a hard, like you're gonna have a hard time squaring that circle of I think my curiosity is a virtue and my intelligence is a virtue. And then now I'm gonna try and suppress those behaviors in order to do the more boring, rote day-to-day stuff. And so, you know, short of the safeguards that Paul was talking about, which I think is great, we have a self-improvement sub-server where people do daily habit check-ins on here, which might be an option too, to kind of get that accountability if you want it. But the third thing I would look at is, is why you feel like you have to enact that virtue of curiosity is good and my intellectualism is good, why you need to explore that and why you need to explore that compulsively kind of. You might be able to get rid of this problem if you start devaluing that in your head or at least spreading that out over a larger set of virtues, which I know, like I know you personally a little bit, so I know you've got quite a few. So I'm just gonna throw that out there. Part of the weakness of me asking questions like this is I don't know, go ahead, go ahead, Chad. Well, on that, that, that Joey, like the way I kind of understand, I've dealt with some of the subsets of stuff with the internet and like all the YouTube stuff, it's like, like I can get a lot of juice out of that thing, you know, like it seems to provide a type of power in my life that makes me, gives me the illusion of connection or it seems to fill a void and but what I also notice is that like, so there's like, it also diminishes other areas of my life. So in order for me to kind of step away, be able to, if I really have a desire to step away and I can't seem to assert my willpower, I have to kind of turn my attention towards something else that will seem to provide a better, better juice. You know what I'm saying? So that's the whole idea behind the concept of, stair quotes, higher power, you know, that's the, so I'm powerless and so this other thing over here, if I seek it, we'll be able to provide a power that is sufficient and so I don't know if that's helpful. Bless you. Yeah, that's helpful and again, that's a better virtue to displace the lesser one, even if it, or to displace the vice. A lot of this is just kind of knowing yourself and with age, you know, so I am, I'm not, you know, let's say in like March of 2017 when I discovered Jordan Peterson, from March of 2017 to September or September of 2017, I watched a ton of Jordan Peterson videos and you know, I just listened to all this stuff, I'd watch it. I had done this with other people before and so I knew I'm gonna do this for a few months and then I'm gonna be done with it and I was and then I watched, I watched and listened to his stuff, you know, I continue to listen to his stuff but I don't listen as intensively as I did before and part of me sort of chalked that up and I was like, I'm gonna do this for a few months and I chalked that up to, this was something that I needed to learn or was interested in or this was something that I was just working through stuff. So it's also helpful to sort of know yourself in this and I, but there is, there is a very addictive quality to a lot of the stuff that's out there now that we really have to keep an eye on. So yeah, I think there's probably a lot of good advice out there. I think I'm gonna end here. We'll start with Charlie Brown's question and we'll take it from there next week. Didn't quite get to the end but got a few, got a few of them. How's that sound, Rick? Sound like a good idea? Rick says good idea. Okay, so I don't know. I, you know, part of me, I always have sort of a love-hate relationship with this format because it's really hard to get a sense of of what, to try to be helpful, especially with specific things like this and it's much more fun having back and forth like I was doing with Chad or with Jacob. It's, I don't know, it just seems more personal. It's hard answering questions in the abstract because for each of us as people, we're just so different. So, and it's fascinates me, you know, to hear Jacob's take on the sacrificial system. I'm just blown away by that. That just fascinates me. So I kind of understand it, but anyway, so. Anyway, so thanks for being here this week. And I hope, my fear is though that I'm just completely missing what you're looking for and not being helpful at all. And I don't want to waste your time or I'm not too worried about my time, but I'd like to say something that would make your life better. And exactly what that means, I'm not sure. But yeah, so thanks for your time and attention. And I hope there was something I said or did today that was helpful, even if just giving Jacob another negative example of a detestable Protestant. Oh, I do love Jacob. So Jacob, I've loved, we don't have any ESO's around for me to hate. Oh, well. All right, Rick, you can end transmission.