https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=iJPPD4Gt55E

 Because if we can't begin to talk about these, how are we going to even make then consequential decisions about them? One of the things we found in the last years we've been working with churches after Synod is a lot of churches found that people would self-censor. So you sit in a listening circle and the first few people speak up and they all hate the Human Sexuality Report. And you kind of like it. You think it's biblically faithful, but you start, you want to get along. And so you kind of, you kind of censor yourself. You try to occupy that small slice of brown maybe that where we have agreement. And people in the group might not even know that you disagree with them. Because you just want to get along. And one of the things we were especially finding is that probably the majority of churches engaging in the resources were ones who were feeling the anxiety most acutely. Hi, this is Paul. And what I've got going today is something quite unusual. Joining with me are four Christian Reformed ministers. One of them works in the denominational office and the other three work in local churches in the West Michigan area. Those of you who have been following my channel know that I've been treating the conversation with respect to same-sex marriage in the Christian Reformed Church over the last couple of years. Synod starts, I'm recording this on Thursday, Synod starts on Friday. And this will be a big discussion. Sean Baker, who's one of the people here, works in pastor, did they rename his pastor church relations or pastor church resources? Soon to be Thrive. I'll, I'll, I'll, okay, I'll leave that alone for now. And he contacted me because he did a process that involved these individuals and some others and thought it was a very helpful thing. And so he asked if we could do a video about it. And I was very excited to do so. Before we get to that process, I do want to do some introduction with each of the people here. Anybody who follows my channel knows that I'm a big believer in getting people to do the same thing. And if you follow my channel, you'll see that I'm a big believer in getting people's stories. We're not going to have a lot of time for other new stories, but we'll at least spend a little more time than average on it because that way, hopefully, we'll hear each other better and have a better understanding of where we're all coming to this. So, Sean, let's, let's begin with you because this, this began with you. Why don't you tell us a little bit about yourself, where you grew up, how you came to faith, what your sense of calling was and how you landed in the soon to be renamed Thrive. Yeah, thanks, Paul. So, I do work with Thrive Ministries, formerly Pastor Church Resources. I, I grew up actually as a son of a pastor, career Christian reform minister. So, I was born in Hamilton, Ontario, lived in British Columbia, and then mostly grew up in Kalamazoo, Michigan. My experience of the church was really positive. And I know not every pastor's kid has that. And I think some of that is probably to the credit of my parents and some of that's just good churches and the grace of God. But I always experienced the church as a really positive force for good. And I experienced that in my own life during season of kind of an acute loss in high school, where the church just really was everything you'd hope the church would be. And around that same time I had sort of stuck my head out for some leadership things and folks, I think probably also the resemblance to my father said, you know, you ought to think about ministry. And the doors just kind of kept opening to that along the way. I had a real strong interest in the church, as it could be an instrument for good in the community. I was deeply influenced by like Christian Community Development Association, John Perkins, that kind of stuff. And so come out of seminary I worked to help to start a campus ministry in East Lansing for a year, but then took a call back to Grand Rapids and I said about the church that I serve Creston Church. I wanted a church, if it was up to me I'd like to serve a church that didn't need to be convinced that their call was to their, their community, the mission was to the community. And I wanted to go to a place that had sidewalks, which for me was kind of a representative of a certain kind of arrangement of life together. So we lived in the Creston neighborhood served at that church for 10 years. And one of the things that I always saw as a value so I entered ministry like oh nine 2010. Those were like, I don't know those are the heady days of like Obama's, not a red and blue United States but a purple one. And I remember thinking it was like a really great thing that my the church that I served was diverse in terms of its politics, that it was a purple church, and I think part of what brings me to the work I do now with thrive coming alongside conflicted congregations is I think it's just a lot harder to be a purple church. Now, than it was in 2010. I think it was a lot harder by 2020 when I left for this position and then after COVID. It's just way harder. And so my passion is really to help churches navigate these turbulent waters in ways that reflect the best of our faith that lean into the gifts that the spirit provides the fruit of the spirit say let's not leave that at the door. While we talk about our differences. And can we help. So I might my sort of mo and my work now is to come alongside really anxious churches, and I try to help them to see that God is in this even this. And that in fact God might be able to do something in you now that you wouldn't have been available to if everything was going swimmingly. And in that way my work now is very pastoral just like for the four of you and your congregations. You know that about the people in your church. It's hard to say that necessarily from the pulpit but there's opportunity in seasons of distress for the kingdom to really shine. Thank you, Sean. I'm just gonna I'm just gonna go around so Rebecca you're next tell us a little bit about where you grew up the house you grew up in. And then what what maybe what led you into this process that that Sean had started. Thanks, Paul. I grew up in Fremont, Michigan. Here in West Michigan just a little north of Grand Rapids here. I'm in Grand Rapids now. And I grew up in a Christian reform congregation. And my parents were people who loved Jesus deeply. They still do. And people who lived out that faith in their work and through their involvement in the church community, the Christian school community that played out in so many areas of their lives, and they told me about Jesus and invited me to follow Jesus. So that's the origins of my faith. The reason that I follow Jesus today is because my parents and then a really nurturing faith community to be a part of to at a Christian reform congregation and a Christian school. So yeah, that community a small rural community is where I was where I was formed and what shaped me for the person I am now. I went to Calvin University, and well I guess it was Calvin College when I went there and studied Bible and theology, just because I found it fascinating just because I loved those courses and wanted to learn more about theology. So that was what brought me to those studies I didn't know where it would take me or or didn't have a clear sense of what God's call was for my career in that regard. I also worked at a Christian summer camp in the summers, and to be a part of that faith community, a Christian outdoor camp for kids. I think I was also deeply formed by the ways that the camp staff worked very intentionally to form community with each other, and then to provide formative experiences for children who came and and all of that intentional Christian community building was so compelling to me and it was, it was something that I really wanted to be a part of and and found that I was good at that I could do it. So, combining that with the studies. During the school year I discern to call to attend seminary, and still not knowing where that would lead wondering if that would be teaching or pastoral ministry. I didn't know a lot of women who were in pastoral ministry. Of course in the Christian reform church at that time. But I also had grown up in West Michigan and was about to at this point, finishing college was about to marry a man from West Michigan. So we both also realized the value of getting out of town for us, especially as I considered the potential of a calling of to ministry in the Christian reform church. So I attended Princeton Seminary for my MDiv. We moved to New Jersey to start our marriage and stayed there for my studies. But the CRC continued to be home and continue to not only feel like home but to match my own perspective and theology and way of engaging scripture and the church. So, we moved back to Grand Rapids and I attended Calvin Seminary for the EPMC that the program for being ordained in the CRC with an MDiv from another seminary other than Calvin. Then, I guess I should back up and say, my, my pastoral internships in seminary were pretty formative for my call, getting to be engaged in the life of a congregation and to lead worship. Again, that was something that really made me come alive and felt like I could use my gifts in that, in that context. So my first call to ministry was at Church of the Servant, which is here in Grand Rapids. They had a program for a while called a pastoral residency. So it was intended for first call pastors, and you get to be there for a two year term and learn from a more experienced staff and kind of like a medical residency you get to start practicing. And that was a really healthy way to start and a good place for me to start in ministry. So, I moved back to Grand Rapids and I attended Calvin Seminary for the EPMC that the program for being ordained in the CRC with an MDiv from another seminary other than Calvin Seminary. So, anyone who watches my channel is any stranger to the fact that the Christian Reformed Church, actually both you and I were at Synod last year, Rebecca, and we actually met at Synod. There was a little prayer group thing and she and I were both in that little prayer group thing. This issue is obviously, may very well, is definitely impacting the church and may very well rearrange the structures of the church in the next, and actually a fairly short term, I would imagine for some people. How did you get come into this conversation and what about this process that Sean invited you into attracted you to it? Yeah, my congregation, Calvin Church. We've talked some about sexual ethics about how best to welcome LGBTQ people in the church. We've talked about it a lot. We hadn't talked about it a lot. And when this became a more active conversation for us as a denomination. I would say there were a number of ways in which that conversation at a congregational level became more difficult. I don't want to minimize the importance of having the conversation at a denominational level, but I just think maybe that's the best way to put it is that it just became more difficult. Because instead of engaging each other in the congregation by saying, I understand this. Can you help me learn how you understand it? We were saying, well, I was angry when somebody from this other classes said this, and I'm responding to that instead of the person in front of me. I think it really complicated the way the way the conversation has gone for us locally. But yeah, I have used Sean's phrase that he just used a purple church to describe Calvin Church as well. That's true politically for us, and that's been true about our perspectives on same sex marriage. We're not of one mind as a congregation. And learning how to be in that space and learning how to love each other well in that time and learning how to discern as congregational leaders, how best to operate in that context has been a challenge. And I'd say we've really benefited from intentional practices of healthy conversation, healthy conflict, healthy approaches to conflict. We're still not all the way there, but we've been learning quite a bit and really been blessed by the ways we've tried to engage that and the ways we've been helped by others to engage that. So, I want to keep learning about that too myself as a as a member of the denomination and as a member in denominational conversations. So when Sean reached out about this opportunity. I thought yeah this is this is the way for me to do that as as a member of the denominational conversation is to sit face to face with people who some of whom I get to talk with in other contexts, others of whom I don't. And to continue to learn and be formed myself as a as a conversation partner and and as a Christ follower. I maybe should I maybe should comment a little bit on context. Most people watching this video won't know but probably many people historically in the Christian Reformed Church that are familiar with Western Michigan will know Calvin Christian Reformed Church, it's a, it's a, how old is the church over 100 years by now I would imagine. Just 75 to 75. Okay, yeah, it's it's in a part of Grand Rapids near the old Calvin campus campus that my parents went to when they were at Calvin College back in the day. And, and so, Clarence Boomsma was a pastor of that church for a very long time, very influential pastor of the church back in the middle of the 20th century towards the late 20th century. Scott Jose who is currently the director of was a classmate of mine in college and seminary had been pastor there so so this is a this is a. This is a well established Christian Reformed Church that in some ways is, I don't know the church the Christian Reformed Church has gotten quite a bit more diverse in the last 50 years, even setting aside racial diversity or ethnic diversity, but this is this is really sort of a flagship Christian Reformed Church historically and has been and so that's helpful to understand that you're going to have a lot of different, you're going to have a lot of different opinions and people, this isn't a church, this is a church that people are probably into intergenerationally. And so, having a conversation like this and a church like that I would imagine, not an insignificant thing. So, yeah, that's true Paul yeah it's in really good ways and in difficult ways. Yeah, I would imagine, and for all of us, I mean, there's no such thing as a generic church. Every church has its fingerprint as its story has its location and so how a pastor deals with these conversations will very much be impacted by the context and history of the church so. All right, thank you, Rebecca. Darren, Darren and I have we have we have met on previous occasions. I believe, or at least interact a little. Yeah, I think Synod 2015. Yeah, it could be. I remember chatting maybe over lunch one time or something. Yep, yep. It's helpful to note that the Christian Reformed Church is not that big, and the cadre of ministers. You tend to, you tend to bump into each other. So, Darren, why don't you've seen the stick now why don't why don't you talk about yourself. Yeah, sure. Thanks for the invite, Paul. I've, I've, I've been something of a viewer listener at a distance. I can't consume nearly all the content you create but I do get, I do get pieces here and there and appreciate so much of your voice and how you encourage these kind of conversations. So I'm currently pastor at Shawnee Park CRC in Grand Rapids. I like, I guess some similar themes from others but I grew up in a household of deep and sincere Christian faith, both mom and dad who were deeply committed. My dad was Christian Reformed minister. He thought he was going to be an accountant when he was at Calvin. And he did a summer workshop in ministry, and that redirected him. And we've always kind of laughed because I, in the course of things ended up becoming a pastor and my brother ended up becoming an accountant, and neither of us could do the other. I don't think at all. So whatever and my dad could have gone either way, kind of split. So, I grew up mostly in West Michigan, Byron Center area. We were also out in Denver, Colorado when my dad served a church out there just long enough to really work a love of mountains into my heart that has endured. But otherwise we're mostly in the West Michigan area. And then, yeah, I went to Calvin. I studied mainly for secondary education when I was at Calvin, and I had a religion and theology track that I think a little like Rebecca I just found the study of Bible and theology compelling and interesting and wanted to pursue it more. Had some interest in ministry through like young life experiences especially kind of a relational focus to ministry that came out of some of that. And then I needed with education I needed another major to go with that so I ended up majoring in Spanish also. So I had a double major, met my wife Sarah while we were at Calvin. Sarah is also a daughter of a for part of his career a pastor, so we were getting it on both sides. So we were we pretty much on track we were thinking education, and we really both had interest in probably teaching overseas and some cross cultural settings and that's kind of where we pointed ourselves. Life took other directions for us, and we ended up deciding we were going to look for teaching positions locally here at least initially. And I got a teaching position out of coming out of Calvin at Grand Rapids Christian High School and taught there for three years and my wife taught at the Potter's House High School. So we're both teaching got started in that way and then we got involved with the church in Granville Hope Christian Reformed Church. And right towards the end of those three years of teaching, we kind of threw the doors open and said, Lord, where do you want to lead us we're pretty open to the teaching overseas things was kind of our top priority, but I had taken a course or maybe two at Calvin Seminary, partly just because after teaching high schoolers for a few years I kept bumping into the my own ignorance. There's nothing like teaching to make you aware of what you don't know, and where you kind of want to pursue some further study, and I enjoyed it I didn't know quite what to do with at that point but I mean certainly seminary was in the realm of possibility. But what happened was the the church we were involved in a position opened up a seminary graduate moved on from a neighborhood outreach position. So that part time position and seminary kind of would work together and that's what I ended up doing so. So for four years work part time at that church and pursued seminary studies full time. And then coming out of that, I spent a couple of years with a stayed on at that church in a pastor of discipleship role so I was ordained there in a part time role with really some focus on spiritual retreat and prayer in some different channels. And then coming out of those couple years then we took a call my first full time pastoral role was at Blythe Field Christian Reformed Church near Rockford so north of Grand Rapids a little ways. And we were there for about nine years, really good years at a community we really loved and appreciated, and, and then about two and a half years ago. And then finally we made the move here to Shawnee Park which brought some things full circle because I taught at Grand Rapids Christian High, which shares the parking lot with the congregation I now serve so the first Sunday I preached here we were outdoors, because of the pandemic and I could look across the parking lot at the window of the classroom I taught in, oh, like, 18 years before, and that was that was kind of a fascinating full circle experience. And then the next couple of years, as far as this really was time up at previous congregation where Sean and I were in the same classes and so our paths crossed, partly just by the mechanics of church and classes life but we also made some deliberate efforts to get together with a couple of us and a couple of others from time to time. So, Sean is a good friend and as this has all come up and seeing his work. We've conferred about it at different points. And then it really just kind of align nicely with the need here, serving at this congregation, where I'd say, as I arrived, you know like pandemic adjustments were still like priority one, and then like getting familiar with people was right there as priority one be or something But soon after that came questions of the human sexuality report and mostly I think round one for us here was like, can, can we talk about this at church. And so last year in the spring, we did round one of the challenging conversations, which was nice in a way we didn't have anything we were trying to produce or decide we just wanted to create some forum for meaningful as much as possible face to face conversation about it. And, and the nice thing was I think coming out of those those rounds was that the answer was yes we can. It's challenging but but with God's help we can. But then, posting it and coming through this year then there was kind of round two, and so we consulted and conferred with Sean and his office a bit on what round two is going to look like and we wanted to try it out so we've done that over the last several months, with now And now an attempt more to come to some kind of discerning some kind of settling point. And that is not finished, so I that's still kind of in motion but an outgrowth of that was to say, it would be interesting to gather with others and hear other churches who have gone through this or thinking about it or have done something like it. And to kind of offer what we had. We are working on and get some feedback but also to hear what others are working on and gained from some of their wisdom as well. So, I mentioned, let's see, oh family so I have my wife Sarah and then we have four kids to who are in high school across the parking lot and then to who are homeschooled in the middle school grades basically now. So, they're all at home right now. Enjoying that long summer. Well, yeah, yeah, that summer is one of the nicest times to be in West Michigan. Yeah, beautiful, beautiful day especially early summer before it gets too humid. Yeah, these are the kind of days you want to like bottle up and save for the other days and wish you could pull one of them out now and then. Absolutely. So, if, if Calvin and if Calvin CRC is sort of by the old campus. In some ways, Shawnee Park is in, let's say the next ring, much more of a community like the new Nolcrest campus and like the big new Grand Rapids Christian High and you know if you're if you're in Grand Rapids you have a sense of history, you can sort of watch the development of the Christian Reformed Church and while still in the Grand Rapids city limits you're, you're sort of in a more of a suburban ring rather than let's say early 20th century ring Yeah, that's right. So Shawnee kind of emerged they first started in the 60s meeting at Calvin seminary's chapel. And then this piece of property adjacent to the high school became available and they built here and moved and settled here so yeah it was it was closely in those circles. And then one, one kind of ringing out from where like Calvin is. Yep, yep. And historically to like just one phase later, right. Yeah. Yeah. Okay. Ben, why don't you tell us about yourself. So, a lot of similarities to the stories you've already heard, although I don't come from a pastor's family background. I was born and raised in the western suburbs of Chicago, Elmhurst, Illinois, born and raised in the Christian Reformed Church Elmhurst Christian Reformed Church. The pastor who baptized me Bert DeYoung preached at my ordination service here at 14th Street. And I think in interconnected relationships that exist in the CRC, and that make it so much of what it is certainly have shaped my life as well. Yeah, my own story of faith. Just grew up in a beautiful and deeply faithful Christian family. I had three older sisters, I was the baby the only boy, a trailer, by some degree. So all of them were dating or married. By the time I kind of came into my most form you are better than a puppy growing up I mean, I not only had three sisters I also had three older brothers in many respects. It was a wonderful home to grow up in. In terms of my own sort of faith story. I just I always go back to my baptism. Right, like the gracious initiative of God. That began right in that moment and right there. And I feel like whatever has happened since has been just the unfolding of God's gracious faithfulness that I was wrapped into beyond myself there. And I have moments along the way of course that feel significant that you point to as, as moments where your own trust deepens as young as third grade, going to a Christian camp being like profoundly homesick, wanting to go home, and a Christian And it gives you a verse of scripture and it, and it means something you hold on to it. You don't let it go, you say God if you get me through these two weeks I'll do anything. And, and he does, and you trust a little more. I can remember middle involvement in middle school, youth group in leadership of middle school youth group. And I remember sitting in the youth group we're worshiping and I'm thinking, like, I want to preach. And that's a bizarre thought for a seventh grader to have. And so some of those like initial inklings of a call to ministry go back quite a long ways for me. And in high school, some of that began to crystallize, kind of being in a chapel service at Timothy Christian High School, and my initial sense of call going back to that moment. And as close to a sense that I've ever had of a sort of audible voice that you're called to ministry. I didn't know what that meant at the time, I didn't want it frankly. I wanted to make a lot of money and I didn't think that that was a possibility as a pastor. And so, lo and behold, but actually had a really beautiful conversation with my dad about that. Anyways, that generated my interest in ministry and in the end, deepening love for scripture and theology and so went to Taylor University, studied Bible and theology and went and worked at a church outside of Milwaukee for two years after college and they're sort of young adults, a sort of residency. I was a large non denominational church. And so, got my feet wet ministry there that convinced me that I didn't want to work in a non denominational church. And it convinced me that I didn't want to work in a sort of niche young adult ministry role that I wanted to work in a church that was more intergenerational smaller and rooted in a tradition. So I went to a region college for seminary in Vancouver. While I was there. We worshiped at an Anglican Church. St. John's Vancouver, which was a very formative experience for me and for my wife, Amy. So much so that I participated in a Anglican clergy training program. We were pretty convinced at that point that if I was going to be a pastor it would probably be in Anglican Church. God had other plans, also discerning sort of there felt like to track to possible tracks to my calling, do I go sort of teaching route the Academy or do I go to pastoral route. And all of those things were worked out, kind of in relationship and conversation with mentors while at Regent. And I started preaching in Christian reform churches in the lower mainland of British Columbia, and there was this sense of coming home. And like, as much as much as there is about Anglican world that I absolutely love and have been formed and shaped by. I couldn't ignore the fact that walking into this Christian reform churches in the lower mainland just felt a little bit like coming home. And so, through my time at Regent discerned a call both to pastoral ministry and also to doing a PhD for the sake of local church pastoral ministry. So there was about a year and a half where I was an associate pastor at a Christian reform church. Right after seminary, we knew that was going to be temporary. And then I went to, we moved to Edinburgh, Scotland for me to do a PhD in New Testament, and we were there for four years 2014 to 2018. And then took the call to 14th Street Christian reform church in Holland. After having done the EPMC program like Rebecca. In order to pursue ordination in the Christian reform church. So that was 2018 that we took the call to 14th Street, and so we've been here for five years. Family wise, is Amy. And we have four kids as well, who are also off on summer break. Tell me, I don't know anything about your church so tell me about your church bit. Yeah. I mean it's, it's a beautiful and a lovely and a wonderful congregation that I am so grateful to be able to faster feel sort of not just called the Christian reform church but in the call process just felt deeply out to this church. It's a church I love its history goes back to 1902. So 121 years this summer. It is the first English speaking congregation in Holland. It was planted more or less out of ninth street or pillar and central have groups of families came out of both pillar and central have kind of in that second third generation of Dutch immigration, the kids are speaking English, the parents are speaking Dutch. The kids want to worship in English, and so it was started out of pillar and out of central have as an evening service in English for families to worship together and it became its own church and grew quite quickly early in its history because of that because it was the only English speaking congregation. And now, older churches go through a lot of changes. How about the last 10 years what are some of the churches questions struggles, who's sort of what what sort of niche of ministry are you really developing. Yeah. I mean I think one of the things I love about 14th Street is there's a deep sense of continuity with the past. So if you go and read the 50 year anniversary booklet of 14th Street which I have done, like the deep sense of community and intergenerational ministry is so recognizable. This, this real sense of churches family and deeply engaged in each other's lives and love for Christ and love for each other. It's been at the forefront of some of the interesting conversations in our denomination and in classes Holland with regards to things like women in office with respect to things like children at the Lord's table. The initial overture that came to synod for children at the Lord's table came out of 14th Street, and the previous pastor Mark Hoffman and Bob and Lord Keely kind of integral and spearheading that. So just a really thoughtful congregation that sense, lots of connections to Hope College Western Theological Seminary people who are engaged institutionally in the life of our denomination. So we're not Grand Rapids, but there's a lot of that sort of institutional engagement. Still in a church like 14th Street. All right. I'm gonna go back to Sean but I'm gonna say a few words about kind of contextualizing Sean to, because even in. Sorry I laughed at thrive it's just, I'm still dealing with the resonate thing. Ripple ripple they get, they take a while to ripple out the California. You guys do. What's that Sean of all the changes we've got to deal with in that week ahead. That's true. This is a very small one to be the biggest thing. Oh, if that were only the case. Now pastor church relations is an office in the Christian from church there are offices and agencies and that's always changing too. And even if you look at pastor church relations you get a sense of the denomination had a sense that, well when ministers and their congregations sort of. Sometimes it's ministers getting trouble moral failure sometimes there's a conflict and they don't see eye to eye and so pastor church relations would step in and try to help the situation. And so when you look at the pastor church resources you can see sort of the transition because, well it's not just always the pastor sometimes it's the church and they really need resources to figure out how to, for the church to get out of a place where they're stuck with their own internal things and get back into a posture where they can where they can thrive and so you can see where how thrive would be in continuity because the goal of the office and those who work in that office are too often help churches get out of their own way and be able to thrive and flourish and do productive ministry. So, again, as anybody who watches the channel knows the Christian from church has been like, almost like almost every other major denomination in in North America or the west has to deal with the sexual revolution. Women's, you know the questions of women's ordination. LGBTQ questions and this has been something that has sort of been simmering in the Christian Reformed Church, really until Senate 2016. And there's just been a long series and there's a positions page on the website of the Christian Form Church if you look type in homosexuality position homosexuality see a long list of sort of synodical addressing, and in 2016, Senate commission to human sexuality report that what was unusual about the committee, usually a synodical committee does a lot of study brings recommendations that Senate then deals with what was unusual about the committee and 2016 was they intentionally selected individuals who were in agreement with the posture of the Christian Church since the 73 report, and that I knew when they made that decision that this was going to set something on a trajectory now again I have more hours than anybody probably cares to or should watch with respect to this issue on my channel alone. But that of course in some ways came to a head at Senate last year with the human sexuality report, and the way that the report positioned confessionality with this position, and suddenly which had been an issue which there were sort of boundaries in the denomination but a lot of people felt a certain degree of liberty to continue to explore, and maybe even push boundaries when Neelon Avenue announced that they had ordained a woman living in a same sex marriage to office that then and that of course happened. Basically concurrent with the pandemic, meaning that this would stew in the denomination. Obviously, you know, a lot of the focus on my channel has been, how does this play out denominationally, but there are many congregations in the Christian Reformed Church, where this is going to become not just an existential crisis in the denomination, but potentially an existential crisis in the local congregation. And that's where pastor church resources thrive. That's where it comes on to their docket and say hey wait a minute. Not only is this a denominational conversation. This is a local conversation, and probably local churches are going to need some help in trying to figure out whatever way this goes in terms of the denomination. These local churches still are going to have to deal with these questions, and maybe, Sean you can take it from there. Yeah, I think when I that shift from pastor church relations, where we were the image we sometimes use is where the firefighters coming in when there's a fire. The shift to resources saying maybe we could work on like building code fire code, try to help churches be more resilient before the conflict emerges. So I came into the position in January of 2020, which is by the way was a great time to get out of pastoral ministry. So I got into this position and we knew that the report from that committee was going to come down the pike within a number of months. And, and I said you know I think there's an opportunity here to get ahead of this because this thing's not never church and a lot of churches maybe most churches this is just blow over they're not even going to be aware they're not going to care but a lot of our churches. This is really like a, it's a time bomb. And, and you know to Darren's point, a lot of churches are wondering, can we even talk about this, like we have carefully avoided this topic, maybe for a long time. And I said what if this was a way to teach our churches, there's a felt need here. So what are we going to do is there a way to give churches, some user friendly resources to try to structure those conversations. And I thought about it really just in terms of what what would I wish existed for my own purple church. I don't, I knew that I wouldn't want like an endless conversation like we're talking talking forever and ever like we need to arrive at some decision. But could we even talk about it in the first place. So that's, that's set off. First it was called the challenging conversations toolkit and now it's next steps discernment. And the idea is through especially listening circle format you pass a talking piece there's structured questions. Can you get into the issues, can you talk about them in meaningful ways not just superficial but meaningful ways, while also maintaining like a respectful gracious posture toward one another. And begin to talk about these how are we going to even make them consequential decisions about them. One of the things we found in the last year as we've been working with churches after sin it is a lot of churches found that people would self censor. So, you sit in a listening circle, and the first few people speak up, and they all hate the human sexuality report. And you kind of like it. You think it's biblically faithful, but you start, you want to get along. And so you kind of, you kind of censor yourself you try to occupy that small slice of ground maybe that where we have agreement, and people in the group might not even know that you disagree with them. Because you just want to get along. One of the things we were especially finding is that probably the majority of churches engaging in the resources were once were feeling the anxiety most acutely. And so that would be more will say more affirming churches are more open churches. And in those churches there was sometimes a lack of a really robust face to the traditional position. And churches were feeling like they were losing out, not having that. That's where the idea of a retreat first came up like what if, what if we could curate a group to have this kind of conversation. What if we can make sure that we have people representing these different views, who, who were who had the capacity to lean in for what I sometimes call a grace and truth conversation. In theory, our assemblies should be able to house this kind of conversation you've got usually enough diversity in the room for that. But our assemblies tend to be adversarial right once emotions on the floor. I'm the fool who's tried to make amendments on the floor of Senate, like, it just doesn't happen like it just does not happen. Like, once, once the advisory committee has submitted their, their recommendation. It's yes or no. And you feel like it's basically my side or their side. And I got to win. It's not really helpful for curious questions. I can't ask Ben's like, hey, what did you mean when you said that, because that's like a show of weakness to my side. And I can't say to Darren, oh man, that was actually a pretty good point. Tell me more about that, because again, we're at this point of needing to win. And so you're surrounded by really wise discerners, but they're in an adversarial posture, where it's hard for that insight to emerge. So we said what if we didn't make it adversarial let's do it on condition of anonymity. So let's say who's participating. Just show up. And let's have the kind of conversation that I think a lot of people are craving. Now I know a lot of people say hey we've talked about this for years and years and years. Most people, most people have not talked about it for years and years. And most of them have not had the kind of conversation they want to have, which is the kind that I'm talking about the kind where you can say, help me understand where you're coming from because I just, I don't get it or I don't understand the kind of conversation I think you try to model. People crave that. And how do you make that happen in a group so we said let's try to curate a group. Let's have them actually prepare. Kind of imagine like a letter to your congregation. This is, this is how we're going to proceed with respect to the human sexuality decisions of our denomination. And then let's offer that to the group for their honest engagement. And actually these three here each submitted scenarios we don't have to get into the weeds of what they submitted but part of what they demonstrated for the group that really cracked that retreat open was each of them said, listen I'm trying my hardest. To be faithful here. Can you help me see what I'm not seeing. Can you give me feedback because it's just hard to get that kind of engagement. And we want it. And when they when these three sort of set that tone with the rest of the nine participants. And we have, we have a lot of people that have been very constructive, very sincere. And I think, when you look at all of these participants, what you saw was people really giving I think very constructive, sincere feedback to one another, of the sort that I think we all believe is possible in our assemblies was just really rare. that it is possible to have these kinds of conversations, but they typically require a fair bit of preparation. And I think they need to be in a non adversarial setting where it's safe to be curious and it's safe to be vulnerable. And our assemblies don't always offer that. Well, that's really good. That's really helpful. And I, those of you who have known me or at least heard from me before the YouTube thing, which was completely disconnected from any of this stuff actually, you know, I've for years really wanted to encourage the Christian Reformed Church to have confessional conversations. And when I, I don't think a lot of people understood, it's not their fault, what I meant by confessional conversations. I found generally that when people sort of on the progressive end of the denomination heard that, they sort of shied, they liked the word conversation, but they were nervous about confessional because they had a sense that this was something that could be used against them. This was a stick. And that's in a lot of ways, a lot of the reaction to Senate 2022. People on the more traditional side, when they'd hear your conversation, they'd hear that as a setup, whereas, well, we just wanna have this conversation. But they've had some of these conversations where this isn't really a conversation. This is a promotion in the guise of a conversation. And so, and I have long thought that even before this issue came up as such in the denomination, I saw this with the women in how the, so I was in seminary during the women in church office wars. I saw how many of the dynamics that Sean just laid out were very true in that. And the denomination was able to, at the cost of about 60,000 people leaving, broker a political, structural, procedural compromise with respect to that issue, but the issue still simmers. And that is the simmering of that issue in some ways has set up some of the explosiveness around this issue. And so I haven't really had a sense of, okay, we certainly need to have better confessional conversations, but as Sean said, our assemblies are set up in a particular way to accomplish particular things. And it's helpful to understand that in the Christian Reformed Church, you have synod, which is the one that gets all the visibility because it's the broadest assembly and it meets once a year. And then you have these classes meetings of all these regional groups. And in many ways, that's an area of the church that has long been sort of neglected. It's really vital for the health of local churches because a lot of local issues actually sort of come up to classes. They never really get all the way up to synod. So, and even, and I focused before the whole YouTube thing, a lot of my ministry focus was in my classes, just trying to help classes become a resource for local churches. But even though over the last 40 years, there's been a fair amount of, I don't know, fair amount that's maybe even too much. There's been some experimentation with respect to classes that maybe at this level, we can, we know we need a business meeting where we have rules of procedure and it's a winning and losing things because decisions have to be made. But there's also these other processes that need to happen for the health of the local churches. And so I was really excited to hear what Sean was doing and I'm not really surprised that it's sort of Thrive or Pastor Church Resources that, because they're the ones sort of keeping their eye on this thing. So maybe Sean or the rest of you, you can come in as you will. What made this different from some of the other processes that you had been involved with? I can say some. I think there were a number of things about how Sean and others on his team structured the conversation that were very important for how the conversation itself turned out. And some of the structure could even seem silly on the surface, like the talking piece itself. You have this little toy that you're passing around and whoever's holding it gets to speak. Oh, Sean has it. That was it. So a group of adults sitting around holding this, there's some, you have to commit to it enough to say, all right, we're gonna trust the process. Even if we feel silly passing this to each other, we trust that there's a reason for this and we'll commit to it. And that pays off. I mean, for our experience, that pays off. It's not just a silly thing to kind of make sure you're not talking over each other, but it's a way to really say, if someone takes a little longer to express their, if they need some more pauses to express their own ideas, we will give them that. Yeah, I think a way to use those techniques that really enhances the conversation itself. Another part of the structure was that Sean had invited, the 12 of us were divided up into two groups. So there were six of us in each circle and Sean had also invited two intercessors to be a part of our retreat. So each circle, there's six participants, one facilitator and one intercessor. And that person is present the entire time praying. They say a couple things, but for many of the questions, they don't respond. When they get the talking piece, they say, I am praying as I listen to you. So we have that visual reminder. When we see them in the room, we know someone has committed their entire attention right now to just praying for how this conversation goes. And then they say that to remind us of it. And we felt that, we felt the effectiveness of those prayers. So yeah, again, you think, okay, an extra person, hey, we were all praying and our congregations were praying for us. But there was something quite powerful about seeing someone in the room who was committed to that. I would add to what Rebecca said, just regarding the listening circles, totally affirm and agree with the power and importance of the first part of these listening circles and the role of the talking piece in that. Totally affirm that and just the way in which it opens things up. There's also, and I've talked to Sean about this before and been honest with him about it. There's also something that, there comes a point at which that starts to feel artificial in group conversation where you really just wanna be able to start to go back and forth with people as trust has developed. And the talking piece and the insistence I'm going around the circle, never actually allows you to respond in real time to anyone after you've listened well. And so it's like person one shares, person two shares, person three, person four, person five, person six, which is great. And like you've just heard six monologues, but there's no actual back and forth, which has always been a frustrating element of listening circles to me. And one of the things I really appreciated about this two day time together was that the way that Sean structured it was that the first 45 minutes say, the first set of questions was talking piece going around the circle, but there came a moment, a point in the middle of the time together where we did start to open it up a little bit, may or may not have used the talking piece, but where we could start to ask questions of each other. And we had a common sort of piece, a scenario in the middle that we were all dialoguing and discerning and talking about. And that was always the moment for me where the conversation actually started to open up in ways that felt more honest and more fruitful. Because trust had developed at that point. So we trusted one another with honesty. And it felt like at those moments, we started to get somewhere. Sometimes the disagreement was palpable. And other times it felt like, give us seven more days in this room together, lock us away and we might get somewhere. So that's that. The other thing I'd say just on structure is we had two days, right? And I think it was really important not to over-program those two days because a lot of the most important conversations happened, not just in the listening circles, but in the meal conversations, the time where you're taking a walk, the side conversations, the offline conversations. And it was just really important, I think, for us to be together over a longer period of time. The greater investment in time had a greater payoff because there was time to develop relationship. Yeah. Go ahead, Darren. Sure. I mean, all of that resonates. I think the fact that we had a couple of days of time that we were able to be relatively unrushed. There was relational space and time moments and meals and worship together. And because we had to sit in circles, it was eye to eye, face to face. And it resonated with something we've worked on congregationally too, where we've said conversations like this over devices and even documents have a supplementary role, an important one, but they don't replace eye to eye, face to face conversations as kind of the primary mode. So I'm grateful to do this too, because Paul, I probably wouldn't get a chance to talk to you over in California if it weren't for something like this. But that finding ways to give priority to just, yeah, incarnational face to face conversation seems really an underestimated benefit and gift to this kind of thing. So you were all sort of pulled out of your local churches. And so were you there with some of your congregational leaders at this event, or was it just clergy in this event? Yeah, clergy and then Sean and staff and the people he invited to help with prayer and worship and that kind of thing. Okay. And I very much want to accentuate the trust element. If there's anything that I've really tried to, the nice thing about YouTube is that the bandwidth is nearly limitless. And so again, part of what makes my channel odd is that I will take two hours to get to know someone or at least an hour before we actually talk about what all of the sort of conflict, I mean, YouTube is driven by conflict Twitter's even worse and Facebook is just as bad. But part of the benefit of YouTube is, and I've seen this over the course of the channel that some people when I'd first introduced them, maybe it was a human sexuality issue, maybe it was a doctrinal issue, maybe it was they're an atheist, theist issue. But once someone has had two, three, four hours to sort of get to know the person, okay, they're an atheist, but I can still trust them in these ways. And that's common with people is that we don't extend ultimate trust over every area with every individual. Trust is usually contextualized, but trust is absolutely essential for dealing with conflict and to have actually conflict be productive. And yeah, so building trust is important. So this process was done with clergy. What are some of the, what did you as clergy take away from this that you thought, oh, maybe this might be useful for my church? I guess one, Sean, did you wanna go? Yeah, I'll just mention one thing briefly. I've joked with these three that if we need to have a like a classes meeting where we talk about one of our churches disaffiliating or disciplining one of our members, I would, I think all 12 of them would entirely trust themselves to the others, that that would be an even handed conversation. You got past attributing motives at hominem, whatever, there's this beautiful moment, one of the pastors was reflecting on the experience and they said, you know, I observed that we all come in here like with a limp. They were talking about how basically we've all been in the front lines of trying to minister well with our LGBTQ folks in our community and family. And we've got wounds to show for it. Like on the left and the right, like we've all been trying this really hard and it's been hard. And we had this opportunity to, it didn't take long to identify people's soft spots. And you kind of have this choice to make, like, will I exploit that for the sake of my argument? Or will I like help prop this person up? And what was so beautiful was to see people trying to help prop each other up and recognizing like we're all weary of this. This has been hard. And I thought, man, if you had to pick any 12 people to have those hard kinds of assembly conversations or council conversations, if they had done this as a supplement, I can't help but think it really would change the tenor in the room. Yeah, I'll just mention that. So are you thinking structurally, this is more of a classical level thing or are you looking at this tool as again, something that can help local congregations? Yeah, I think a lot of local congregations, that's probably the main spot. There'd be an appeal to having this kind of engagement. But I think this retreat suggests to me that you could do this at a regional or a classes level. I don't think it can, it's not designed to replace regular order, but a kind of a supplement, especially if we're about to step into really momentous decisions. This might be the time that it's worth the investment of a couple of days to try to do it as well as possible. Make every effort to keep the unity of the spirit through the bond of peace. Let's make sure we do it well, even if it's really hard. My sense is that at the regional or classical level, it's most fruitful with pastors. As Sean did in giving pastors the experience of doing this together, so as to try and begin to replicate it in congregations. I mean, one of the things you asked, what's the takeaway for the local congregation? One of the takeaways for me is we need to find ways to... Sean in his opening comments talked about that sort of narrow slice of agreement, that like you read the room, you go around, you find out what's acceptable to say, and you just sort of like live in that narrow bandwidth of what's acceptable to say, so that we all feel like we get along. And then everyone leaves that circle totally dissatisfied because we sort of got along on... Like there's a veneer of getting along, but everyone walks away feeling like I actually couldn't share anything about what I actually believe or who I am. And my sense is just like we have to find ways first to cultivate the trust, but second of all, to actually facilitate honest enough conversations that doesn't settle for the narrow bandwidth of agreement, the sort of lowest common denominator of agreement. Because in my experience, when you actually begin to trust yourself to another person and actually be honest, there's actually ways that can clarify the disagreement, but it can also break through to new levels and deeper levels of relationship and intimacy. And it doesn't mean that we agree, and it might not even mean that we stay together, but it will be impossible to understand one another unless we're honest enough with each other to share where we're at. And so just a commitment to facilitating that, I think is important for me. Senate used to be two weeks. I'm old enough to remember when my father went to Senate for two weeks. And I... Part of, I think two things. Number one, we are increasingly rushing, partly because we can. We have, you know, if you had to travel cross-country to go to Senate by car, two weeks wouldn't seem crazy. You might be gone a very long time, but the pace of life was just slower then. Also, the Christian Reformed Church is, when I was growing up, it was not uncommon around, even as a child around the table, listening to my parents and my grandparents talk names, and names of clergy, certain, so and so went to this church, so and so went to this church. It was not that they necessarily did real well when it came to conflict back in the day. You can read those histories. But there was a sense of, you know, we certainly have our church business. We have our doctrinal beliefs, but we also have this other layer of relationship. And those two things were always part of one another. And, you know, I think part of, you know, when I think about, say, going into Synod, part of my concern is, just as you said, Sean, that everything is set up for a certain thing. And, you know, even if, there tends to be, when things are programmed for Synod, it's usually, well, this is an education. And increasingly, education in our country with respect to all sorts of issues feels like indoctrination by one side or another. And so then there's resistance. And it sounds to me like a process like this very much helps people hear each other, understand each other, and then with respect to whatever decisions actually do get made, because there are times to make decisions about structures and wineskins, then at least even post wineskin, could discernment or differentiation, now maybe if there are relational bonds, some of that segmenting off won't be as destructive or counterproductive as I think we've seen in the past, because usually what happens is it wells up to a big fight, and then there's a blowup, and then you might spend decades of people sort of on different sides licking their wounds. But also what you tend to have is that the two sides just tend to grow like this then, because the sort of natural tensions that held them together by the container, which forced, and then actually in the long run, that negative practice of conflict leads to polarization, because there are likely temperamental aspects to all of us that tend to lead us towards openness or let's say towards orderliness. And so very quickly, because when I think about this, I think, okay, well, we'll see what happens, but I'm much more thinking beyond any kinds of divisions or that happen, okay, how can I, even if I find myself on the other side of a boundary from people that I've looked at as colleagues, fellow brothers and sisters in the Christian Informed Church, even if there is a division that happens, I don't want to be separated from these people. I want to continue to be informed by these people, and I hope to have some influence with them. And I'm hoping that whatever way their experiment goes, I'll be able to learn from it, and they'll be able to learn from me. And so, I hope that at some point we can begin to transcend some of these boxes that are necessary for just working in a very large complex world. I don't know if that resonates with any of you. Yeah, it does. We talked about pieces of that over the retreat at different points. I mean, there's no question, the marriage gender and sexuality questions are themselves complex, and they have levels, psychological, sociological, confessional, pastoral, missiological, that would make this plenty challenging as a conversation. But then we've had to do it through the warping spin of a deeply polarized moment. And one of my concerns throughout this has been, boy, it'd be nice if we didn't merely copy in a churchy way exactly the way the world is polarized. And this issue has just been ripe for that, it seems like. And I mentioned while we were at the retreat, something I think I heard from Jonathan Haidt about polarization, where he talks about, something like in any organization, institution, or even family, or any community, you're gonna have a more progressive mindset and a more traditional mindset. You're gonna have a mindset, and he compared it, I thought, really helpfully, to a gas pedal on a car. You're gonna have to keep moving forward, right? Things are gonna come at you, you're gonna change if somewhere you're trying to go. And then you're gonna have another mindset, which is more of a brake pedal mindset that says slow down, continuity of the past, don't get out of control. And the gist of it seems to be, if you're functioning in a healthy way, those have a kind of alternating, like when you drive a car, you don't slam on both at the same time. You alternate because you have a common vision of where you're trying to go, and you have a common direction steering the thing. And part of the sense is like, we're at a point where it seems like both one side wants to slam on the gas pedal and one side wants to slam on the brake pedal. And so that's just really hard on the car and everybody in it. And so one mindset is like, well, let's just cut this car in half and we'll move the gas pedal people over here and the brake pedal over here. And one of my convictions is we may do that, and maybe some version of that's inevitable, but what's gonna happen over time is that new gas pedal community is gonna have some people who will begin to voice brake pedal type questions. And over in the brake pedal community, people are gonna continue to ask some kind of gas pedal questions. So that's where like staying to some degree in touch and in conversation and communication, even if it proves not to be possible to stay organizationally united, has some real value. And these kinds of conversations, the possibility of division doesn't preclude the value of some of what happened in a retreat like this or in a conversation like this, because there's still gonna be, even if there is, if the division is inevitable, and I still kind of hope on a wing and a prayer that it might not be, but if it is, this still will contribute to the nature of what the separation looks like, and maybe insert some wisdom to it for the way ahead. I really resonate with that as you're expressing it, Darren. Also with the hope that division is not inevitable, and with the conviction that even when structural splits happen, that doesn't take away our need to learn how to do conflict well or how we benefit as churches and as Christians from learning to do conflict well, because yeah, a split over one issue is not gonna take away conflict in the future for our communities. So yeah, I think learning to do this well is so important. I maybe wanna add too, just about the strength of conviction that people can hold in these conversations, and that I believe, and I've observed, that having the conversations well and creating atmospheres of trust, that doesn't have to take away the strength of conviction that the participants bring to those conversations. And I think that's important to say, because I think that can be assumed sometimes that, well, if you're willing to talk with them, then maybe you're not as strongly convicted about this. And I guess, I don't know, I think that is something for everyone to continue to wrestle with, how do we express our strong convictions well and clearly, but I think being concerned with how the conversations happen does not at all have to take away the what of the conversation, the strength of the conviction that either side carries. I think I observed that in our retreat, that we came with our own convictions and we didn't feel a need to water those down in order to speak to each other. And I think that's my hope for other conversations too, that the trust building, the listening, the curiosity, all those things can be really strong. And we can continue to grow in all of those things, even as we hold our own firm convictions. There was this really kind of powerful moment to me in the retreat. It was one of the later circles where one of the participants, I think was quite outspoken. And then like, sort of was like, oh man, like felt like maybe he transgressed, like he'd gone too far. And we'd done so much conversation and prayer about expectations that we just turned it back to the group and said, what do you all think? Like, was that out of line? And it was so cool to hear everybody say, no, no, like we want you, like, please like bring yourself. And yeah, sure, that was maybe an unorthodox way to say it, but come on, like we wanted to see that. And there's just not a lot of places where you'd see a dynamic like that, where instead of this person being like slapped down, people just sort of said, oh yeah, like, no, we want you here, we want to hear from you. And I thought that was really cool to see that dynamic take place. That's a good sign, that's a good sign. That people, we all want to be known and love and be loved. I mean, that's just so basic to us that when you can have, you can create a space where that happens. And I think you're right, Sean, that these kinds of conflicts have the potential for blessing and we often aren't blessed by them because getting to that space is not easy. But I think that's deeply true. So where does this go from here? You had a retreat with some pastors and some clergy and seemed to go very, very well. Was this sort of a prototype that you were doing to see if it would work and what happens from here? Yeah, I'm working on my cloning technology to get more Benjes, Darrens and Rebeccas out there. That ain't gonna happen. There is a sense in which- What do you want it to happen? I mean, we did it in Grand Rapids mostly just to keep costs down for what was really, I think, a prototype. You can get that range of people in West Michigan. Well, actually it wasn't easy, but more easily than probably any other geographic location. But I've been reached out to by a few classes who've said basically, we're headed for the worst classes meeting ever this fall. Is there any way that this could be different for us? Or congregations feeling the same way? And I've said, I don't know if this gets you all the way there. I don't think it does. But if you are animated as I am by that call from Paul in Ephesians 4, making every effort, this is a way to make an effort. And this could be used by a congregation or classes. And for part of me, and part of the reason Paul, I'd said, can we try to get this even in before Senate is? I think I've said elsewhere, like if I hadn't been there, when I read the CRC news article about this, I would have thought it was propaganda. Just because like it seems so unlikely. And so there's something really hopeful for me about how God showed up here. And I just think honestly, our denomination could use a more hopeful story right now that these three pastors who themselves represent like different positions strongly also feel deep affection for one another, even a desire to stay in relationship. They have varying degrees of a sense of how much we can do that institutionally together. But there's so much good fruit that came from that conversation. So yeah, I'd love to see if God shows up in other places the way that God showed up in this place. And anybody in the Christian Form Church knows how to get in touch with Pastor Church Resources, AKA Thrive. They're not hard to find. They have an office, they have phones, they have email, they have all those things. So if you're in a classes in the Christian Form Church and you're saying, this is getting dark quickly and we need some help, you can certainly reach out to Sean and to others in the office. And anything else you guys wanted to cover in this conversation or get out there? Most of the people I get on YouTube, I can't stop them from talking. You guys are so polite. Let me hand the talking piece to them. That's right. No one, Sean's the only guy who's got the piece. Ah, it's a setup. I knew it. I appreciate your, oh, go ahead, Darren. Yeah, I mean, I think when I think back, if I go back a decade, so that puts us before the 2016 and I think about what conversations have I had as a pastor and as a member of the Christian Form Church around questions of marriage, sexuality and gender. I think in retrospect, too many of them are siloed conversations. It's people who largely agree, talking with others who largely agree or other adversarial conversations. And so part of the value for me has been, it's easy to wish in retrospect, but at least to wish going forward that more of our conversations are less siloed, that the discernment and the decisions are informed by genuine deep personal engagement around the questions involved. And that involves a good deal of wrestling with scripture together, wrestling with tradition together, wrestling with implications together of the positions we take and doing it in as honest and forthright a way as we can. And yeah, that may not mean that we hold organization institutionally together at all levels, but well, I think there'll be more wisdom if we can have those kinds of conversations more and more often rather than very late in the game or something like that. The word patience comes to mind. Paul, when you said, I think we're in many respects, it's regrettable that we're rushing, something that would be nice to give a lot more time. But I think there's a sense of foreboding and doom and like a decision needs to get made tomorrow. Going back to Darren's analogy of the brake pedal and the gas pedal, anybody from my congregation who now listens to this is gonna know that I stole Darren's analogy in my sermon last Sunday. I stole it anyway, so it's all just holy-morrow. Master's are thieves. I tell people right away, we steal from each other. Terrible plagiarism. There's a different analogy that I had used. I like Darren's so much better that I'm now using it. But there's this French Catholic theologian middle of the 20th century, pre-Vatican II, his name is Yves Kangar. He writes a book called True and False Reform in the Church. And he talks about two poles in the church, center and periphery, or core and periphery. Let's call them brake pedal and gas pedal. And I think Kangar makes the point that these two poles need each other and they need to talk with one another. They need to listen to one another. And the periphery, the gas pedal people, sort of unkept from the core brake pedal people have a tendency to sort of potentially run off. Like that's the danger, right? The core, the brake pedal people, have a tendency to sort of like tradition for its own sake, a failure to move at all. And Kangar's point is that the core, or the brake pedal won't reform without the periphery, without the gas pedal. And the periphery and the gas pedal will tend towards false reform without the brake pedal, without the core. And so for the sake of true reform, brake pedal and gas pedal need each other. This is how we end up in a better place together, but that actually requires like a profound level of sacrifice and mutual submission to each other and patience that I just don't quite know we have. I just don't quite think we have in us, sadly. And I wish we could think about this as a 50 year, what if this was a 50 year conversation? And that would mean something for right now. For me, I'm traditional on this, like it would mean that the periphery, that the gas pedal would allow itself to be restrained for a time as we engage this conversation. And it means frankly that the brake pedal needs to create and be okay with private spaces for disagreement for this conversation to continue in the right places. But I don't particularly get the impression that the brake pedal people want to create space for disagreement to have this conversation. And I just am intensely realistic about the possibility of gas pedal allowing itself to be restrained because of the nature and strength of their convictions. And I get it, I get it. I just wish that this could be a 50 year conversation that was more patient. Maybe it can be, even though we're not necessarily together as we learn from each other if we're separate. I think part of these dynamics tend to hold even when we start rearranging boxes and wine skins. The, I mean, even going back to the Protestant Reformation, part of the challenge of church after the black death was Europe's population begins to grow. And we've seen, over the last 200 years, beginning of the 20th century, there were, a million and two billion people in the planet. We leave the 20th century with 7 billion people. I mean, a hundred years to have that happen to our population, the Christian Reformed Church, has not grown at that pace, but grew at an enormous pace and the interconnected way we are with all sorts of others. It's ironic that on one hand, things are tremendously polarized, but it's also the case that we are as, in some ways, as interconnected as we've ever been. And that doesn't necessarily solve any of our particular misery right now, but I do think that whatever way we try to go forward together, I suspect we will, the boxes are not nearly what they used to be, even in the Christian Reformed Church, that they were in, let's say, 1940. It's been a tremendous amount. We now are, I mean, even just in this circle, I mean, Princeton, not old Princeton, new Princeton, and you went all the way to, you know, the old, the new Princeton, you went all the way to the other continent to get your PhD and not to the free. I mean, this is a big change in the Christian Reformed Church. So, we will see what comes this Senate, but I really appreciated when Sean pitched this to me, you know, he very much said, we need to be talking after Senate, even if we don't know what Senate is going to do. And we need to be anticipating whatever reality, which right now we can't really forecast and say, let's help address that reality. Because in many ways, what holds us together, that will still remain whatever Senate does. Those relationships we have, those remain our commonalities. So, I think we do have to keep thinking beyond just the wineskins and the boxes. And I think then, especially as we develop new structures, given whatever changes in structures happen, all that this conversation has borne witness to, I think will be something that can go into the next iteration as well. So, all right. Any, anything anyone else wants to say before I land the plane here? I'll just mention this briefly, Paul. I still see in my consultation work, the wounds from 25 years ago, 30 years ago, they're still manifesting in churches, the ways that we separated and how traumatic, basically how traumatic that was for churches and communities. And I don't want to presume that we can just, if we do this just right, we'll avoid the trauma. But I do hope that we can conduct ourselves with just the maximum of charity. Because look around you, all of our churches still bear the wounds from that fight. And I'd love for our remembering of this time to be remembering how God showed up in the midst of all this, to surprise us, even to delight us, to strengthen us, to make us more like Christ. And so those wounds don't stay with us in the way that it seems like they have the last time we went through something like this. Good word. Maybe good word to end on. So thank you all for showing up for this. I know I tell people YouTube is for people who have very little to lose because you can get yourself in a lot of trouble doing this. And I know as a minister of a local church, there is always risk in showing up on a screen that can be shared via social media to different places. So I applaud all of your courage and I'm sure you all with me will be praying for Synod that is about to begin tomorrow. And we pray that come what may, the Lord will be with us and that one way or another, we can continue to bless our church and bless each other. So. Thanks, Paul. Thanks everybody. Yeah, thanks Paul. Thank you. I'm gonna stop the recording now.