https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=1TMgcbsUtLQ

 Hi, this is Paul. I just saw that. So, Gavin was on Jacob's channel this morning, and then GrimGrizz picked up, and then I came in here and I had a bunch of work to do. That's why there was no Q&A livestream this morning, and then I did a little bit more work, and I just caught the Grail Country livestream. Jacob had a real desire to sort of have a 24-hour network, and I know he wanted to have all sorts of programming and things, but I sort of like GrimGrizz's take on this, sort of a virtually not alone, to be able to sort of have a drop-in where you could have conversations with individuals. Oh, there's Chad. I'll pull him in. Hey, Chad. I'm on my robot track, so I'm just listening for now. Oh, okay. All right. How have you been? Good. How are you? I'm good. I'm good. You're gonna have to teach me how to do all that good editing on the phone. That's pretty impressive what you're, I mean all the, now, did you start the, what's the name of that new channel, the channel with all the shorts? Is that you two? No, that's Dave from Kansas. Oh, lost cause. Oh, lost cause is doing that. Oh, good for him. Yeah. Yeah. Oh, good for him. So, yeah, I like it too because they'll grab different things and they're doing a different style. I'm trying to be less serious. Sometimes I take it to a serious spot, but, and I also like to raise more questions than give answers, I think. Yeah. Yeah. No, I'm glad, I'm glad lost cause is doing that. There's been a need for that and I'm glad he picked it up. For sure. Hey, Matt. I see Matt Moore just, I just pulled you in. Are you gonna just be listening or do you wanna, do you wanna turn on your camera and say something? Oh, there you are. I'm a big fan. This is the first time I'm joining the stream. Didn't really, you know, I was just trying to figure out all this website stuff in a kind of a boyer of the, this little corner of the internet, but appreciate everything you do. Yeah. Oh, thank you. That's much more fun to turn on the, it's much more fun to turn on the camera and play. Absolutely. Yeah. Howdy. Welcome. And there's Chad the alcoholic up there. Yeah. I feel a little starstruck here. That's a big star. Yeah. I've got a, I've got a, you know, his Friday morning Nameless channel. I looked at my, I looked at my YouTube, I looked at my YouTube things and I noticed that partly just because of this, all this just chatting, it's like my three of my biggest channels I watch are, are Jacob and Grim and Friday morning Nameless. I'm, I'm often there seeing because you know, it's funny Chad, because you, you actually manage now to, I think, do more of what you wanted to do with sort of the, the hub channel where you're doing the news. I like how you bring the movies in and that's really good. Thanks. Yeah. We'll pray for you because you're watching all these weirdos. Yeah. Oh, go ahead. Go ahead. Oh, it's just, it's just been kind of super interesting to slowly kind of get used to all the names and all the characters. And I've been trying to get into the discord. I don't know. I've struggled to, my wife's about to leave. Give me a kiss, baby. I was going to show you these. That's just a live stream that I joined. That's, that was my, that was my wife. Not really realizing that I was not watching a YouTube video. That's a, Hey, that's a typical wife response by the way, in this little corner. Well, one of the things I was going to say was that, and I don't hear mentioned and maybe, you know, now that I've got the ear of the, the pastor and the king of this little corner, I guess, Chad is the Pope. The Pope. That's right. Okay. Yeah. Yeah. That's right. Yeah. I felt that it's, so I'm kind of somebody who used to work at a mega church and then got fired from the mega church and then through a series of, you know, philosophical wonderings has found myself back in a similar, I really responded to the Jordan Peterson is a Christian in Kierkegaard video. That was kind of my entryway into this little corner. And that's kind of, cause that's kind of how I felt for a while. It's like, I don't know if I'm the type of Christian that I was raised up to be in a fundamentalist church or the type of Christian I was when I worked at a mega church, but there's something about the writings of Kierkegaard that give me liberty. And so by extension, this little corner. And so one of the interesting things is how, especially Paul, I guess, and a lot of the, you know, the more inwardly turning dialogue about PLC has been interesting that there is this motivation to almost reify a sort of secular church, I guess. And for me, as someone who, I don't know, I guess I still feel very much in the wandering in the wilderness phase of the journey. It's nice to see a group of people who there's a little bit more freedom to kind of figure it out. And that's not to kind of downplay the sort of uneasiness and the fear in my heart that I feel when I feel things getting too structured. There's too much of a Tower of Babel vibe going on. And there's too much building and not enough growing, I guess. And yeah, I'd just love to hear you guys thoughts on that kind of word salad, I guess I just spewed. So relatable. But the thing you said there about the Tower of Babel thing, the Tower of Babel thing, I think that's a very relatable statement for probably a lot of people who are kind of inwardly protective of the, I don't even call it this little corner anymore, I'd say this conversation we've been having because of that reason that you're talking about. You know, maybe I'd love to hear more about your experience in the mega church because on one hand a lot of the critique is valid, but especially, you know, even through the work of James, Jim Wellman, you know, mega churches on the other hand have a critical part in the American evangelical and Christian ecosystem and actually do really good work in many, many ways. And they're not given credit for it. They're given the money and they're given the attention. So, you know, can't fault them there. And what I, so somebody just asked about commentary on the Grim Grizz Breveki. So that I fact I just uploaded. It's not really commentary, did some of it this morning in the live chat. So you can find it on the Grim Grizz channel. But they, you know, this little corner as sort of a sort of a byway ecclesiastical byway. That's, that's I think I know we had to go. So thanks for dropping in, Matt. So how are you doing, Mark? Miserable, but I'm awake now. So that's good, I guess. Oh, that's back in. Yeah, I like that Grim Grizz Breveki talk. That was really interesting. I'm always two minds, right? Because Grim, Grim was able to get stuff out of Breveki that he's never said before. I was like, yeah, right. But some of his misunderstandings, I was like, wow, like, I don't. And some of the I mean, on both sides, like some of the stuff that Grim told John that I thought was obvious, John was like, that's really, wow, I never thought I was like, really, John, you never saw that? Wow, we could have straightened up the Q&A on the discord, you know, two and a half years ago on stuff like that. No idea that you weren't seeing those connections. So that was that was interesting. Anyway, go ahead, go ahead, Matt. I don't know if you had more you wanted to say on that. No, I said, just as soon as Chad started speaking, my phone cut out and I got no audio, I guess as soon as Mark joins. So I just kind of had to read the I was going to try to rejoin my other computer, but it doesn't have Safari anyway. I'm just back on my phone. OK. Yeah, I'd like to I'd like to hear more more about your mega church experience and how you connect that to what you see happening. What we're doing. Yeah, so it's it's probably if I thought really hard about it, I probably would fail to come up with adequate kind of ties or like one one for ones. It's just a general uneasiness or a general queasiness when I see a group of charismatic people joined together to do something they think is important, which is maybe I'm giggling at how cynical that sounds coming out. But yeah, I think it's a it's just a part of the story that I was surprised I hadn't heard of, even with all of the all of the devil's advocates within the little corner. It seemed like my one bugaboo, which was you know, why do we need to build something? You know, why why does this thing need to be a why does it need to be anything at all? Why can't it just be, I guess, for a lack of a better term, very engaging content to aid me in my kind of personal spiritual journey, which I'm kind of I guess I'm I'm putting everything a little bluntly and a little cynically, but that's kind of the main it's just that kind of uneasiness of, you know, why do we have to group up? Why does it have to be so communal? And then I'm kind of when my when my thinking gets to that point, it's it's it's recalled to the little church I grew up in, which is the south, the southern Baptist version of a type of church that you're you're dealing with now, Paul, where it's I grew up as the youngest person there besides my sister by a lot. And my dad was the music minister. And and that was your life. You know, that that was that was your people. That was your tribe, another way to put it. But those were the funerals. Those were the birthdays. Those were the anniversaries that all kind of got ritualized and celebrated. And and so and all the good things about a little community like that and all the bad things, all the gossip, all the backwards thinking, kind of the anti intellectualism that seems inherent in those small kind of rural communities. Yeah, so it's kind of those are the two poles, I guess, are that the kind of charismatic, just the fact that it's so fun to watch all of you talk and to think out loud. And, you know, I for one am wary anytime I see somebody who's, you know, explicating the Bible or talking about philosophy, because I just know myself and I get so enraptured and and those types of people. And then to see that's basically essentially what happened with the megachurch was that there was a there was a group, small group of people kind of led by the head pastor and and some of the elders. And it was all about kind of, you know, there was a little bit of a meritocracy of playing the game, playing the part, being the young, restless and reformed, but being the nice sweet version, the nice southern version. All that kind of mixed in and then all that cultural stuff that kind of good or for bad. That's the kind of, you know, that's the questions, that's the kind of negative question this thing is like, why do we feel the need to search for a metaphor of things like a church as a metaphor for this little group or a body? Why must it always be kind of a the telos of these groups? Some why it's always, you know, we're always pushing ahead. It can't be that this is a great spot to join in discussion of philosophical or theological ideas. There must be this kind of realpolitik aspect to it where it's like, all right, well, what are the boots? Where are the boots on the ground? When is this actually going to impact people's lives in a real way? And as somebody who's up until this point has been completely on the outside, I'm like, this has been great. It doesn't need to be anything else. Like, I don't want there to be in person meetings that I'm missing out on. I'm happy with it all being on YouTube, being shared. I was hoping to join the discord, but my you know, the link wasn't working. So like, you know, I got I hope I'm going in circles now, I feel like but does that all make sense? It makes perfect sense. It makes perfect sense. And and what I think you hear in the chatter the sort of I think in some ways over the last few months sort of kicked off by Jacobs and some of the drama surrounding the German festival thing when in a weird way, this little corner got self conscious. And, and that then linked up that that then kicked off the identity conversation. Well, what are we? I remember, I remember at some point when I was dating the woman who would be my wife, you know, I talked in one of the marriage things about the fact that I sort of my strategy was always slip into the friend zone and then elevate. I hit one point when I realized that in fact, we had level change. And, and so then I was getting scared and nervous. And so I, I said to her, I said, you know, who are we? And what do we want? And in a lot of ways, that's sort of the self consciousness that this little corner has gotten into. And part of what's true is that this, so Chad did a Friday morning nameless on my conversation with Peterson. And I should really go back and watch that conversation, screw up the courage to do it, because it's sometimes painful to watch myself. And, but but what Chad did was he, you know, I put the institution question to Peterson when I had him on the line. In fact, they had a whole list of questions for him, and I hit pretty much all of them. I knew what I would get at 30 minutes. And, you know, he kind of bounced back with challenging, well, what exactly are we talking about when we're talking about institutions? And I hear what you're saying along the same lines in that for, so I've got a, I've got a conversation coming out next week with a guy who is in a research, he's an AI researcher. And, you know, he, you know, he's, he's, he grew up in the behind the Iron Curtain. He's now deep into this little corner. He did the Peterson, Verbecky, Peugeot, me, whole thing. And he, like many, is sort of on the outskirts of church. And his wife basically says something like, Oh, please don't convert. And we, you know, in some ways I hear that. Now we're getting bombed by something. I hear that in, I hear that in your, do I have to shut the chat down? Let's see. I just kick him out. Yeah. You can do it in StreamAird. You can whack them there or you can whack them in YouTube land. Yeah, it's one of these, one of these. All right. 300 seconds. Oh, I want to get rid of the guy completely. Yeah. Come out and destroy him from the internet. That would be good. And I mean, that's the problem, right? Like literally, you know, Oh, look at all the advantages of having a body and things to do and ways to help me transform. No, but really, why can't it just be chaotic? And it's like, well, yeah, there's, there's attention there. There's attention and all those things. And you saw that, like, that was one of the good things about the grim conversation too. You saw the other two pieces of tension that people don't like, right? They don't like the tension of, we don't want a charismatic leader. Okay. But there's a bunch of things you can't do without the charismatic leader. Right. And we want all the things we can do that we, you know, that a charismatic leader enables, but we don't want to charismatic. Fair enough. Nobody else does either. But, you know, I think there are just things you can't do. If all you want is chaos, well, you know, we've got a bunch of cast on the internet, there's more and more channels all the time. And then you're never going to interface with the things you need most, because you're never going to find them because there's too many of them. Or we can have fewer things of higher quality that you can't have both. And the other thing that came out was, you know, John is talking to Grim and he said, you know, well, you know, part of the issue is that people make this connection through narrative to a character in the past. And they make this equivalent. Which is, I would say, that's completely wrong, but whatever. In his model, he doesn't have a way to connect things in a poetic fashion, we'll say. Right. It's all discrete and linear. And then he goes, well, we need that. But we need something else. And it's like, well, no, we need that. That's what comes first. We don't have something else. Right. And that's, you know, and if Nietzsche, I don't know if what he was saying was true, if Nietzsche thought that, then Nietzsche is an idiot. It's not hard. Right. It's just wrong. And I think that's what it is. There's this struggle between we want structure, right, but we don't want people to get along. It's like, well, you know, if you want people to get along, you've got to go with that structure. You can't. You all have to agree on it. And it's hard because then we're all agreeing and we're building a tower of Babel at some point, but at some point you're not. Oh, and, you know, part of what, you know, part of what you raise, Matt, so many people. I mean, Mark, I mean, you're so you're I mean, in terms of the in terms of the conversation, you're very pro structure here and. And yet you, you know, you're not you're not a diehard Roman Catholics. You're not in mass every Sunday. And and so this is a big part of Protestantism. And it's interesting that this in many ways has reverberated for the last 500 years. Yeah. Yeah, it's not. But it's not like I'm not I'm not pro structure. I'm anti total chaos. And if you want a two second description of what the main manifestation of the problem we're in is that actually explains why the Internet seems to be a problem and why capitalism seems to be a problem. It's chaos. Right. But we're talking about this little corner. So, OK, but again, so the problem with this little corner is and look, I mean, I'll just make it all personal. I did a live stream on Jacob's channel and Navigated Patterns Polling didn't even mention it. You know, like your attention is already to spread out to boost, to boost certain signals over others. And so you're boosting the signals that you're and I'm not criticizing what signals you're boosting. I'm just saying necessarily you have to boost some signals and not others. And then and then the further criticism is going to become if it isn't already. Right. And I have heard this criticism of you before. Right. That you're boosting the wrong signals. You're favoring the wrong the quote wrong irrespective of whether or not that's true or go to bed. I'm just saying this is the problem that happens necessarily. It's mathematically certain when you don't have enough structure, when you don't have enough standards of interface, when you don't have enough method of cooperation because structure is the method which people cooperate to build something bigger to themselves. This is key to the meaning crisis because part of the meaning crisis is I'm powerless. I can't build anything. I don't have any meaning. And when I'm dead, nobody will know or care. The other the other part of the meaning crisis is I can't build anything lasting outside of myself. And there are two two separate parts. One is sort of a personal nihilism. The other one is a global or universal nihilism. And they're both solved by the same thing, which is religio John would say, right, connectedness. Right. And I would say this is the intimacy crisis. You can't be intimate with the whole world. All of these words, Mark, all of these words are like way up here. Maybe, maybe, maybe they're way up here. And yeah, you gotta bring it down to. So I'll bring it down. But I'll bring it down again, Paul. The sink, there's too many people running too many different channels and types of content in this little corner of the internet for you to decide which signals to boost and which not to. Not that I'm saying that you have to, but no one else is either. So instead of being able to engage with what would help people the most or what would or what people would be helped by the most, they're just engaging with the signals that are being boosted. I know. And it's a valid point. But that's that's point is basically the counterpart because what Matt has said, what he has seen is exactly those structures and those structures that failed in many ways. No, attention. Right. And I think that it's one or the other. That's true. And my worry, I think maybe even goes deeper than that. And it's, and it's almost like a skepticism of any structure, especially manmade, because once you start building, the question is what direction and it doesn't seem like a clear on the one hand, it's like everything you're saying is like, we need structure to create this meaning. In order to escape the meaning crisis, we have to kind of have some sort of structure. And in order to build that structure, we have to work together and we have to all kind of be we have to agree on a set of things. And I guess I just I hear Jesus and I hear Kierkegaard saying, you know, on the one hand, only one attains the goal that we can hide ourselves in a crowd, but we're ultimately not judged by our actions as a crowd. And then I hear Jesus wanting to go for the least of these. And it's almost impossible to build a structure for the least of these. Right. And I think I think that that the main problem is that structure is going to emerge either way. And I mean, that is very much what what the emergence people like John Berveke say is that structure is going to happen. And who and what takes over that structure is important. And we've seen this in history. Right. If a structure is built, a bad agent can take it over. I mean, that Well, it's important if power is the most important thing and suffering is the most important thing to avoid. I think that what Jesus and what Christianity offers is at least a chance that you can suffer and peddle your way through and by the grace of God, it all be worth something at the end. And so that the the meaning crisis is not necessarily ours to solve. Now I realize I might be pulling the the rip cord Jesus button, which I don't know if there's a rule against that. So I apologize if that's the case. But yeah, I guess I would I would go for a harsher nihilism and a more saving grace as my solution, not building castles to the sand. Not that that's what we're doing, but that, you know, just to put it in the harshest terms as possible. Oh, can I say something? I think you have to go into your settings settings and there's a echo canceling. Is that me? No, no, it's not. Oh, yeah. Well, I don't think Well, OK, so like you could say that Paul might somebody might say that Paul's boosting the wrong signal. But I went and used my so-called platform and put a call out to people who are interested actually contributing something on the ground. And I thought I made a good case for it. And I didn't get a single hit back on that. I've also done when putting a call out for people who want to do creative projects. I got a very, very limited response. So Paul, you know, he could like be boosting my signal only once, but it's not doing anything. And there's skepticism like Matt's expressing the skepticism. That's part of the whole point. Like you can go and try and get things built all you want. But people are suspicious of leadership. They're suspicious of charisma. They're suspicious of structure. They're suspicious of all the things that would help them because those things have been seen to be corrupt in certain circumstances. That doesn't mean they're optional either. And that's where the thinking comes from. And that's part of what I think is the slow. I mean, all of this is trust building. It's trust building. And it's acting in good faith. It's extending forgiveness. It's giving people a long leash. And I think, you know, in many ways, and you're going, so I've one of the things that I've been wanting to talk about, or my wife and somebody in one of the comments just mentioned the HBO documentary, The Bow. And so my wife and I started watching that this week. And it's, I think it's a, it was so amazing because I think it's very germane to what we're doing in this little corner. And even let's say Digital Gnosis, who seems to have gone away again, disappeared. He's not on Twitter. He's not on YouTube. I don't know what's going on with him. But this is taxing. That's what's going on with it. What's that? Attention is taxing. And I think that's what's going on with it. That's my assumption. And so what you had was this, you know, it was this, you know, this cultish thing, and they had all this language and all this answers and people go to these things and, oh, they're changing my life. And they'd be, you know, it was sort of like Scientology and that they're paying money to have the classes and, and it's all, but it's all under this structure. And, and so part of what I think Matt is really engaging here is that part of how people are dealing with the corruption that they have seen, the inevitable corruption is Peterson notes, they have seen in churches and governments and medicine and finance and just about everything is they have gone now to the, the, the, the, the disorganized. And you're exactly right that at some point you never get anywhere until you organize. But what we're really doing is sort of feeling our way through this to try to get to the right balance of, of, of organization and disorganization. And we work this all the time in churches. I will tell you this is in churches, I think this is for me one, one of the dominant preoccupations in terms of doing local ministry. Am I asking enough? Am I not asking enough? And, and that's huge with mega churches, because of course they have this massive audience and, and you very quickly begin to know. So one of the things happening right now is our parking lot, our parking lot at church has needed to be resurfaced for the last 25 years, the whole time I've been here. And it's gotten to the point now where it's almost reverting into law. And so, you know, it's probably going to be a 65, $70,000 project, which is a lot of money for this little church. And then the question is, do I say something on my channel? Do I put out an appeal for year end gifts to help with the project? Boy, that's a hard thing. And I've been dealing with these kinds of questions all along, because, you know, I've built relationships with some people with some means and some deep pockets, but I don't ask because part of which is I might need to ask one day and I might want to ask one day, but I'm going to wait. And it's been the same thing with structure all along. We have the structural conversation almost right away when this thing happened. And so, you know, I'm not allergic to the structural conversation, but you know, who said it in the comments here? Where are Frank Blazkowicz? Ideas, and you said it, Mark, in your video, you think I never see your channel navigating patterns. I do. You said it in your video on story, narrative, and archetype. A lot of what you're saying right here is sort of archetypal. And that's fine, because it's, in a sense, the broadest of them and the most stable. It's sort of analogous to the monarchical commission. Narrative is a little bit lower, a little bit more accessible to us, but what people really grab on to are stories. I remember Rick Warren saying at a Saddleback conference that I went into in probably 1998, if you want to be powerful, and he meant in your speech, be specific. And that, I think, so when we're talking about this question here, now, Jacob is specific. He's a bit of a broken record, but he's specific. So storytelling in the search for meaning. Oh, interesting. You know, and so I think as we as we continue to sort of feel our way through this, I'm so glad Matt came out on the channel today, because I think Matt, with his story about the megachurch, I get this message like Matt just gave. I know that this is out there, and I hear it perking up, but many of the people that have that message aren't not joining into live streams, are not on the Discord, because they are so careful, because they've been burned, and they don't want to get burned again. And so there's a lot of people out there that are super cautious with this, and I keep reminding people, why don't I say like and subscribe and hit that notification on every video? Why don't I talk about my Patreon? Why don't I push my church? Why don't I, you know, why don't I self-promote more? It's exactly this reason, and this is part of the reason why I really do try to elevate the signal of others, but you're right, Mark. It's everyone's going to have an opinion. I mean, I'll tell you, there's some people I really love and really value who really don't want me elevating the signal of Grim Grizz, because they're afraid of him. And there's people I love and really value that really don't want me elevating Jacob's signal, because, you know, they don't trust him because of stuff he's done. And that's true, and you know, Chad's mask scares people to death. Yeah, well there's a trust issue there too, right, right. But you haven't explained why you don't push my channel now, Paul. See, that's what I mean. Navigating patterns. Go watch navigating patterns. If you really love archetypal abstract analysis that Mark is great at, that's what's there. I'll tell you what, navigating patterns gets more promo than anybody else in this little corner. And so you're- I know about that, but it does get quite a bit. Your channel name in itself is a meme, and it's basically, it's like a character in itself, right. It's kind of like this mask. Your channel name is your mask, you know. And so that's interesting. I do want to say one thing, put the call out right here. I really, I want to talk, so Paul, I'm going to do the old, if you're friends with Jordan Peterson, can you get him this book? I'm going to do this, but I'm going to do it with Jonathan Paget. I really want to have a conversation with Jonathan around, like a really good hearted conversation around storytelling and service to others. And I'd like to talk a little bit about some symbolism stuff and around legion and stuff. So if you can hook a guy up, it will be the only conversation that I have on my channel, because I don't have any. Dope. We'll see. I'll see if that comes up. It's so, but you know, what part of what's interesting in this is now with John Verbeke and Jonathan Paget, we're seeing, we're seeing what, we're seeing what success brings. Yes. I tell you what, man, like to Matt's point. I don't mean there's a criticism of either John or Jonathan. I just want to say that too. They're just harder to get hold of. Yeah. When, when I saw the promotion video for Jonathan, the thing that Matt's talking about hit me immediately. And I was like, whoa, you, you, because it just seems so weird. It was kind of outside of what we've seen them do before. And that's what came to mind. It was like, oh, this is like a weird promo video is using promo music. It's like the animation. I mean, that's great. I'm happy for them. It's just, it does, there's something interesting that happens when you, when you have built a trust with, with, you know, the audience and then all of a sudden something flips. It's like, Whoa. And that, I think we saw the same thing happen with Peterson when you joined the Daily Wire. There was a little something there that everybody noticed and was like, Whoa. And, and so it's, it's like very interesting. Like, and like, if, if, like if Jonathan, I don't really even know what you would have to do to happen. But yeah. Oh, if he, if he built like a huge online store and was like made a symbolic world shopping network, you know, people would be like, what the hell? You know, right. But that's all the suspicion. And that's the problem. I mean, if you can only ever trust individuals, now you have a filtering problem. Right. And if you, right. And you can't filter all that stuff. And then there's just too many people to pay attention to. And now you're almost certainly not getting the right thing for you or the closest thing that would help you the most. And so there's always this compromise, this tension between those two situations where there's just too much for you filter, too many individuals. And, and there's just too little, too few options, right. Because it's only, you know, although I've never seen too few options in churches around here in the South, you know, you could run into that, right. Where there's too few institutions, right. So you're not really, but the question is, what do you have to change about yourself to fix that? Cause the world can't be any other way. And we're bumping into the archetypal problem. That is the archetypal problem. The problems don't get any simpler than that. And they can't, at some point they can't be dealt with. Well, and the story that's playing out right now. Yeah, I think, sorry, go ahead. No, no, go ahead. I was just thinking in the story, it seems like in the story that's playing out in like this little conversation is, I think that it's almost easier to trust because there's so many players that are just small players. And like, they, like, that's what I love about the just chatting thing. It's like, you know, like, Oh, these are just like, if you were to trip over this, you'd think it's a little strange, but wow, they're just like talking. Like, so I think there's only about it. That seems inviting enough to the point where Matt actually decides to not be alerted you know, and so that's interesting. Well, what I was going to say is, I guess it does kind of have to do with that. And what you were saying too, Mark, about the problem being if you only trust individuals, if you only focus on individuals, that is our typical problem. I wonder if Kierkegaard hasn't made any progress on that. I'm reading right now, Works of Love. And it's taken me forever because to be honest, I'm not that great of a reader. And there aren't that many good Kierkegaard audiobooks. So I'm kind of forced to read. But his answer for that is that the individual is, you know, his answer is the neighbor. That, you know, you're not called to focus on every... Whoops. You kicked off his audio, Sam. I didn't mean to do any such thing, Matt. Wow. I don't think he can hear us either. I hate to say it, but it's kind of entertaining. That's not entertaining. Should we tell him? Vander, please, muted. And he doesn't know it. This is a... Can you hear me? Did we lose all sound? Uh-oh. No. There are whatever leaves you need to take care of. Yeah. Paul seems busy. Matt is inaudible. I don't think he's learned that yet. No, he hasn't. No, now he's figured it out. Okay. But that's Sam's fault. We can blame Sam for all of that. Yeah, that was... I mean, if you're looking at Kierkegaard for answers, you're going to be really disappointing because all modern philosophers have absolutely nothing but more problems instead of answers. Like, here's the thing that I would do. I would tell Matt, you want to... Like, here's a good thing that you could do to participate. Almost all the audiobooks by Kierkegaard suck. Record them and put them on... But I think the key... I think you touched on the key, Chad. The key, and to some extent, what Matt was saying for the part that he's reading about Kierkegaard is correct. It's the participation that matters, which is not to say do away with all intellectual conversation with people who don't live near you. No one's saying that, right? That's fine. You can still do that. But... I like Kierkegaard a lot. ...the people closest to you you can participate with and the people further away from you, you can't participate with in the same way. Has anybody read this? Patience and Christianity. Practice Christianity. No. I haven't gotten to that one yet. I had a sore in Kierkegaard's case. Back in like my Dark Night of My Soul, I think Kierkegaard was the most helpful. So props to Kierkegaard. I feel like he does a good job of kicking people out of propositional only frames and into a more subjective, existential frame, which I think was really helpful for me when I needed it. Sam, I'd love to hear about that Dark Night of Your Soul there. Now that would probably be one of the coolest things I ever hear you talk about, because it's actually you. Really? You know, not to say that the stuff you talk about is new, but to me I'm interested in who this Sam guy is and who he is when he's in the Dark Night of His Soul or whatever that is. I mean, it was in college. I was having a crisis of faith on multiple fronts. I'd been excommunicated, right? And it was also my senior year, so you know, trying to figure out what you're going to do when you graduate. And a couple of friendships got burned through the excommunication thing. And I was, you know, I was trying to figure out, am I going to stay a Christian at all? I mean, it would have been so easy, right, to just flip off and, you know, become a regular secular, whatever, magick or atheist person. That's fascinating, because Paul said the same thing. He talked with that the gist with Joe, and Paul said when he was in college, he had a similar thing. He had the question, do I stay a Christian or not? And like when I hear that, I think of how impossible, like to the or not part sounds impossible to me. Well, and this is where I think I've said this to Paul before, this is where I'll be my most Calvinist, is at some level, it didn't feel like I got to choose at the end of the day. I feel like I've never had a dramatic conversion, right? Grew up Christian. I never stopped really being Christian, never stopped going to church regularly by a dramatic lack of deconversion moment, right? When all arrows were pointing in the direction of Sam's going to reconvert, he's already had a lot of friends who have, he has been pushed out of his Christian fellowship by for unjust reasons, everybody's being mean to him, the people being nice to him in his life are the non-Christians, not the Christians, etc, etc, etc, etc. And I don't know if it was the grace of God, or the writings of Kierkegaard, or the grace of God working through the writings of Kierkegaard, or other combinations of factors, but I, my faith stuck around. And I feel like I was in a dry period spiritually. And like, what do I mean by dry period? I don't know, faith didn't feel as strong. My, the juices of excitement towards God were flowing less vigorously, church felt phony and fake for a while. But I just kept doing it. And over time, it just slowly weakened, or strengthened, depending, the crisis just slowly went away. And I feel like Jordan Peterson kind of helped. I feel like Paul Vanerclay helped. I a lot of different things helped. Having my YouTube channel helped. And I don't feel any, having kids, I guess, maybe helps, you know. And the dark night of the soul went away. But at the bottom of the darkest night of the soul was Kierkegaard. And he actually seemed to understand what was going on. And it can be pretty useful for people in that place. Jason Tate Can somebody from Walmart read this book and understand it? No, no, I was in Ivy League University, and even most of my friends didn't understand. Or like, Kierkegaard is so hard. Jason Tucker I'm going to take the hot take that actually somebody from Walmart might understand Kierkegaard better than somebody in a philosophy major. But you know, it's a certain, you know, Jason Tate I'm careful with the Walmart thing, though, because, I mean, one of the fun things about the Vervecki conversation was, Vervecki saw, Grimm understands a lot of Vervecki. I mean, we listen to John, and we think everything's going overhead. But there's a ton of smart people out there in Walmart, at the auto parts store. Paul Vanerclay Yeah, well, that's the that's the snobbery of articulation. It's actually one of the weak points, in my opinion, of Peterson, because Peterson points out if you're articulate, you're deadly. Yeah, but you can be articulate. And what I call the archetype of the articulate idiot, right. And you can lead people astray really easily. Or, and some of the smartest people I know, they work with their hands, they work with, you know, jobs where they're doing, you know, regular things that like there's a there's a buddy of mine, he's actually on the discord, Jefferson, he he I call him the redneck philosopher king, because and he is so well read. It's absurd. Like, I know very few people as well read as he is not an academic, not not. He worked he works on physical machines, I believe he built designs and builds them to feed chickens. That's what he does. And then he travels around all over the place, like, like across the country across the southern US and Midwest, and fixes these things and checks up on them and make sure they're within, you know, tolerances and all that. And man, he's got his philosophy down. Like I put him up against any modern philosophy, probably take them all out instantly. He is really smart. On the other hand, he's not very concise. He's excellent on Twitter, which is really good on Twitter. But he's not very concise. He can tend to ramble on and get circular. So he's not we'll say as articulate as I'd like, but I'll tell you, I learned a lot from listening to him when I'm patient enough to sit and wait 20 minutes for him to make a simple point. But because it takes 20 minutes, it sinks in deeper and better for me than say the verveky stuff, which sometimes goes over your head because verveky is compressing a lot of stuff. But yeah, Grimm gets a lot more verveky than you might expect. Grimm is really sharp as a tack on some of that stuff. Yeah. Well, I'm going to read it anyways. You should do that, Chad. You should do that. Chad, you too are another person like that. What you do with your with I know, I know you're just having fun. I know sometimes you're just being silly. There's a lot in that a lot in those associations you're doing on your your little Friday morning thing. And I worry every time I see the navigational thing come up on one of your videos because it's like, you do is drive in, he's making his videos, he's going to do some tiling. You're mad after my own heart, Chad. I never I never edit while I drive. So I just I'll capture while I drive. That's easy enough. But in all my stuff is basically it's just impulsive. So they're impulsive intuition. So I might not even I would probably never be able to articulate what it is I see. But I just throw it up. It's like I'm more interested in I know I saw something. Did you see that? And so that's all that's all I'm doing. You know, it's almost Chad, like there's a different type of knowledge that's intuitive, as opposed to the particular knowledge that people utter with their speed with their propositions or something, right? It's almost like there's two types of intelligence or smartness, which is oddly what the model says that we've Manuel and I and others on the awakening server worked on, right? And if you want to see that, you check out navigating patterns, the knowledge engine is right there. Go check out navigating patterns. And look at the knowledge engine. It's going to be huge. I don't know why that I want to put a Trump voice on that. But it just makes me think it's going to be huge. It is going to be huge. Well, look, I mean, that's so funny, Chad, they came up this morning, we were talking about the different methods of communication and that it will specifically with Vervecki and Graham, right? Vervecki sort of says, well, this story and you're connecting to the member of the story. And it's like, he had a very scientific sort of not way of talking about it, but way of thinking about it, I would say. And my point was there's different because the thing that Vervecki was saying with Graham, well, one of the things was, look, parables break you out of the out of the narrative. And I'm like, no, parables don't break you out of the narrative. This is what I'm happy to watch my video, Paul, because this is the video that Peterson and Pigeot needed to watch to have that conversation with Vervecki, make the difference between story and narrative. Because I think stories, parables and music all point to narrative and the narrative template patterns, right? And that would have resolved the discussion that the three of them had, you know, it was Pigeot and Peterson and Vervecki, that would have resolved it. I mean, John wouldn't have been happy about it because it sort of goes against his thesis about nomological versus narrative order, but that that would have fixed it, right? That would have fixed it because, and I think that's what Trump does, instead of being dogmatic and saying, we're going to do this and the wall is going to be exactly this height, it's going to be exactly this long, and then we're going to put exactly these things around it. He just says, we're going to build the highest wall ever. It's going to be the greatest wall of all time. It's going to reach up to the moon or whatever he said. But everybody knows that he's serious and that he means it, even if they don't know exactly what he means, they're on board, which is kind of splitting the difference between, we'll call it that slope, right? That the sloping that Pastor Paul likes to talk about, right? Where you get the hard slope versus the soft slope, there's the middle ground. And I very much think that people who speak metaphorically, like Jesus, like Trump, are in that middle ground. And I think that's what Peterson did. He occupied that middle ground between those slopes. So when you were talking a minute ago, I was reminded of, when Peterson kind of first came back, he had this conversation with this. It was like, I don't know if he is a musician, but he's like a music major, and he talks about music and the culture and stuff. Do you guys remember that conversation? Anybody? Anybody? Yeah. He said something that was really interesting, not Peterson, but this other dude. He said that everybody should pay attention to the music that's going on in their culture. Why I thought of this was because you mentioned narrative, as in the music and all that. If you could see that that's true, you can go and look at the whole swath of music, maybe even from different genres in a particular era. And you can see, especially in modern music, lyrics and stuff, you can see the cultural narrative through all of it. If you were to take a closer look, I could look and get a better picture. Maybe that's what I'm doing with my images and stuff like that and the films. This is the problem with talking to me, is I don't know what the hell I'm talking about. No, you do, though, Chad. You do. You're a lot like Luke in some ways. You have a hard problem with the languaging. I went through this with Sally Jo. Sally Jo used to have the hardest time with the language, but she's much better now. I'm happy to report. And it takes practice to know how to get articulate. And it's okay because your articulation, to Paul's excellent point, is better in the videos anyway. So I wouldn't worry about it because you're doing a fine job. Yeah, it's something to do with narrative and music and the geist that's in all of, I don't care if it's Garth Brooks or like NWA or Snoop Dogg and in that whole generation, there's something in there that you can really see if you were to take like a lens and look at. That's Burn Power. Burn Power, the anadromist on his anadromist channel, that's actually his whole thesis for How We Got Here. He's got a playlist called How We Got Here. And I didn't finish it, mainly because I think you went off the rails in points, and it is long. But I did watch it because I knew, I knew this is what he's talking about. He's saying the music uses the archetypal patterns to point at the geist, at the geist. So you see it in the music and then the participation follows. You see it in the art and then the participation. This is Burn Power's whole point in that scene. It's not his only point, but it's his main theme, or thesis rather, in How We Got Here. Because he's going through, you can see the anger of punk, right? And then that turns into, and then he follows, in some parts he follows the artist. I think it's Nick Cage is the artist name. He says, look, here's the transformation of Nick Cage musically. And look at how he presaged or walked in front of the culture each time. He was each time in front of the engagement with the culture. And I thought that was fascinating. And I think it's correct. I think that's true, those narrative patterns through the geist are playing out in the music before we participate in it. Nice. Look at this guy. Yeah, look, we got a celebrity in here. I know, a real one, not this Vanderclay guy. Welcome. Hey, Cal. Have you ever visited Navigating Patterns, Cal? Hi. How you doing, Cal? I'm okay. I'm doing like weird feedback loops and sounds. So I'm a mess. Did you turn off the sound on your browser? Let me turn off the sound on my browser. I know I do that. Yeah. Sometimes like on the phone, there's that there's like three buttons that says more. You got to go in there and then you click audio set or settings audio. Then there's an actual cancellation button you got to press. Yeah. Usually you just start it up from the browser and then the other browsers have. Yeah. Usually you just started up from the browser and then the other browsers have. All right. I'm going to. Not you, Cal. I think it's Vanderclay. No, it's Cal. Playing Vanderclay. That's a good idea. I just muted him. I think it's Vanderclay. You'll find he's got to find the browser tab that's open and close it. Open Cal and kill it or just mute it. It says he got it. Now it's OK. Yeah. So you need to unmute me, Paul. All right. Do you want me to? I'll just have to leave. Sorry, guys. I'm sorry to crash the party. I mean, Matt talked for like 20 minutes with an echo. You can do the same. Yeah, you can do the same. We're not mad. We'll deal with it. Are you great? All right, let's go. How do you get echo with headphones? That's a good question. You must not be going through the headphones at all or something. That's weird. Yeah. That's what it is. Yeah. OK. Yep. Aha. Yes. There we go. See, I'm not a total noob. How do you feel, Cal, about having been on the Grim Grizz channel? Dude, I loved it. But now so I did a deep dive afterwards and now I really like know what Grim Grim is about and I want to go back and talk to him. You got all this kind of stuff I wanted to talk about and I totally whipped on it. I feel bad. That was a great introduction, man. He's fun. I mean, and he boy, he he he like sort of like pops out with these things and sort of says things. And you're like, you know, three minutes later, I'm like, wait, wait, I want to go pick up what he was just saying. And he's moved on. So so I don't know. But I wanted to do the sort of the defensive against the dark arts thing and, you know, whatever. So, oh, you should. You should make a video on it. But I don't really know how to do that, Chad. Is it is it a technical thing or is it? Yeah, yeah, yeah. I can talk all day, Paul. I mean, come on. It's like I teach for a living. I'm like I'm like a cheap preacher. Yeah. So, you know, you know, hey, hey, that puts Paul in the driver's seat, not me. I mean, no, no, no, I know. That's good. That's good. Yeah. Yeah. But that's what I was doing. I mean, part of navigating patterns. I have a don't be fooled set of videos, right? Where I'm like, oh, don't be fooled by this. Don't be fooled by that. Right. Because it's that sort of, you know, and you know, you can get a format for it. I think it's fine. Yeah. Yeah. I just need the. Yeah, I'm just I don't know. I mean, I think I'm a little scared about it, which is ridiculous. But this is something I'm trying to tackle before Christmas. Just tell you have both you do your you do your show with Rod Dreher, the American conservative. Yeah. But you also have your own channel, right? Yeah. But I really haven't done anything with it in largely because I don't quite know. I mean, I can edit a little bit. Like if you saw my early shows with Rod, I actually recorded those, edited those, did the whole thing and just basically taught myself how to do what is it? File maker and a filmmaker, whatever the Mac version of video editing is. And, you know, it's I got OK with it. But then then American conservative wanted us to do it through their channel. So I just we record on what's this thing called Riverside and then they edit it and then I do the notes and then they upload it. So I haven't been controlling the uploading side of things really since, gosh, whenever we started a year and a half ago, whatever, two years ago, I guess. So it's a technical hurdle that I'm struggling with, but it's probably more like mental than than anything. OK, so OK, let me let me hear from you now. You're I mean, so that this is that's first time on the stream. Mark and Chad are like, you know, over regulars here. You can't you can't start a chat without Mark a stream without Mark and Chad coming in. Right. What do you see? What do you see in this little corner of the Internet? Because you're you know, you've got a little bit of distance, at least, and you've got other things in your life. You're not living on your computer. So what do you think this is about? Well, I guess that's kind of what I wanted to talk to Grim about, because he said something again, you know, an hour and then later on I heard it. And it was he got awakened. You know, he was sort of hiding in sort of virtual land and for whatever reason kind of got conjured out of I mean, sort of conjured out of out of hiding because you know what he says, Rip Van Winkle, you know, he sort of was asleep and kind of out of it all of a sudden. He's like, holy crap, what what has been happening? And I think in our own respective ways, you know, I've sort of similarly been hiding kind of in mainstream spaces, but just sort of recognizing all along that that something is really, really wrong. And and, you know, being in front of, you know, you know, handfuls of teenagers, you know, several times a day for the last, you know, 17 years, you start to see that, you know, whatever is supposed to be happening, it's only very narrowly happening. In other words, you know, my my big, the thing that I've been thinking a lot about lately is wisdom. Right. And the thing that jumped out at me, one of the verveky, I think it was when he was interviewed with at Rebel Wisdom. Remember, he went over there after covid and he did a really great interview. And he said something like, you know, and that kind of like he was like, you know, and wisdom, it's just not optional. And and I've that's just really stuck with me because it's something that I've been chewing on for a really long time because I live and work in spaces, you know, that is very much a sort of fast track for the meritocracy. You know, my kids are going to go on to college 100 percent. They're going to go to fancy colleges. They're going to work in New York or Boston or San Francisco, L.A., Chicago. Like, that's what they're doing. And, you know, I'm sort of seeing they're very sort of technically proficient, but what they are lacking is sort of any deep connection to wisdom, you know. And again, whether they are explicitly Christian or not is really almost sort of doesn't matter. They just, you know, they're all winging it, you know, and that bothers me greatly. It keeps me up at night. You know, so that's what I so what attracted me to this little corner is these you all, we all are people who are trying to sort of say, hey, you know, what we're doing, the various scripts that we've been acting out are just not working. And it's not just an economic thing. It's not just a, you know, a sort of social formation thing, but it's really like sort of way deep down, you know, that that we have forgotten something very, very real. So this has sort of sent me down rabbit holes of nostalgia as sort of a mechanism through which we try to make sense out of things. And so when I heard, you know, Paul, you early on got onto the verveky thing, and I was very dismissive of verveky early on because he just sounded like Auguste Comte to me, you know, it's just like, okay, like, we've tried the religion without without God thing, like, it was just sort of yada yada yada. But then your insistence sort of made me see, well, actually, he's doing something more. And I think you may have even said, Paul, at one point, you know, Peterson is sort of riding the rocket, as you always said, but verveky probably is the one who is doing more or something like that. And I don't want to put words in your mouth, Paul, but that was a big takeaway for me. I mean, it's interesting how we wrestle with this, all this dead reckoning that we're doing. Okay, we sense it's not working. That's an interesting phrase. We need wisdom. It's an interesting thing. And I knew, you know, the one of the big, one of the big problems in the church was that we were one of the big problems in the church is it's is always it's insularity, because I don't mean in any way to, to fail to recognize the line between church and not church. That's an important line. It's, you know, but at the same time, one of the things that I've always noticed in North America, and in the Dominican Republic, too, is that there's a lot more, that's a very semi permeable membrane at all sorts of levels. And so I knew that if, if we were actually going to have a community, we needed to have, we needed to have good faith actors who could be conversant with Christianity, who weren't Christians. And we saw that in the discord. And I know I got a ton of heat right away when I started bringing Reveke into the conversation, because in terms of Western Christians, there's a lot of sort of post traumatic stress by Buddhism, because Buddhism is the hot chick that came into school late and, you know, oh, Buddhism, yoga pants, smells and bells. And so there's a lot of Christians who have lost a lot of people. Right, because we saw people get peeled off, right? And that kind of low res way, we know that, you know, I'm spirit, you know, we can make fun of the spiritual, but not religious thing, but there is like something to that, right? And so as much as that sort of pains me to say it out loud, there is something to that. And, and I think what I found, oh, scratch it. Oh, you. Okay. I'm from AA. So, you know, spiritual, but not religion. Right, right. You know, and so I'm, you know, so what I have found helpful for me is, you know, my most eye opening experience as a cradle Catholic and as someone who grew up in a very Catholic South Louisiana world. When I moved out to Los Angeles, I was involved in an interdenominational group called Act One, which was run out of Hollywood First Presbyterian, but it was a, it was, it was basically evangelical with a couple of weird Catholics like me that were involved with it. And just watching another tribe go through things, process through things or not process things, seeing the way that another tribe got people peeled off, or, you know, it was incredible to me. I mean, number one, it's great, of course, to meet other people from other tribes who, you know, were way more similar than I would have thought as a sort of a nerdy intellectual Catholic type. But it was very helpful for me to sort of be able to see patterns in a basilica that was not mine. Right. And so, you know, I, you know, so that's why I've learned so much from, you know, tuning into almost everything Paul puts out is, you know, or watching sort of, you know, Twitter kerfuffles with evangelicals, Big Eva and all that sort of stuff. You know, people always ask me, okay, like, why do you care? It's not your thing. Yeah, but it's so instructive to see the patterns without a dog in the fight, without skin in that particular game. And then you realize, well, actually, you do have skin in the game. It's just at a much deeper level. They're family, too. I mean, some. Yeah, yeah, totally, totally. You know, and like, and I would just say one more thing, you know, the, you know, if, if, if, you know, like, right. So, for instance, Paul, one of the books that you recommended many times was the reformations book. And so I was very interested in all that. And again, prior to all this, I had a very low res, you know, Protestant's bad, Catholic's good, you know, the basic, you know, you know, but I remember reading that book and reading some, some letters from Luther and listening to him. And I'm like, wow, Luther's going through a meaning crisis right now. And like the fact that I could read that and not see Luther as the boogeyman, but rather Luther as, wow, like, that's one of me. Like, that's one of my versions. Like, I'm just like that. And that was really a profound moment. And I don't think I would have gotten there without this little quarter. And so, and so as you all know, I'm sure, you know, my church is going through all kinds of convulsions, not dissimilar to what Paul's denomination is going through. And it's just helped me have a much more wider and circumspect view on, on things. And, you know, I don't know if that's makes any sense, but again, it's not just churchy for me. No, that definitely makes sense. And I think the difference, roughly speaking, between Peterson and Vervecky, and I know I made, this is my first talk with Paul, right? Is that, you know, Peterson's doing something very pragmatic and helping a bunch of people. But what Vervecky is doing is giving you, roughly speaking, a science of meaning. And Peterson's work slot very nicely into Vervecky's work. But then the problem is, you might say, oh, well, now we can, now you can just, you know, understand, you know, understand Peterson and more. Well, maybe if you're playing at that level, and most people aren't ever going to be able to, like the, the meaning crisis is harder than a college course, for sure. For sure. I mean, you've got to sit and take notes. You can't be doing the dishes and listening to that stuff and expect that you're really going to be able to get stuff out of it. And then you have to put that together in ways that are helpful to people, whether it's new models or new ways of thinking about the world or whatever. That's what makes it so difficult, is that we want to be able to just emulate Peterson only slightly differently. But Vervecky doesn't give us that. He gives us something probably more powerful. And then he goes astray with things like Ritnar and his theory on ecology of practices that he can't quite schematize. And, you know, there's all this stuff just out of reach for him at the same time. Yeah. Well, part of what's interesting, and this, you know, I really picked this up in Grizz. I'm really, Chad touched, Chad, I had exactly the same reaction when I saw the trailer. It's like, yeah, production values. I get it. I get it. I totally get it. On one hand, it's so slick. You're going to have graphics, all of this. Another hand. Yeah. But, but you know, the, the Ritnar thing, religion that's not a religion and the ecology of practices. That's why I was so glad he was on Grizz's channel. And Grizz asks the Walmart question. I thought John handled the Walmart question well. But, but I think, you know, that's, and to tie this in, Kale, to your point, it's not just the Catholics. It's not just the Protestants. It's the, you know, spiritual, but not religious. And it's the, I'm not spiritual or religious. I mean, it's, and that's where John's categorization of a meaning crisis was so important because it's, no, this is, this is systemic. And one of the things I saw very quickly when, you know, I started watching John was it is systemic, but many people are not having a meaning crisis because they are in church, because they are, or they're coming, they're immigrants from a culture that hasn't yet been pulled apart, pulled apart. But my conversation with the Korean couple that I have this week about marriage, I mean, those, that's, you could just see the fraying coming in those groups and you see them in the next generation often. And so I had a conversation with a, a Tongan who he was renting the church and he was saying, yeah, I try to get my kids back to Tongan every year. But, you know, I walk out of the hut and I pull a papaya from the tree and, and my kid's like, no, we want cereal. Right. Right. Right. I mean, I remember, I must've been 15 maybe. So I'm going to be 40 this year, but I remember I was about 15 years old and I had like this sense and I wasn't in church or anything, but I had this sense and I was actually vocalizing this to, to friends of mine. Like I would say, I don't know, there just seems to be something so weird. It seems like there's nothing that's taken or that was like something that I felt like just kind of threw me. I would, I would actually say those words out loud. I would say like, it feels as if there's something in the ground, some force in the ground that's like sucking something out. Like it's just like, there's like this stale, this stale permeation and like that's, and I've had that feeling for a long time now and that might be existentialism, but I think it was deeper. It was like, cause you could see it all over the place and all these kinds of things. It's like, it's something that at one point we could, I could see, but I could never articulate what that was. I saw him and a guy like obviously Peterson comes along and then it's like kicks over the, the barrel and everybody's like, Oh, that's kind of, that's what we're seeing. So it's interesting, but I think I have a real solution to all of this guys. And this is, this is a real solution. What we need to do is we need to go and buy one of those old malls, the shopping malls that are closed down. And so like in the shopping mall, you just take all the churches who are failing and you give them a store, pick a church to go to, that we want to go to at the end of the service, we're all meeting the food court and have a big potluck. And then, and then play paintball like Grizz wants to do. Exactly. Right. You did that. We played paintball. Grizz is in denial somehow. I don't, I don't understand. So, you know, it's interesting Chad to hear you talk because I, I was really, you know, to use sort of Paul's language here, I was really colonized by stranger things when it came out. And I kind of followed it along and all the markers that you're talking about, like, you know, of course it's a work of fiction, but you know, all the sort of those weird, uncanny things actually turn out to be real. You know, that, that, that, and what there's no more unsuspecting population to experience something weird than a, than a, away from the mainstream, you know, small little community with a mall in Indiana, right? I mean, they are not ready for evil. And so for me, it sort of takes on this allegorical meaning. And, and, and the, and the showrunners seem to be hitting every one of those notes, every one of those sort of mid 80s notes with malls and, and all of that. And yeah, right, right. I mean, all those, those sorts of things. And, and it must be like, you know, there's a, there's a line from a Robert Frost poem. It's like, it's got something like back out of all this now too much for us back to a time made more simple by the loss of detail. And, and it's this, we, we, we sense that something's not working. And so one of the plays, right, is to just pretend that we're in a new age, right? We just sort of move on and we'll just build something new. But another move is to be like, well, did we forget something? I think maybe we forgot something. And like, so that's, so that's my wheelhouse. Like, that's where I live, you know, cause I read old books and I teach old books and, you know, but, you know, how to sort of, how do you make somebody read, you know, Sir Gal and the Green Knight? I mean, no, you're right. And that's what's bubbling up in the culture, right? One of the themes, I didn't do it on navigating patterns. I did on my personal YouTube channel. One of the themes you see bubbling up is children saving the world and the adults being clueless, right? But it's almost like they're stuck at a developmental level. And then they're running it. I liked the way you phrased it, Kale. That was brilliant, right? They're running into the problem of evil. They can't get around it. And it's real. It's manifest in the world, even though in a way it's not right. And they don't, they're struggling with it. And that's the zeitgeist is struggling. It's been struggling with that for a while. I would say starting with the matrix for sure. Right. And that's all bubbling up. And then they don't know how to deal with it, but they realize in some sense, these adults, they realize they're developmentally children facing for the first time, the concept of evil. And you're right. It's one of the deep sort of messages that's sort of conflicting in, I would say in Verbecky's work and in Peterson's work to some extent. I love Jordan Peterson, but I've got a few criticisms I will levy at him. There's this, well, we can't go back. Are you sure? Right. Right. Right. Are you sure we can't go back? Maybe we left something over there when we took the left. Yeah. And Albuquerque. Yeah. It's the thing that drives me nuts about Brett, right? You know, you listen into Brett and like, he'll just sort of pronounce like, well, you know, that's of course ridiculous. Like, you know, it's clearly not up to the job. You don't even know what you're talking about. Like you've literally even just, you've never just read a page of Plato. Like, you know, and it drives like, so like today, just today, I on a whim, I decided to Xerox the, the, the ring of Gaiji story from Plato's Republic. And I had not, I have not read the ring of Gaiji since I was 20 years old. I just like, you know, and I think there's something here with Macbeth and anyway, so we take it in there and we just, we just read it out loud together. And it's only, you know, a page and a half or whatever it is. And you know, you watch this thing and the kids, I can see the kids are doing their thing and I'm working with my, my partner and it's all, it's all kind of coming out. And you're like, man, this is just so profound. It's pressing and it's like, it's sophisticated. And, and, and then people are going to say, well, it's just not up to the task of what we're facing. Then in other words, you don't know what we're facing. If you can't read a page of Plato and I'm just picking on Plato. I'm not a big like Plato guy, but you know, what, how, how do you, you know, you are sitting at the apex, you know, the shoulder of the proverbial giant, right. And you don't even know that you're standing on this giant. In fact, you're pretending like the giant doesn't exist. And so, gosh, is that just so frustrating? Well, and you, and you said, you know, Kaylin, you, you know, I saw that today, today, critical drinker put out a video. We're basically talking about Jennifer Lawrence coming out. She was the first action female in cinema. And the guys are just apoplectic. You don't watch movies. And one of the guys actually said, maybe she doesn't. Oh, no, I'll tell you that. I used to work in Hollywood. No, no, no, I used to work in Hollywood. They know nothing. A couple of old guys in the studio, like have seen everything, but oh, everybody, nobody knows. I'm telling you, it's, I bet she hasn't seen a movie older than like 1985. Like honestly, or the 90s even. Yeah. I need to update that a decade. That would update your decade. Yeah. That you see that, you can see that sense is out there in the zeitgeist. Go ahead, Chad. Sorry. That pattern is in the, I'm sure it's got to be in the music industry as well. When I was in my band, our vocalist, he had a lot of talent and stuff, but I'm talking with him about classics like Jimi Hendrix. And he's like, who that is? It's like, what? They've seen a t-shirt, right? I think I've seen a Jimi Hendrix t-shirt. But yeah, they don't actually know the stuff. And again, we can sort of, yeah, wrote about this, but like that is actually consequential. Yes. Right. You can't book a listener of Metal Band and not Jimi Hendrix or Candice Joplin. But imagine if your task, for instance, with trying to understand what justice is. Okay. Right. Let's just say for the sake that you're a lawmaker. Okay. You know, it is stunning to me that we have, what are there? 100 senators? How many of our 100 senators have read a page of Play-Doh? And again, I'm not a big Play-Doh guy, like whatever. How many of them have read a page of Play-Doh? Now, even more damning is all the Ivy League kids that they have working for them. How many of them have read a page of Play-Doh? And it's vanishingly small. Vanishingly small. I was thinking about something akin to that when I was watching, I'm sorry, I'm not trying to derail this, but something else. I was watching, what was that? Better Call Saul. Right. And I don't know if you guys have seen this, but in that there's the character of Charlie or Chuck, and he's a lawyer. Right. And but he's like, he's like, like, like this total like, materialist, rationalist, my dog, she's like going nuts. It's hilarious. But like, when, when, when stuff starts hitting the fan for Charlie, like he doesn't pray to God, he prays to the brown lamp. So it's like, it's interesting to see how like, I don't know, there's something about that. There I go again derailing. No, that's right, Chad. He focuses on the material around him. Right. And I think a helpful definition of materialism is you think material is the driving force or the gating force for everything. And so you focus first on the material, not that you don't believe non material things exist, because this seems to be for Vickie's reductionist, physicalist argument. My argument is no, no, you're just a materialist for Vickie and Peterson, for that matter, they're materialists. They want the material to fix the problem. Oh, we just have the right platform. Twitter won't be a dumpster fire. That's just wrong. Any platform you make is going to suffer from one of two problems. Either it's going to serve the will of the people, in which case it could very well become a dumpster fire. I'm not saying it will, or people aren't going to use it because it doesn't serve their will. And the end of and the Plato problem is huge, Kale, because I noticed this with a bunch of people. I think it was a Donald Hoffman when he talks and when Lawrence Krauss talk, and when Michael Levin talk. I'm just sitting there like, you guys need to take a course in philosophy. I've never taken a course in philosophy, but I'm sure that if you took one, you would realize these are not scientific questions, and they cannot be answered with science. But they are answered. Those answers may be unsatisfying, but they're there. People have thought about this. Right. And they need to have happened what happened to me when I was 18. And I thought I was the smartest person in the universe. And just by, well, perhaps providence, but by chance, you know, I have to read old stuff, you know, to a class. And I'm like, wait a second, this Plato guy or Aristotle or Homer, I think it was Homer. I was like, these guys are way more sophisticated. That whole recency bias is a real thing. But to me, Mark, what you're getting at, I'm going to be sort of one of two reactions to this, is this is why I found Paul's work with what is spiritual so helpful, you know, is that we have sort of taken this idea of spiritual and sort of sort of given it a very narrow parameter with which we kind of accept it as a thing. But it is way more prevalent. And Paul, you know, you go on about school spirit and like just that simple little, you know, handle has been so helpful for me because people believe in spiritual spirituality. They don't admit it. They don't call it that, but they really, really do. And so, you know, Mark, maybe, you know, you're listening to Breveke to do his thing. And it's like, you're talking about spirituality, like, actually, you know, in a big way. All right, guys, I got to go. I have to go to meet my kids for dinner. So I'll see you all later. This is awesome. I'm going to come back. Thanks. Thank you, Kale. Good to be here. Cheers. I'm going to hop up too, guys. Yeah, I got to land the plate on this too. So I don't know if Professor Luigi or Gray want to say anything because you two are new in the chat. Man, I jumped in. I jumped in. I'm usually a lurker. I jumped in when Kale, it's too bad, Kale was signing off, but I jumped in when he was kind of touching down on the sort of rejection of tradition because it made me think I coached tennis in Dallas, Texas. And I coached one of our law professors at SMU on a weekly basis. And he's a guy who's probably in his early 30s. And we had this random conversation about Yale Law School and how it's this number one law school, best of all of them. You can't even get in with a 4.0 GPA and a perfect LSAT score unless you have all the elite connections. And he named a friend of his who works for a congressman in DC and is currently at Yale Law School, but still works for the congressman in DC and doesn't go to class. And how they don't even do grades. And so that he is essentially kind of walking through Yale Law without even really having to put much effort in. And I was sort of contrasting it with a friend of mine who just graduated from U Chicago, which is a similarly highly tided law school, but where he, I mean, my friend, I barely talked to the guy for three years. He was working so hard. But I thought just Yale was a good example and sort of connects to that what you guys are discussing because you've got people who are getting probably the most valuable degree, one of the most valuable degrees in the planet. And it's simply a matter of connections and probably coming from money, coming from family, perhaps multi-generational and benefiting from what their fathers have done and their fathers fathers have done and not being connected to, to touch it to your point, you know, the origin, the original wisdom tradition, spiritual traditions that probably gave their fathers, fathers, fathers success in the first place and the place where they came from. And, and I have other clients who are, you know, this guy was an older guy, but I have other clients who are more my age. I'm 26 who are, we're in a very affluent area. And so mostly very, very affluent went to high level universities. And I think all the time that a lot of these, these kids are sort of in their little bubble and protected sort of from the meaning crisis because of generational wealth, material success. And it's a little bit like they're protected in the current moment. And they talk about, you know, you see the classic struggles of not taking dating seriously, not taking marriage seriously, not taking spiritual tradition seriously. And you realize, you know, maybe they're not feeling the effects of the meaning crisis right now in this moment, but like some of the, like some of our peers who are not as materially successful are, but it could be 10 years down the road, 20 years down the road, or even maybe because of their material success, one generation down the road where their kids are going to be even further removed. Maybe the grandparents aren't there. The last generation, our parents, you know, boomers or, or maybe the generation above who have the last genuine connection to the spiritual and wisdom traditions of our people, one generation gone and that's, that connection is almost completely removed. And so the people who are my age, who might not be feeling those effects, and they would not, they would look at you and scratch their head when you mentioned the meaning crisis. But in 10 years, 20 years, or maybe when, when their kids are a little bit grown, they're going to start to see those effects. And it's, it's almost, it's sad because I'm sitting here like, man, I don't even know how to break through your bubble because it's so, it's like David Foster Wallace, man, like this, it's like what he says at the beginning of that commencement speech. Like this is the water that we're swimming in and I'm not entirely sure how to convince you that you're even in the water. And it's amazing to me how this wisdom tradition has simply been, I mean, you've got people going to the elite universities and like Kale said, you know, they never even got a crappy introduction to play dough, not, not to mention a good one. But you know, and all at the same time, where right now on YouTube, on the internet, you can learn one heck of a lot about play dough. I mean, there's amazing things on YouTube, just Nate Heil posted a really amazing video this morning on someone going through, going through play dough and alchemy. And I saw that title. I thought, I'm in alchemy. Why would it, but you know, and he's going through the cave and the water. Wow. But, but no, these people are, I've been on, they've been on a, they've been on a conveyor belt and they're up at Yale and they might not know much about much. And they are very quickly going to be, they're going to be, you know, they're going to be working in the Supreme court, they're going to be working in Congress. I mean, one of the things I don't talk about hardly at all here in Sacramento is, you know, fair amount of contact with the political register. And I think, I think it is not at all what most Americans think it's like at those rarefied levels. So interesting. So thanks. That's great. Professor Luigi, anything you want to say? I was going to join on the music discussion, but that kind of got passed by very quickly. So, but I will say, sorry, I have to get this out. I will say that I really like professor Michael Segru or I don't know how to pronounce his name. Except for his, except for his lecture on the book of Job, which I think he totally misunderstood the point of Job, but I'll just leave that at that. Well, yeah, but he, no, I've listened to all his lectures on play, at least all the lectures I could find of him on Play-Doh and they're all amazing as far as I can tell. But no, that's, that's pretty much it. I want to thank you, Paul, for including that, interviewing those, that Korean couple, because it's nice to actually hear some Asian, some, I guess, Asian slash Asian American representation. I don't hear a lot of that perspective on this side of the internet. So yeah, yeah, they're there. They're out there. But thank you all. Thanks for joining the live stream. Like I said, I saw Nate had to close his because he had to get back to work. I need to close this because I need to get back to work. But hopefully someone else will pick it up. And I really like how these, these little chats are. I mean, we were doing this in Discord and I think it continues in Discord to a degree. I think, you know, a lot of the people who are doing it a lot are out here now, but I think, I think there's a reason sometimes to do it on Discord. I think there's reasons to do it out here on the open internet. So, you know, we've kind of left the harbor and are out there in the sea a little bit. And so thank you all for, for, for coming in and chiming in. I really, I gained wisdom from all of you. Thank you, Pastor Paul. All right. Thanks, Brother Paul. Oh, if you will check the link for the Discord, it might be expired. I think I just updated it. I just updated it yesterday. So, okay. I'm not sure what day I really have to update it. If I knew that it would be easier because then I could get a routine every week. So cool. Thanks. All right. I'm just going to warn Rick. Rick, I'm going to have to broadcast. So Rick's been doing stuff behind the scenes while we've been doing this playing around with things. So that's, that's the beauty of the kind of stuff Rick does. Thanks guys. All right. Thanks guys. Take care.