https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=pfgRXIwzKCw

 Good morning, good afternoon, and good evening. This is a very special Friday live stream. It's not what we usually do. We are, last week, Rick, I've still got some echo from you, I think. Last week, on Saturday, I posted a second video talking about the Jordan Peterson-Michael Malice conversation. The first one I had posted a little bit earlier in that week, and it got some interesting feedback, so I thought I'd pursue it. I got a lot more interesting feedback from none other than Ginger Bill, who might not be known on my channel because I haven't done a one-on-one Randall's conversation with him yet. I does actually have a very good one with Cassidy on her channel. Then I got into church on, I don't usually look at comments on the weekends, so I got into church on Sunday, and Rick's like, oh, you really got it going with that video. I said, what? He says, Ginger Bill isn't having it. I said, Ginger Bill isn't having it? I had a lot of ... I can't look at this feed. I know Ginger Bill from the Discord server. Part of the reason I like working with the Discord server is because there's actually a chance at community where we can get to know each other and, in the context of a relationship, I think have a better conversation. Today I will be talking with Ginger Bill for about the first 45 minutes or an hour. We'll see how the conversation goes. You can obviously follow along on the live stream on YouTube, and there is a chat that you can participate in. I don't have that in front of me. Rick sort of monitors it, but if you want to join into the Discord community conversation, Rick will drop a link into the chat on YouTube for you to come in. There is a text chat section under Friday live streams called Questions on Malice and Anarchism June 26. After Ginger Bill and I have spoken for a while, we'll address some of the questions and comments that are in there. Depending on how this goes, we might even have some voice chat, extended voice chat with some of those who are in the voice chat room in the Bridges of Meaning Discord. So that's what we're doing today. This is sort of an experiment because I do the question and answer every Friday. Those aren't going to go away as such, but I would like to broaden out into some other kinds of conversation, which I think we can do well in the context of this Discord community. While people on the Discord server probably know Ginger Bill fairly well, even better than I do, for those who are watching the live stream, Ginger Bill, why don't you introduce yourself a little bit? Yeah, hi, I'm Bill or Ginger Bill, as you may be calling me. I'm usually active on the Discord anyway for the Bridges of Meaning. Again, I've been watching Paul's videos for quite a while now and I've always enjoyed them as much. I can highly respect Paul and what he's been doing. Again, I do love what you're doing as well, and especially in this community as well. It's been absolutely loving, is the best way of putting it. It's always lovely to talk to people from all walks of life, all different viewpoints, and it's just a real buzz in that sense. So I guess today's video is discussing two particular videos you've recently done, I guess, isn't it? Which is the two videos were called, Blue Church War into the Heavens, Birthing Spirits into Estrus. And the second one, Are the Woke Left and Anarchist Two Faces of the Same Coin? Now, I guess how I got onto here is because I wrote two comments on the latter video, which we're talking about both videos together, but again, YouTube comments, I didn't want to make it an essay, so I kind of split it into two comments. And I was kind of just kind of disagreeing with Paul and I can just, shall I read them out directly or just summarize them? Yeah, go ahead. That's a good, no, go ahead and read them out. Why not? That's a fine thing. I'm reading voice anyway, so. Yes, okay, so it's just like bedtime stories with the gingerbill. This is not a good story this time. So with the first video that Paul did on Michael Malice, my main view is that I think he completely stood and understood what the things he was criticizing about and brought along like preconceived notions of what like anarchism was and implied that without actually listening to what Malice was actually saying in that. So in this first video, Paul's quip was about calling him woke by a different name, which is around about 54 minutes into that first video when Malice said, and I quote, unity through politics always means oppression. And I would say this is just wrong what Paul is saying like this retort, because the main reason is Malice is being tautological here. What I mean is, is that by definition, the state is a polity under a system of governance with a monopoly on force and violence. So this is the textbook definition effectively, like you can find this in many sociologists or even like Max Weber would write this. So this means that any use of politics, any use of the politics through the state is by definition using force and violence of the state to achieve your ends. You can argue this is legitimate use or necessary evil or unnecessary evil or whatever, but the statement is true regardless. And again, I was saying the quip was wrong. So in the comment as well, I wrote a little definition of what oppression is. I got this from the Merriam-Webster. Oppression, now in a situation in which people are governed in an unfair and cruel way and prevented from having opportunities and freedom. So just trying to keep the definitions there, something I guess Malice would agree with. So if you are forming unity through involuntary means, then for the Malice this is completely immoral and an unjust action. If the unity is achieved through voluntary means, then Malice wouldn't really give a care at all, to be honest with you. Again, in the first video, Paul started talking about anarchy as chaos, which means he doesn't really know the meaning in the technical philosophical sense of the word. In colloquial speak, people do use the term anarchy to mean chaos or rulelessness. The way Malice is using it is the absence of a state, i.e. no ruler or rulers, because the word anarchy means known or without ruler, anarchy. So Malice never said, and then the other comment I was criticizing is, and this is I think around about, right at the beginning actually, the slide is one of the first slides you did. Malice never said once that all cooperation is tyranny, nor even implied it. His point was that cooperation through force is not moral. If you want a better term for Malice's political philosophy, you could use the term voluntaryism, but that's still not technically correct for him. And I'll explain later if we can just do a discussion. And to be even clearer about Malice's standpoint, he wants to privatize everything. It stems from the belief of natural rights, which are a form of private property rights, which all stem from the concept of self-ownership and individual sovereignty. And when I mean privatizing everything, I mean privatizing the courts, so having private law, privatizing defense agencies, so having competing defense agencies rather than having a state monopoly, which is the police, privatizing the banks and everything for him from that regards. So he may argue he wants more order, not chaos, and the state is what brings chaos in a different form. And lastly, when Malice said the battle is won when the average American regards a corporate journalist exactly the same as he regarded a tobacco executive, after that he was plain devil's advocate for the tobacco executive. He was not defending him whatsoever, but then you were kind of discussing something he would agree with. And I would add on to this, he would say yes, the tobacco executive knows he's selling cancer sticks. So your view is like, yes, we know what he's selling, that's the product he's selling, they need to understand what the corporate journalist is selling as well, in that sense. And it's the metaphorical equivalent to cancer sticks in that sense. Again, the last thing is, as for use of the blue church, Malice uses a term coined by Mencius Mollbach, also known as Curtis Yarvin, called the cathedral, and uses that as a model of analysis. That's the first comment, I apologize if it's going on for a little bit longer. The second comment, which is the second video now, which is, my answer to that video was no. So regarding trolling, as Malice states in the video, it is best demonstrated in the late comedian or anti-comedian Andy Kaufman. His performances were also a joke for him, not for his audience. So he turned the audience into the joke. A good example of this would be his Tony Clifton character. So if you don't know who Andy Kaufman is or anything, he had a character called Tony Clifton, which was effectively a failed lounge singer and such, a nightclub singer. And he would usually come out with one of those like suits on with the ruffles and such and the sunglasses and always wearing a big cigar. And one of the kind of shows, if you want to say, he brought his daughter with him and would go and sing and says, oh, she reminds me so much of my late wife and all that lot. So he starts singing a duet and when she makes a mistake, he just whacks her in the face, like saying, don't make that mistake. And then all the monsters going to shout, don't cry for her. She shouldn't need to make those mistakes. And it's like, clearly this is not his daughter. It's a trained actress. And it's just a complete laugh. Another one he used to do was professional wrestling against women. Hint, professional wrestling is already a farce. So it's like he's like saying, yes, I can take on all the strongest women in the room. I'll fight any of you. And it's like, clearly it's all fixed. But that's the joke. People don't realize it. Regarding egalitarianism, about Malice, another topic. Malice is explicitly anti egalitarianism. The reason I don't say it is because it's actually an egoist. That's probably why. And a test he usually is determines whether someone is like left wing or right wing is to ask them this very specific question. Are some people better than others? Now, his terminology, a right winger will say yes, a left wing will give you a speech. And that's he says that what happens about 100 percent of the time. And it's like, OK, fine, I don't use it myself. It's his test, not mine. But to quote a famous economist, philosopher, historian and also the father of anarcho capitalism in the tradition of malice, in a sense, egalitarianism is a revolt against nature. This is from Murray Rothbard, in fact. There's the book and the collected essays I own, because I again, I've been researching a lot. So showed up to the camera. Be better. There we go. Murray Rothbard and other essays as well. Again, he was a very natural rights theorist as well. In that regard. So, OK, so regarding corporations is one of the criticism that Paul had. I'm going through all of them. So corporations do differ from all the companies and other forms of organisation. Corporations are entities which are endowed by the state themselves. They are quite a modern invention which arose around the same time as the modern state itself. But again, as Paul correctly points out, corporations are principalities. And even in legal terms, they are classified as a person and those patterns manifest in really interesting ways. So both Peterson and Malice are correct when they were discussing corporations, but from two different viewpoints. So Malice is looking at a goal oriented aspect, while Peterson was talking more of the inevitable economic structure causing this type of entity. They are both correct and compatible viewpoints, but they were both describing a purpose and function respectively. And the fulfillment of the function is the purpose is its function, which is basic Aristotle there. Another point, sorry, it's going on for a little bit longer here. Another point is about Malice and is he's trying to achieve goals. He's just trying to get his viewpoint across very concisely. Which itself is radical and unknown to most people. It is why he uses a lot of quotes and shorthands and very many quips as well. Another aspect is him being a joke and a comedian. He's trying to be joke about the topic regarding institutions and hierarchies being necessary. Malice agrees to this too. The difference is he does view the institutions which are based around force of violence are not necessary evils, just evil. And there's the difference here. So again, quip in. Older forms of anarchism would probably do like no hierarchies and all that stuff. That's more the left wing forms and Alice is technically a right winger in this regard. So Maris's conception of human nature is probably closer to Aristotle or Augustine in a sense, St. Augustine. But he does agree with Augustine because he disagrees with the conception of originalists and such like that because he's not Christian. But especially since Malik is kind of an atheist from the Ayn Rand tradition. And again, side note, Ayn Rand's tradition is mostly Christian. And again, side note, Ayn Rand's tradition is mostly just Aristotle, Aquinas, just without God. She nicked most of it pretty much and then twisted herself with a bit of Nietzschean twist. When he was talking about the other side of the left, he was trying to describe them as best as he can in the way that they view themselves. So when Paul contrasted Malice to Black News Tonight, which I've never seen before as an American show, but OK, it's the first time I've saw it, I didn't necessarily think that was a correct assumption nor could I hear it from Malice. So I thought his point, but yeah, your point about him being conscious about it, are they conscious about it is a very good one. And it's a question that, again, are most people conscious about what they view? But again, I don't think the framework is necessarily you replied onto Malice was the same. So it's not technically a bandit conclusion. OK, sorry, I'm up to the last two paragraphs. So the Let's Send the Tanks to Harvard Yard is a meme amongst the indiscriminate across the New Right, which he's written a book on. This is actually a comes from Mendez Moca himself. He was talking about disgusting. So it's not meaning it necessarily literally, it's hyperbole to show how much discontent they have for something of this wing of the cathedral. Again, this small book term and to be very clear, again, I'm not defending any of these positions, just describing what his beliefs are. That's trying to make very clear. But again, as I said in here, maybe this is my person wrong, I think my hypothesis of my way, Paul probably is discreet, like instinctually, at least, was more that he has more trusts in the institutions of the cathedral, what the cathedral's institutions would be are the state schools, the universities, the corporate media and the government. Whilst Malice, who's even only I think is only a decade younger than yourself, Paul, and many other younger generations do not have as many trust in these institutions because they can see what they're doing to them, their friends, their family and the general culture. And these institutions don't care about them. So this is the partial revolt against this cathedral. And the fun thing is, is that this term, the cathedral, is in reference to the revolt against the scholastic order of the high medieval period. So it's in a partial sense Protestantism, and that's kind of it's referring itself to this. So Malice's main thesis is the state doesn't know what's best for you and ascribing its will onto you through force is immoral. This does not mean you know what is best for you either, but at least you're not being forced through violence to do something. And my last thing was in terms of religion, participating in the church or kingdom of God is voluntary in that same way. It does not force participation. Being a virtuous man of good character and integrity also requires grace and mercy. Good. All right. Well, what would you like to do? Because you also differentiated some of your opinions from Malice's in this. Yes. Part of what's interesting to me is that, you know, I started doing this channel and I attracted a very different audience than I spent much time with, many of whom are sort of in this libertarian. I heard on Karen, the Meaning Codes channel Rothbart, I heard them talking about Austrian economics. Yes. Now that's are they what's their relationship with someone like Malice? Is Malice sort of a an extreme version of them? Of course, we've had, you know, Karl making himself famous in the comments section here for a while, a super fan and now kind of a nemesis of me because I didn't finally follow along the path to truth and natural law. So maybe you can explain why. Maybe you could explain how we got here. And I'm not sure exactly where you are in this whole thing either. Or are you just kind of correcting me because I was getting it wrong or? I was mostly correcting you, go on. I wasn't really saying my opinions. I was just saying these are the opinions that Malice has. So Malice particularly, we start with him. He comes from technically from the Ayn Rand traditions, the objectivists in that sense. He's a very big fan of her. He's not an objectivist himself, especially being an anarchist. The objectivists, minarchism is the correct position. But he also disagreed with her in many things, but he is a very honorable and not to say how much he respects her. He owns her actual copy of the fountainhead. That's how much he respects her. Yeah, so that's yeah. He respects many other figures on the right as well. I think he owns one of Margaret Thatcher's dresses. This is a weird thing. And he's one of those like collecting random things. Yeah, so. But he's also, his audience also. He doesn't put it on does he? I know. I know I'm like, I don't think he put it on. No, I don't think he just dragged himself. I don't think he'd pull it off, honestly. But the, we can see that's the tradition he has. So the egoist is who he would call himself an egoist in that sense. So he's more like, if I was going to use in the very technical sense of like Nietzschean term, he is would be a subjective nihilist. But that doesn't mean what many people think it means. So egoist is a much better term in this regard. So that's why it's things. But yes, this mini circle, I think on the internet, I think this general libertarianism or classical liberalism stuff has kind of been gaining a lot more momentum over the past decade or so. So you will see many circles on the internet being more libertarian leaning in sense. I think it probably is, could be due to the past 20 years and such. For instance, you've had 9-11 and such and all the different wars. You've also had, for instance, the Great Depression and such and saying, not the Great Depression, the Great Recession as it's called. And many of things relating to that and many of the banking crises and many of the other things that have been happening over the past years and even the past 18 months. So many of those things have kind of been contributing to make, I guess, more people libertarian. That's just one hypothesis. Probably wrong. That's it. So yeah, there's many people in here. So the libertarians. Go ahead. Yeah. No, it's fine. I want to hear your opinions because I respect your opinions. Yeah. No, it's absolutely fine. Yes. I'm just getting, I'm hypothesizing wrong. Again, it could be wrong. That's the best thing about hypotheses. You can test them. But the, so this kind of libertarian, so there's different types of libertarians out there and what most people, I would say, the standard of view of a libertarian is probably not the technical term. So the technical term of a libertarian would be something they believe in something usually private property rights is the first stance and something called the non-aggression principle or non-aggression presumption. They believe that aggressing on someone, to violating the rights, is immoral and that's kind of the basis for their beliefs. Not all libertarians are natural rights. Some of them are more utilitarian in their views, but the more natural right ones are a bit more popular nowadays. Stuff. In fact, even the term libertarian, how we use it in the modern sense, actually comes from Moira Rothbard, who was an anarchist, even though most libertarians are not anarchists anymore. So that's actually kind of a nice thing of a quote and someone like many people said all the Arrandians were libertarians said, no, we're not the libertarians. They're the Rothbard types. She even said that explicitly because she knew Rothbard and such. So this is all in like 60s 50s and 60s time. 1956, so should be clear. So that's where he's coming out of this tradition. So he's kind of like this is where Michael Malice is all this tradition. So yeah, there's many people who know the libertarian circles like Princess of America, you'd have Ron Paul and such and those would be associated with the Mises Institute, which is a kind of very kind of successful think tank and economic forum of sorts because it's named after Ludwig von Mises, the famous economist, which is actually the mentor of Moira Rothbard and Moira Rothbard started the organization, co-founded at least, as respect for the late economist. And also Moira Rothbard is dead now, that's why he died in 95. So that's kind of where it's gone. And that's kind of they've all kind of associated things and they have many different books on economics and this school of thought for this economics is called Austrian economics. It's just named after the founders. They're all Austrian. That was pretty much it. They are but they've got different philosophies and stuff and it's called thought is broad. There's many different schools of thought. Of course, there's the macro, there's Keynesians, there's neoclassicals, there's many different schools of thought with economics. So there's not one. It's not like physics where there's pretty much any one school of thought in that regards. But yeah, that's sorry. I'm being as broad as I can as I can to explain. But yeah, there's different different things. Hopefully that's not too much of a history lesson. I love history. I thought it was helpful. But these are Austrians and Hitler was an Austrian therefore. Actually, these Austrians were from the initial ones were from the 1860s and 1870s. So these were the they were kind of very free marketer types. So the first ones would be in the names now. Carl Menger is one of the first and he was one of the co-founders or not co-discoverers of something called subjective value theory and marginalism. So in classical economics people in the past thought that there was something called labor theory of value and that the value of something was related to how much labor you put into it. This is what Adam Smith believed. This is what Karl Marx believed. And it wasn't until this area like three people independently rediscovered this subjective subjectivism effected with our views and its value is just depending on what you value it to be. There is no objective economic value in the world. And it's all subjective and it once you do that, you actually so actually removes a lot of the contradictions and paradoxes they had in the old thing. So this way is correct because you can actually show it through kind of like logic that it actually is correct. But yeah, this is a many all the schools of thought economics nowadays believe they accept the Marxists, but they're wrong about economics in general. But that's the thing anyway, but okay, we're so we're kind of telling things. But yeah, these people are also kind of criticizing Marx at the time and everything. Yeah, so they're Austrians. That's fine. And then look for Mises was Austrian and the one Friedrich Hayek of people have known that as well. Friedrich Hayek also went on to kind of inspire someone like Thomas Sowell, which people probably know a lot of his name of. And many other stuff like that. So that's kind of that's kind of school of thought. But again, there are multiple different schools of thought in every field, to be honest with you. That's very interesting. That's actually is very helpful. So now you're not an economist. Nope. I'm a physicist. You know, you know a lot about this stuff. What brought you into? I mean, obviously you're interested in this stuff enough to learn about it. And to know about it. Yeah. What where's where's your interest in this? How did that happen? This is actually kind of a mistake. And this is how this will be sound bizarre. Economics is what got me interested in religion. That will sound bizarre to many people. But the fundamental thing is economics is the study of pretty much human nature. And that's why I was really fascinated about it, because it was actually talking about like this is how humans act. This is what they do. This is how this is how there's laws governing this. And it's like, oh, wow. And then you get read all the history and stuff. And it's always very fascinating how these different thoughts emerge. And I always like history of thought in general. But then it kind of got led me on to stuff. I learned any other readers like Thomas Sowell, which then kind of led to me to some even like from Thomas Sowell to non economic thinkers, but something like Jonathan Haidt and the Righteous Mind. And then around the world, I learned a lot about economics. And then around this time, this year, about a year later or two after this, then the whole Jordan Peterson thing happened. So it's kind of just like carried on. And this is kind of my trajectory. And it's kind of like it's helped me restructure my thoughts. Now, again, I've tried to read as broadly as I can. I have books of all schools. So I have loads of communist books behind me. I have loads of Keynesian stuff. I have loads of Austrian stuff. So it's like I don't I'm not like I like reading. So why did this community gather around Jordan Peterson? What did they hear in Peterson that really attracted them? Because that's that's something that I've seen. And that was because what interested me about Peterson was none of this. I mean, it was a totally different aspect. Obviously, the far more religious aspect that sort of this is the thing. There's loads of things like for me. You're right. The thing that interested me is his views on psychology initially, and then talking about like the views on the phenomenological aspect of religion more than anything and kind of showing that yes, this is not nonsense or like a not silly superstitions or anything like this. There's actually something behind this. And also, it's actually describing human nature. So it was like once that clicked to my mind, I went, of course it is, too. But it's not always obvious when you again, I again, I should be very clear. I've been brought up as an atheist all my life. So I virtually had no religious background at all. So it's like I've never been a new atheist or anything like that. But just just like that's it. You're a regular. The background says, yeah, whatever that is. But yes, it's kind of like so for me, I don't know. I might not be why there's loads of people who love Peterson, because I think he was saying the right things at the right time regarding the culture at the time and the problems in it. One of the things when I listen to Peterson talk to you just talk to Andrew Doyle. And it seems that in the UK, I mean, when I listen to some of the stuff Andrew Doyle was talking about with respect to laws about saying mean things about other people on the Internet and how that can get you in trouble, I thought, wow, that's not in America. I mean, you might get kicked off of Twitter, but the police aren't coming to your door. We've got a thing called the First Amendment. How I mean, how is this conversation different in the UK than what you've seen in the United States and perhaps other parts of the world? Because Malice is, of course, in the US. Peterson's in Canada. Yes. So Canada is sort of halfway between Europe and America anyway. Yes. So I used to have said that the culture in the UK is five years behind the US. Now I'd say it's a year or a few months. And it's because we've effectively imported American culture, Americanism, and also imported back the American Puritanism culture, which is like where all this I knew progressivism comes from. If you look at the history, it comes from American Puritanism, and then it forms into purgassivism into like the 1890s, the 1920s history. That's the progressive era. And then you've got this new form, which has got merged in other things. But I would still say it's part of the same kind of lineage and tradition. And many of the philosophers in this area would say, yes, they would call this a form of hyper-Calvinism or something. I wouldn't go that far. I'd just say it's Puritanism, even though I know Puritanism does come from the Reformed tradition. But yeah, so that and we've kind of like, hey, we thought we got rid of these after the Civil War. So they've just come back. Great. But yeah, so that's kind of what's happening now. So a lot of our institutions and even our politicians have all gone very, as the term would be, woke. I don't really like the term, but yes, but that's kind of what's happened. So we're experiencing the same, many of the problems that America is having as well. But we're also having a lot more issues as well because we don't usually have the same cultural norms and such, like, for instance, freedom of speech. Okay. Now, maybe go back to human nature. You know, obviously, we're both humans. Gingerbill is not a program and Rick is real. Rick is running this from behind the scenes. Why the interest in human nature for you? I mean, it's humanity has a nature. I mean, this is one of the points that Peterson makes and then you have individuals versus collective. So you said you kind of got into this as you began studying human nature and that's sort of how your economics and the religion sort of connected. So what about human nature sort of caught you? You're just trying to figure out people? Because you're a scientist. I'm a scientist, yeah. And I also love talking to people, always have chatting, I'm very extroverted in that regard. But it's, I don't know, there's something fascinating about people and how they tick, including myself. Like you look at your own self and think, why do I do what I do? Like, sometimes you have those experiences where you're watching yourself do things and it's like, wait, what am I doing? Like you just, or sometimes you're just doing it naturally. You're not even thinking about it. It's not like conscious movements. And it's like you're doing these basic rituals and such. And it's like, okay, all the other humans do this as well, don't they? And again, they think it's different. But the thing is also fascinating because people think differently to you as well at times. Like we are, like some of these progressive people would usually think, everyone has the same, think the same way. They just have different mental contents. Kind of a blanks latest view. But I'm like, no, no, people really are wired differently, like completely. And it's fascinating to me. Like, why do you think that way? Okay, I want to learn how more about you. And it's just beautiful to hear in a sense. So I think that's why I'm fascinated because it's just like, it's what makes you tick. It's kind of like, and why do you have that opinion you have? And like, I just, yeah, I don't usually care what people have as opinions, but like, yeah, what do you have? So when it comes to human nature, you're more of a process theologian. You don't, you can be more agnostic about the particular beliefs. Oh, you can read loads of white hair, have you? Okay. Yeah. You want to know how they got there. Maybe, yeah, I don't think I'm a process theologian at all myself in that regard. But yeah, I know the essence of that. Yes. So let's talk about human nature and part of, you know, myself coming. Well, let me say a few things. When I began to see the rise of what we're sort of now calling the woke, I called it progressive liberationism. I immediately saw it as a version of Calvinism because of course, I am a Calvinist and I have lived in conservative Calvinist communities my whole life. And so watching the dynamics, watching the processes, I immediately thought, wow, this is sort of a Calvinism. This derives from Calvinism. The processes sort of work like Calvinism. But in some strange new way. Part of what fascinates me about, well, I think, getting back to anarchism, I think we might think about anarchism as a strategy and anarchism as a morality. Because when I listen to your critique of, and I very much welcome your critique because I learned a lot from it. Yeah, sure. And it's really helpful to be called out, especially in terms of getting someone wrong because the better you actually know them, actually the better you can engage with them instead of just talking past each other. So, and the fact that it came from you and that I at least know you a bit and trust you to because I've seen you operate with other people on the Discord server. And I knew that Bill is an upstanding guy who speaks the truth and is a clear thinker and is very articulate. And so, you know, obviously when I see comments from you, I pay more attention because I expect that you'll probably be right. Thank you, seriously, that is an honor. So let's, so is it fair to sort of differentiate anarchism as a strategy from anarchism as sort of a base, basis of morality? You could, the way I would differentiate, which is very similar, is there's philosophical anarchism and practical anarchism. So you could like, and the reason why I would separate is there is if you look at, they view the state, the state concentrate on the state itself and they would say, is the question is the state legitimate or not? And then they would ask is it necessary or unnecessary? So many, most people in the world would say yes, the state is legitimate. So regardless of it's necessary or necessary, it's legitimate. Then some people say no, it's illegitimate, but it's necessary evil effectively. And that's maybe, yes, they're evil and so forth, but we need them anyway for whatever reason their argument is. Now, and that would be, I would call them as like philosophical anarchists in a sense. They know that it's kind of an immoral thing, but the alternatives or the comparisons are probably not better. Again, I'm not going to try and describe what that is because again, multiple schools of thoughts on literally every topic you can meet. If you meet 10 people, you can get 12 different opinions. And the other one is the unnecessary evil. So these, I would call these the practical anarchists. They said, yes, we need to get rid of the state and yes, we think it's also practically, it's like a moral imperative to do so. So yeah, you could, and it's like, yes, so there's the kind of the, yes, the necessary evil people, the philosophical anarchists, they would be viewing it more as a moral way, less than a, again, less than a strategy. And then the unnecessary ones, yes, they would be more of the strategy people like, yes, this is practically possible as well. And I guess in some ways, you know, part, partially why I saw a connection between, let's say radicals on the left who want to tear down, you know, the, if you look at say Peterson's, because in the first video, I was contrasting Peterson and Barry Weiss and Michael Malice and I thought those two conversations back to back were very interesting because it's clear Barry Weiss believes in the state, believes in the blue church, believes in the cathedral, but basically sees heresy in it, wants to get heresy out of it. So the, you know, the blue church can be the end of history, let's say. Yes. Whereas Malice says the blue church is the enemy, the blue church, you know, happy to see Donald Trump come in and troll blue church to its destruction. Now, this to me gets very interesting because a couple of years ago, I read a very interesting book by Timothy Snyder where he paid attention. So you had in the middle of the 20th century, you had Stalin in the Soviet Union and you had Hitler in Germany. I mean, two of the most powerful states in Europe at the time and all of these weak states in between and both Stalin and Hitler had designs and ambitions on this space in between. What was interesting about Snyder's book is his book is Black Earth as opposed to he's written two books about that, that period and that land in between bloodlands is the other book. So in Black Earth, his thesis of his book is that the Soviets saw state coercion, you know, in a line with Marxist state coercion as sort of this transitory necessary evil, which in some point will birth the new society of liberated individuals where they are no longer disconnected from the their labor theory of value, let's say. Okay. Yes. The Nazis had a much. Yes. Yes. The Nazis had a different strategy, which was much more green as it were, who believe that institutions are a problem. And Nazis also saw institutions as a necessary evil. And in that sense, Nazism was to a degree a version of anarchism because they wanted to get rid of all of these institutions because then finally the natural evolutionary process would yield the super people and would yield that evolution is in a sense the path into the future. Now, I'm not claiming, you know, Barry Weiss nor Michael Malice are in this fight, but that highlights the question of there's sort of an intermediate state and then there's sort of an eschatological state. And I'd say most most worldviews have sort of a means to the end and then a vision of the end in themselves. And those are usually very much connected to people's commitments about human nature and its potential for transformation. Yeah. And to be very kind of here, the famous, very very recommended, but always is the conflict of visions by Thomas Sowell. So for people who have loved Jonathan Hyatt's The Righteous Mind, I honestly heavily recommend reading that because Thomas Sowell kind of lays out a model and it's a model of human nature. It's about two different visions. It's this constrained vision and unconstrained vision. So Stephen Pink, who's a big fan of Thomas Sowell himself, even though Stephen Pink is a lefty in this card, so it's clearly it's not, he thinks it's a very good model. The constrained vision he calls the tragic vision. I would call this the Augustinian vision as well. The unconstrained vision, he calls this the Utapian vision. I would call it the Rousseauian vision. And these are two different views of human nature. The constrained vision is very that man is flawed, complete like, and he needs these institutions to keep him in check and all this like this and institutions not just like physical ones, but also like religious ones and many of these things. Because if you don't, man will do very bad things in the sense. That's the extreme end of it. The other end is the unconstrained one is the idea that man is perfectable, completely perfectable and through reason and thought we can make the perfect man. And those are kind of the extremes of them. And again, everyone fails in some part on that spectrum, bits of odds everywhere. Of course, that's humans. So regarding like the fascism and Marxism, you've got to remember that actually they have the same root. The fascists, the early fascists, they were all Marxists. They were like, for instance, Mussolini. He wrote loads of books on Marx. He was a massive fan. But the problem is they kept they eventually got saying look, practically this isn't going to work. So we're going to take it seriously and we're going to do the right socialism in this way. We're not going to do an international social, we're going to do a national socialism and we're going to do it this way. We need to get the idea of the state is the thing and it's going to be a final goal and this is how we do it and generate the perfect man. So they've got these different kind of visions of human. They're both hybrid visions, by the way. They're not one way or the other hybrid. For instance, the Marxian one, they view in the past that the man is flawed and such and they've got constrained vision in the past. But the man in the future is now can be unconstrained because from the chains after in when you get to reach the final utopia of communism, the man will be unbounded and become perfect. Whilst the fascist view is that no, the man is flawed, but the state itself is unconstrained and all the man is working towards the state to perfect it. So it's this weird hybrid visions that are going on and it's understandable where they've got their eschatology in a sense. It's very Hegelian, but it's very different. One is very natural, cyclic progression, like Hegelian, while the fascist one is more of a hill progression in a sense. I can't, that's my bad explanations, but that's kind of how they kind of view it. Well, I was saying both of these were going to come from the same things. And one interesting thing you can remember when you read history is the fascists saw themselves not as on the right, but they saw themselves as radical centrists. They saw themselves as the third way. The left was the Marxists, the right was the English, the liberals. So they saw themselves as nowhere the third way between capitalism and socialism. We are the radical centrists. Nice quirk of history is though that those terms got reused by Tony Bayer and Bill Clinton in the nineties, but they claimed him in the same sense. It's just a nice rhetorical phrase. Well, what was interesting about Snyder's thesis in that book was he saw whenever, so he's looking at Poland especially, because of course at the beginning of the war, Hitler and Stalin are like, oh, let's divide Poland down the middle. Both of them knew that at some point they were going to end that truce. Stalin knew Hitler was going to, because he was paying attention and Hitler basically said it many different times. This is the future of our country. Germany is land poor. What we really need is Hitler looked to America actually and said, wow, the Americans did it right in terms of what they did to their indigenous population. We need to do that, but we've got all these poles in the way and we've got these Jews. I very much recommend that book. There was a ton of history in that book that I knew nothing about, such as the fact that various segments of Europe in the early 20th century were looking around for a new Jewish homeland basically because they wanted to settle the Jews and Madagascar was a leading contender and you just think. Really? Madagascar is a Jewish homeland. That's surprising to me, but yeah. And the Poles were... Yeah, that was not my first thought. No, I'm sure the people of Madagascar would have found, you know, millions of Jews streaming in saying, this is our new homeland. Of course, then the British set it up in the old homeland and that's where we are today. The thing that Snyder noted was that when the Soviets would come through, they would set up all of these institutional structures. And when the Nazis would come through, they intentionally destroyed institutional structures because they believed that what these institutional structures did was preserve the weak. And what needs to happen in terms of a Darwinian evolutionary system is that the sooner the weak die off, the sooner the system will revert to its natural condition. Now, obviously within all of this, there are a lot of assumptions about human nature, its perfectibility, and also what is perfect and about humans. I mean, what is the perfection that we view? Part of what interested me in Malice was this idea that, now you said it quite well in a number of places, if I can find it, it's basically about coercion. Now, most of us would agree that violence is a problem and that violence should not be at hand in terms of how we treat one another. But this question of coercion is a far more subtle thing, for example. And this especially to me gets interesting with respect to trolling because trolling, as you know, there's a very interesting section in the Peterson-Maliscot video, trolling is in a sense a way to employ the machinery within a person against another aspect of that person. Isn't that also sort of a form of coercion? The way that we would view this, and this is why I'm going to be right, in their view is that it's not violating anyone's rights, and Malice's view is that all rights are property rights. So it's not in that sense a rights violation, a form of coercion. But yes, it is a form of coercion as in you are getting, you're not manipulating in a sense, but you are partially tricking someone into making them look like a fool. And Malice does this on purpose. He knows his doings, he explains why. Yes, very much so. You're trying to take them off their perch. And this is why he's done it to many politicians in general. And why he's very said, look, this is a very good thing. Like back in the day, especially at the U.K., most of our politicians are all very, the technical term is upper middle class, but we'd call them very upper class. They went to all of the partial schools. They went to like Eaton College, for instance, for instance, Boris Johnson and David Cameron, which are two prime ministers. They were in the same group. They were best friends in Eaton College. They were posh as you can get. And this is, so we have a kind of an aristocracy class for a politician class, effectively, not aristocracy, but a politician class. So you think these people have gone to all this thing, you start thinking they're all very smart, they're all well to do, they're a bit more noble. But as Malice would say, it's like you see in that tweet on Twitter, and they just look like your neighbor. They look like complete idiots. They're not as high falls or anything like that. And because they're in that position of kind of like authority and power, you can just bring them off a notch by just making them look like fools, especially since one thing he commented in there, he says that so many people do not have a mind and it's that's a very harsh way of saying things. And it's things because of Malice's egoism, which is very solstice stick in that sense. And what he means by that is that many people when confronted will not, they'll be very emotional and come with the candid responses. They'll be like as the Internet meme is called an MPC, a non-playable character, and they'll just play like a script and just say the same thing. And he plays with that because he knows where they're going and then goes along because it's not as what he means is no, what he means by there's no mind. He means there's they're not rationally thinking about it. They're acting more like an animal in that sense. They're predictable and they're non-rational. That's what Malice would say. I'm not saying I agree with this whatsoever. Again, make it clear. I'm just stating Malice's views. Well, he's got a point. Yeah. Yeah, yes. And you know, when I think when I think about these things, the question of okay, who is acting like a non-player character? And there are a couple of uncomfortable questions, which I think actually gets into sort of the revakian meaning crisis is it's one thing to sit outside and say, ah, you're a non-player character. But the more disturbing question is to what degree am I a non-player character? And so I look at I look at Malice and I wonder number one, how self-aware is he because he's looking at all these people saying, well, there are all these non-player characters out there and I can demonstrate how much they are non-player characters because they're so subject to trolling. And so it almost seems like susceptibility to trolling is becoming the new social media IQ test. In a sense. Yeah. I don't think social media is more he uses it as a way to, okay, I'm going to have a conversation. You is this conversation going to be productive? Okay. This is a really quick test. Like, okay, this person is effective as he would state they have no mind. So SK will just push them out of the way. I don't need to talk to you at all. And he wants more people. He knows he can like kind of lean on trust and stuff like for his friends and such like mouse will say that doesn't mean they're not good people. Be very clear. He means he says, they even says this. This means something. They're good people, very not kind people. It just means for him, they're not worth his time. Right. And he's pursuing a goal. He's been, yes, he's a goal of himself as a self-interest. Yes. Yes. And to me, his political goal is, is hoping for the, um, the end of the state and the beginning of, as you described a much more privatized environment and he, especially by virtue of his definition of morality, which is basically, I think a libertarian morality that says the freer in that view. Yes. Yeah. The freer one has the freer one is in terms of their ability to express their desires, or we might even use their authentic selves, the more moral the environment is that's sort of the worldview as I see it. No, that's not what he views. Okay. So his view is like getting rid of the state is getting rid of one problem. It's like curing cancer, but there's millions of other diseases out there. That's all his view is very tragic in that view, in that view nature. And like, look, he says, it's not utopic. It's just solving one problem. It doesn't mean there's going to be people solving anything. It doesn't mean there's going to be crime still. There's still going to be murdering people still. It's just that if you want to look at a practical sense, the state isn't doing a good job at all. And if you, again, in a very utilitarian sense that again, the state could do a private firms could would do a much better job at protecting your rights effectively. And he's not saying that this is going to be more moral society necessarily. It's just, it's solving one problem in that kind of state. If that makes more clear. Yeah. Can I ask a question or is this a one-on-one? This is a one-on-one until about five minutes from now, Julian. So, uh, put your question in the, put your question in the text chat. Oh, I just mean for specifically this conversation, but that's fine. No, no, it is for this conversation. So we're going to, I don't know. The problem is that I think ginger bill and I could talk all day. Um, sorry about that. Everybody else. Part of what we're doing today is sort of playing around with. Formats here for seeing how well they work and, and who works well in them. I guess part of what I'm getting at is I, it's funny to me, the assertion that I really liked how you laid things out because a lot of this is questions about who trusts the state more. I think your observation about generations with respect to the state, I think is very true. I think the older you are, you, we probably have been formed. If you were born at least 10 years before Watergate, you might in fact have a disposition or a deference towards the state that perhaps people born after Watergate in the United States don't have that we sort of picked up a posture that says, yeah, the state doesn't work that well. I've just lately been in a little, um, tiny little conflict with our local post office over whether our church mailbox is approved or not. And basically it boiled down to our regular mail person went on vacation and the other one couldn't find the box. And anyway, so, you know, you have these kinds of, you have these kinds of things that come up. I would criticize that. I don't think it's Watergate. I don't think most people view Watergate because most people say oh, corruption happens in the state, especially in the UK. Most people, I would say they don't like the government. Um, but they're like, eh, so here we'll go just grumble on, carry on. Um, and that's usually kind of like the British kind of view of kind of the government and the state, but they're more like, but in some cases there's aspects to it since like past World War II, where it's been more reverent certain aspects to it as well. Like I, and this may get a lot of flak, but our national health service, the NHS is effectively our national religion. It's one of those taboo topics in politics. If you criticize it, you will be called a heretic effectively. Even if you think yes, fine. It's okay, but I've got this criticism. Yeah. Yeah. And it's like, um, like a good example of this to show how much it's like our religion in the, in the, in the UK, um, is when we had all the lockdowns, the very initial lockdowns. At the very start, every Thursday, I think it was eight o'clock at 8pm at night, everyone else, most people would go outside their doors and clap for the NHS and its workers. That is how much it is. You had a national worship service. It's really fascinating to see for some, yes, a national worship service. It's extremely religious behavior and it's fascinating to me. Watch it. I'm like, I think this is insane, but like, I'm not even saying criticizing NHS, I'm just watching this behavior. Like an anthropologist is kind of like, wow. Well, we are, we are keeping on an hour and Julian would like to ask his question. So, um, I don't, I don't know if you want to, I don't know if we've gotten anywhere. I've learned a lot. Yeah. Okay, Julian, why don't you, why don't you have at it, Julian? Oh, okay. Here I go. Um, so I, I was reading one of the, the chats that you guys had on the chat. The chats that you guys had after the conversation that Paul posted or the video that Paul posted and someone was saying, um, you know, this Malice guy is just super radical and he kind of has to slowly bring his message in to kind of, uh, win people over. And, and my critique of that was, I wonder if this kind of libertarian anarchism is actually just the sort of American religiosity of anti-institutionalism and, um, sort of libertarian freedom taken to its kind of logical end where his kind of critique of the state is just basically, well, you know, I should be able to be me and nobody should be able to stop me from expressing myself however I like. So it's a kind of expressive individualism, um, turned into a politics. So do you think that's fair or, um, yeah, I don't think that's fair, but for many libertarians, I would say that's true. Um, but for Malice, no, and especially those natural rights, many of those people in that, I would say the Mises crowd, um, that sort of kind of tradition, they don't view freedom in that sense. They view freedom as property rights. That is what freedom is to them. It's not this, there's many different aspects of freedom. This is why it's a Fuji word. It's a word that fudges on both the left and the right and the libertarians and everywhere, because everyone has a different conception of what freedom is. They're not talking about freedom of expression. They are literally saying, are you, are you allowing among my rights being protected effectively? That's, that's pretty much their view of it. It's a very weird and like autistic way of thinking about things. I know, but that's like, um, and I mean, autistic in a technical sense that I mean, like, like it's very, like that's the kind of the rules of land. They have their view that their theory of justice is justice is property rights. Um, a good philosopher on this would be Robert Nozick. Um, his, that's kind of his thesis of like libertarianism sense. There's justice as property rights rather than like some like John roles, which was they were the kind of rivals, each other. John roles, there is justice as fairness. Um, and that's kind of the distinction. I hope that centers your question. Um, I mean, are you looking for a way to dismiss malice, Julian? I mean, you're a, you're, you're, you live in a commune. I mean, how much, how, how much more can you get Julian? Yeah. Well, I suppose I'm kind of trying to poke around in, um, in what aspect it's sort of his anarchism different from, you know, maybe a Christian anarchism, your own. I would say you're an anarchist yourself. I mean, in one sense, just this notion of property rights. I mean, that's something that, that, that, you know, the radical Anabaptist version of anarchism doesn't hold it all. Like there's no sense that, um, you own anything. There's, there's this, um, yeah, what are the early writers in our tradition, has this quote where he says, um, you know, people are sort of always so greedily kind of taking everything for themselves. If, if they could grab hold of the sun and the moon and the stars, they would, they would grab that too. And there's, so there's this kind of this consumptive individualism that he's critiquing there. Um, it just strikes me that there's nothing ethical or nothing. Um, there's no sense of a common good here. It's kind of only the individual expressing himself or expressing his rights. Do you think that's, that's maybe not fair, but don't say it's fair. I think it's because it's a, it's a foreign way of thinking. And seriously, like it's really difficult to start thinking this way. If you want to understand, like it's very difficult to think anyway. For instance, again, anarchism in traditionally has never been right-wing. It's always been left-wing. Like you've got the communist anarchists, the syndicalist anarchists. You've got the mutualists. The mutualists thought property was theft. Like I've got, um, proud hum behind me. This is the guy who is a what his property and he's asking about the idea of what his thing and the mutualists were free marketers as well, which is like a, it's like a very weird tradition, but I mean weird as in it's foreign, not as weird as in incoherent or bad or anything like that. But again, that your idea of property is very different. It's not necessarily individualistic. It's it comes from the classical liberal tradition and then the British one. So it's the idea of self-ownership and in or individual sovereignty, whichever you want to call it. And this idea itself is the idea why slavery is wrong. That is actually what sprung the moral crusade to get a bat to abolish slavery effectively because the individual is sovereign in the past. Like if you read like a St. Augustine, um, he's talking about like, oh, slavery is bad and horrible, but it's probably a necessary evil. Like that's literally how we kind of viewed it, but it wasn't until this, the modern evolution like with John Locke and such in that area like Adam Smith, David Hume, or Thomas Riddle. That's just the British tradition I'm trying to speak to. Um, like, no, no, no, no, slavery is wrong. It's not necessarily evil. In fact, it's just an absolute wrong because it's violating the fundamental aspect of what it is to be a human. But couldn't you also say, since everyone has a right to their own property, that could also be a kind of defensive slavery. No, that was the defensive slavery in the American South. That these, these are property, this chattel slavery. These are my chattel and therefore the government has no right to take it away. That was the standard position of the antebellum South. And so for that reason, and when you hear Michael Malice complain about the creation of the state in the United States and the civil war, that's a deep irony that he makes that point when basically the, the union said we must preserve the union. So sorry, South, we have every right to take away your property. And the South said, no, these are my property. I purchased them with money. This is property rights. But that's where the, for like the classical liberal tradition, you know, it's very weird, it's very binary, but it's like the classical says, no, you cannot own a person, in a sense. A person in this sense would be a prime mover, in a sense, it's kind of a way of view. It is, it is in themselves a sovereign thing, which cannot be owned. It owns. So that is kind of the view and why it's the kind of justification why slavery is wrong. And what's interesting to me is that when we, when we start using terms like a non-player character and when we start recognizing the fact, this is where we get into the meaning crisis questions. When we start recognizing the fact that most, most individuals are sort of working through a script, which leads into the far harder question. Okay. What is authenticity? When is a human being acting like a free agent? You know, and it's interesting noting, you know, Sam Harris's skepticism about he uses free will. You know, that's part of the reason I don't like getting into free will conversations because they don't go anywhere. But this question of, well, what in fact is authenticity? And to me, this question of coercion gets very interesting very quickly because rationality, as I observe it within myself, involves self-coercion. Part of me stands against another part of me and says, no, you shall not, you know, covet your neighbor's wife. You shall not covet your neighbor's home. You shall not kill. You shall not steal. There's coercion in the state, coercion in institution is in some ways in continuation with coercion in the self. And I think that contemporary crisis we have is to what degree are any of us actually agents or are we simply expressions of long-running, I'd call them principalities, moving through time and now are these physical instantiations of these things. At least with Christianity, you have this idea that there, it is a monarchical tradition which says, well, the faithful, the faithful, see, not citizen, languages, the faithful servant, the faithful slave is the one who embodies the master's will. And so the faithful slave is the expression of the master. And so there's to a certain degree, this gets very complex, to a certain degree, a Christian is someone who is now submitted to the Holy Spirit and now plays out the kingdom of God and all that they do. And someone might at the same time say, well, there's, that's the death of the, that's the death of the individual. Christians would say that's sort of the fulfillment of the individual. And I mean, but there are lots of deep questions under this whole thing that that come to the surface pretty quickly. Yeah, very much so. And it is the good question is, yes, people may have free will, but how much willpower do they have? Like I know most of the time I'm on autopilot. Like you walk in the dog, I'm on autopilot, but the things, things happen in my brain, I'm thinking about all the things, but when I'm walking the dog, I'm not really thinking about it. Other than like, okay, is there some animals going around by or is there a car coming or that's about literally, but they're kind of my animal instincts, more than my rational instincts. And if there's different parts to you, you're right. You would use the term, you like it, the Congress, conscious, conscious, Congress, I can't even say it. That's what I mean. Oh, stupid words. But it's this, you're kind of like, there's different aspects to battling each other. I wouldn't call it coercion. I wouldn't use that particular term, but I would just say it's more of, or even like Augustine, there's aspects of your will who are kind of fighting to each other and it's, it's a very interesting thing because Augustine was like critiquing Plato effectively. Plato said there's actually three parts. I'm not going to that philosophy, but yeah, that's kind of a saying, but and that was kind of the solution. It was just different levels of willpower of the different aspects of the will. And it is interesting to see this because I would say, and I'm no, I'm weird. I know I have a huge amount of willpower in the sense that if I want to do something, I will do it. Like I knew that, okay, I need to change my diet. So pretty much, so I went, okay, I've got to change my diet. I'm just doing it. And I stuck to it. And I kept to it for a very, very long time, just through willpower alone. And I know most people couldn't keep to the diet I kept because I knew I had to do it for medical reasons. So I said, screw it. Well, whatever. But most people I know struggle on diets. They'll give up after a few weeks, won't they? And it's like, they just don't have the willpower to continue. Like they want to go back into their own habits. Like, oh, I'd like eating custard donuts, custard donuts. I like custard donuts myself. Like they're delicious things. Oh, oh, that's some of the best things in the world. But it's like, no, no, no, you're saying don't do it. But like, that's the thing is a lot of people do it. They just go back into their habits. And again, someone like Aristotle, which I highly, highly respect, he says, look, yes, people can know what the good is, but they'll feel habitual. Like they'll just go back into their habits and just need to, you need to kind of. What's the best way of putting it? Like you just got to change your habits and you've got to be conscious about that. But that takes a lot of willpower. And I understand like everyone's different and it's like, sometimes you just don't care and that's sometimes valid. But, but the question is, the question is what colonized you to convince you, you had to change your diet and there are various elements to that. There are obviously some, some idea of, well, these are the things that you should eat. These are the things that you shouldn't eat. There was a sort of an eschatological vision of this is ginger bill, you know, on the beach with his shirt off and I don't know if that's part of your, but, but it's these deep questions that, okay. So the I, the question is, well, what is this I in me that has this willpower? And there are, there are, there are, I would call them principalities and powers. There are spirits at work that are in a sense competing around us for dominance within us and ginger bill is a bit, is a big catch for them because he's got a lot of self-discipline and willpower. And when ginger bill decides to change his diet, he can change his diet. Gosh, what else can't we, can't we succeed at if we somehow colonize? Yeah. And that's the thing is I know there is aspects where there's me and I'm like, Oh God, I wish I didn't do that. And it's like, because there are aspects of my world where I don't have control over it. I know so much and it's, it's a fighting battle with yourself. I argue with myself daily and that may sound like I'm a madman, but I guess that's just being human. It's right. And it's like, especially when you're dying, especially that's why I focused on because the stomach is effectively like your second brain. It really is like, this is one weird thing is if you quit every other part of your body off from the brain, they all die off except the stuff, the digestive system, which is bizarre. Yeah. It only goes to the only things from the spinal column and it will just work there because it's an extra bundle of nerves that won't go up your spine. And it pretty much works by itself. So you've effectively got a second brain and that's why your diet can heavily affect your mood in some cases because it is a technically controlling your mood. It's like, Oh, wow. So when the apostle, I don't know if it's the apostle Paul, who it is in the New Testament or who it is in the Bible that basically yells at an enemy. Your God is your belly. They're speaking the truth. In a sense. Yeah, I guess it's like so much you get controlled by it and it's like this bacteria in your stomach, which are controlling everything and like what they do and it's controlling your mood. So in many senses, you are not control of yourself either. It's like, wow, that's all I can say. Like there's not much you can do at times. Well, Mark LeFavor, I don't see Mark in the room, but he wrote here in the in the comment section, he said, Malice has a bad frame for understanding things because he believes in the principality of government as having agency. I would say acts as if it has agency. I don't know. So it would say it has it. If I was thinking like Malice, I'm trying to put my Malice hat on. But it's a good question. It is a good question. I think in many cases it's a distinction. So like what I was trying to explain with Mars, he used the word Cathedral, but a left-winger may use what's something like Noam Chomsky. If anyone's read Noam Chomsky is called manufacturing consent. These two models manufactured consent and the Cathedral are effectively the same model. They predict the same things, but they believe they have two different root causes. So the man of consent just think it's self-interest economic adventures like hey, these big corporations just trying to look make them big better for themselves. And that's the reason why they're saying all these different trends and different like fashion effectively. That's what they're doing. It's fashionable things. Well, like the other right-wing thing is this no no ideology is first. It is a religion first and they're trying to propagate their religion through these this institution. They predict pretty much the same things which is interesting to say and that means they're both kind of compatible and probably both true, but they are looking at it from different viewpoints. So for Malice, he's saying yes this he would not speak in this language because I don't think he's very religious thinking it at all. But I would say yes, it's this manifestation of this ideology. This failed religion effectively becoming manifestation. It's like a it becomes an like a an angel redeem in itself a principality across it all. And that's kind of why it's manifesting itself. So it's not a agent singularly but it it emerges from it. Right. Well agency, especially in a materialistic frame is an emergent property and I and I find it fairly persuasive argument that in many respects certain kinds of organizations there's an agency as an emergent property does in fact emerge from certain kinds of organizations. You see that in court visit this in corporate life because you start to work for a company you very quickly get a sense of oh, this is the company culture that culture to a degree has a level of agency to it because it rewards certain things it it punishes other things and there's sort of an agency as men as emergent property which begins to express itself. Apple has a very different personality from Microsoft from Amazon from Google and yet there are things that are they have in common basically by virtue of the structures and their need certain things that those corporations need certain coercions those corporations and force in order to be able to act. Yeah. And it is fascinating. It's like these things have structure to them. They have emergent structure as well and that causes them to act as if they are like they have got a personality. You're right. Like Apple has a certain personality to it. Like when it was like Steve Jobs, it was effectively kind of built around his personality in a certain sense, but also just general culture. They were trying to be they were trying to be fashionable like they were trying to set fashion trends. Well, Microsoft wasn't trying to be fashionable. They were literally wearing the suits and the tie nerds and they were trying to sell business things. They were the business people. Well Apple was eventually Steve Jobs, especially when it's the early 90s when he came back after they were like no fashionable we need to check the trends and they understood in that sense the culture and that's why they've kind of got more hold now over the years and they know they are very clever at knowing how to control not control it but fashion sense is set by people isn't it? It's not like it's an emergent thing, but it's also kind of be a top-down thing at the same time. Like I think Michael Miles talks about that I was proud of thing and he didn't answer the question that Peterson asked him which who do you prefer in the devil's who do you associate more with the devil's product? Is it Meryl Streep or is it whatever name is the dark hair? I can't remember name, but ever and he did answer that question, but I think it's because I don't know if Miles could answer that question because I don't think he views themselves in that way, which is why I think my Peterson in the conversation was like kind of saying to him like what if you imagine the aspect of you that part of us of you what could you think that way? I think Miles just doesn't think in those terms, which is why it's a little bit interesting to see the distinctions in how those two think. Well Luke part of what we didn't want to get in today was Christian anarchism and I think maybe we'll do this with Nate Heil. Maybe we'll do a similar thing with Nate Heil because Christian anarchism came up quite a bit. Luke writes my concerns were not about malice. I don't know much about him. It's more about the misunderstanding of anarchism particularly Christian anarchism and I last week in last week's question and answer Sam dropped in and maybe if we do a separate thing on Christian anarchism, we can get into that because Julie so Nate and Luke and Julian did a randos conversation on Christian anarchism and I that that's where some of these questions about There's there is a degree. Oh gosh, I gotta I gotta really watch what I say here. Jesus nonviolence and noncoercion Is nested within assumption about the ultimate coercive capacity of the Creator God. I'll say it that way because Jesus is the son of the father and so Jesus can sort of let all these little non-player characters take his life and the father can Put him back into the game, which is one way of sort of gamifying Good Friday and Easter. So I think I think Luke we will have probably a separate conversation on Christian anarchism. I don't know if there's anything in Luke's comment there. Can you see Luke's comment? Yeah, I can see. Yes. Not really specifically about Christian anarchism. I don't know much about it. It's because honestly, I don't know much about Christianity in general. So that's kind of where I'm like, so don't want to go something very random when I should be willing about the other stuff in general first. But it's it's interesting and what I was talking about Christianity the first thing came to me was what's that thing in Matthew about render on to Caesar and stuff. I can't remember the things and I'm thinking well people came to Jesus and and this that was a very big deal. In that context because the basically a lot of the groups that were resisting the Roman occupation and hegemony over God's Holy Land and God's Holy People. Then you have the question. Well, if you pay taxes, aren't you participating in the subjugation of God's Holy Land and God's Holy People and so that was the you know, when you when I frame the question that way a lot of people can hear questions about anarchism today a true anarchist would not pay taxes because why would you send your money to that illegitimate power who is coercing you and so they bring that question because Jesus the answer is always easy for that. It's very much like well, do you want to be in it locked up in a cage effectively like that's the answer is like you said it's a it's yeah, I've got the phrase here now says and everywhere more readily than all men endeavor to pay those appointed by him for the taxes both ordering and extrovert as we have been taught by him for at the time to come to him and asked him is if one ought to bear tribute to Caesar and he answers tell me who does this coin bear and then they say Caesar's and I guess it is very interesting. He's trying to go up saying like look. Yeah, I know there's the the actual true king and stuff like yes, you may be here like look this guy he's got he's got all the army. Yeah, you'd probably just it's better to just say let it go at the moment and it's I maybe that's my interpretation. I probably not the correct interpretation if there is one I have no idea. I'm not don't know but that's that's what kind of you to me when I heard it. The correct interpretation is in the render under Caesar video. Thank you. Thank you. Luke. Yeah, I wonder around as you're United. Okay, the the the tyrannical government run by Joey and Rick might you'd better you'd better fear the tyrannical government run by Joey and Rick Rick is waving his finger back there. And there are people out there who are who are very much in, you know have difficulty with tyrannical governments anything anyone else from the bridges of meaning voice room want to ask a question. Nobody's dropped anything into the into the question chat. So and just be careful to say again most of my views are explaining I was lecturing about Michael miles is using the tradition of stuff. It's not person my own views. I've not even said what me and views really are tonight. So they're not really matter anyway. I wouldn't say that you you you may or may not want to express your own views here. Yes, but there's some things that come through. I know I already know that I can't help that I'm only human. All right. Well, maybe it will Chad the alcoholic is typing. And if you haven't seen Chad the Alcoholics news channels on bridges of meaning discord, I think they're they're quite funny. All right other if we if we don't have conversation we can there are there are questions in the in the chat on the live stream. I haven't looked at any of them. So it's difficult to to know. Yeah, I'm just going to quickly read through them myself. And they see my question about commending yourself. No ask it. Well, well, I was thinking because I saw a scripture. I'm not sure like how I saw it before or whatever, but very interesting to think about there's a scripture. I'll have to look it up again. That says something like we commend ourselves and then for the next paragraph or whatever it is. He's like, yeah, we've been beaten and burned and stone and live live live and he's like, yeah, we totally commend ourselves. I think I might be saying a little bit wrong, but I just thought it was an interesting thing to think about. Yeah that Paul is talking to the church at Corinth and Corinth is this this gets actually this gets into my video this earlier this week about Colt red wines comment about me the Corinthians really liked their private ecstatic mystical experiences and valued people according to how amazing transformative those experiences and the miracles that they would do that's sort of how they established a hierarchy of leaders in their church. And so then you sort of had a mystical Olympics going on where people would brag about their the personal revelations that they had experienced and so what the Apostle Paul is doing in that letter is sort of mocking them and he basically says, you know, I could easily participate in your Mystic Olympics, but I think your Mystic Olympics is completely off the mark. So anyway, I think that's what that's what they're doing with Corvus, Aussie Mara asks how does anarchism's idea of private police forces avoid the Pinkerton's? What do you mean by the Pinkerton's? I'm not sure what that means. So the Pinkerton's were the Pinkerton's in the American West before the American government really got out there with police and military and courts. So the American Wild West is, you know, mythic even I hear, you know, Tom Holland try to say yee-haw in the UK. So it's it's famous around the world but Americans and the American mythos sort of see the the old West as an anarchy and so part of what happened to fill the void of that anarchy was the Pinkerton's were a detective agency and so basically they came in with guns and agents and they would have their way because they had power. Yeah. I remember reading about some of the stuff of the the actually the old West and is it called and many of them would actually say it's actually pretty compared relative to other things at the time in that area stuff like in America was pretty lawful as in there was well established property rights and such and as well Lord North had their own courts thrown and stuff like that. It was very anarchic in that sense. You're correct. And again the Pinkerton's come in but it is the question of well if someone has bigger guns, they're going to be able to just win better in a fight. So it's the question is it's not necessarily it's one saying okay, what happens if a Mafia comes in and then comes and trying to literally try and shoots everybody what's going to happen? Well, yeah, that's not saying that it's more of a saying like okay, why didn't these these places actually have more defenses to them? Like why didn't they have more guns to defend against the Pinkerton's or stuff and it's a good question. Like what why didn't they have this is historical in a sense and I could only speculate on someone like an anarchist view in this sense and they could say look maybe they would they came out with a friendly and they were just kind of doing doing that stuff or maybe some of the things it is a good question. It's not saying it seems to be pretty stable in that sense. It what I mean by stable is there are has been anarchist societies in history like Ireland and Iceland are usually canonical examples. They had a thousand years of anarchy effectively. So it's a pretty stable system they had so it's the question of what happens if someone else comes in and bigger guns and like what happens now if another country invades another country with bigger guns like for instance, what Russia do with the Crimea? Well, they're going to overtake it aren't they? It's not like I don't know how to get around that sense. It's just like yeah. And I think so there's lots of interesting variables in these mind experiments one of which is population size. Yes, because if there are you know, if there are let's think about America's the pre-Columbian Americas that was functionally part of the question is prior to Empire is anarchy sort of the natural state of humanity? No. Honestly, I would say the natural state is monarchy. Like when you see civilization before civilization, you could probably say you've got tribal societies and such but soon as civilization came about you've pretty much got monarchies popping up everywhere. And it's very interesting that getting to the ancient Egyptians the the king in their thing was also God effectively the manifestation of them whichever God or multiple gods in a sense, but see all these things and usually with a have a name or ruler and the other king and you always hear the stories and such this idea of other societies that popped out. Yes, there was also like princetons duchies and all that lot, but it was a very still a monarchy in a sense this idea of democracy. That is a very modern one even though like in ancient like ancient Greece. Yes, they had a former democracy, but it's nothing like we would think of nowadays, but they had different things and it's like look the most common form across the world has always been a form of monarchy whatever that may be. So it's more than more natural way that many people would organize themselves, but that's with regards to a state in many cases like what Malice would argue is that many of our interactions are on our kick like kind of our conversation right now. It's there's no one telling us how we ought to have this conversation. Really. It's just we're just talking with each other other examples. I think Malice is brought up is that language language is like it says the most basic example of an archic thing arising. No one has told you how language arises. It just does and it's in spontaneous order people create words all the time in English. This is why now there's the Urban Dictionary. It shows you that like that is pretty much I would say the better dictionaries out there because it's showing actual proper usage of new words and showing definitions and people saying yes is better definition or not and it's just a very thing. There's no top-down thing saying this is how it's doing it unlike some governments like French government that said no, this is the correct way of doing French. Like they didn't want people like in the 70s and 80s. They the French government really hated something called Frongley. They hated the French using loads of English words like weekend or computer and stuff and they went no, no, no. Okay, so this the sign. Yes, okay. The weekend is a French word. That's fine. But computer no, no, no Lord and the tear and it's like they were very dictator like what's the correct French but key people clearly not going to order this. They're just going to just keep themselves and do whatever they need to do. But and yes, that's kind of his out what his arguments would say is like all these different things like thing and also many of your interactions are on voluntary basis and he said this is kind of you says anarchy is not a place. It's a relationship. That's what malice and many anarchists would view. I kind of want to a tangent there, but hopefully I was answering some questions. Yeah, just to cut there were a couple follow-ups in the chat. Basically the Pinkerton's were famously used by companies such as more Ford Ford Motor Company in the early 20th century to enforce compliance on employees. Why did the Pinkerton's why didn't the Pinkerton's genocide everyone? Well, because there was a see these questions getting very interesting. They do. Yeah, you know again back to Timothy Snyder's book about the Nazis part of the Nazi ideology that was in practice was that we need to turn return to a radical naturalism and that radical naturalism is sort of this Darwinian state and part of which I found quite fascinating about that book was because I was always sort of mystified. What's what's with anti-Semitism? I mean anti-Semitism is this really strange recurrent theme throughout history. Why does everyone hate the Jews? I mean, I've never found the Jews to be terribly offensive. Maybe because have you read the book? There's actually an essay by Thomas Sowell in this and it's in the book Black Rednecks and White Liberals is a very interesting history book. I'd recommend it but the book is got a chapter in there called are Jews generic? Which is very weird topic. He's trying to say like why is the Jews thing and he's trying to show that actually there's always a certain like minority like group throughout the world, which is a very certain certain ethics in the very popular like for instance in the West. Yes, it was it was the Jewish but in Asia was very more like the Southeast Chinese. So they were a very particular group and they were always kind of hated. And as you can see this population popping up like it's always a very small minority and it's looking from like a very anthropological standpoint. Like this is why it kind of happens. Why is it the Jews particularly well, they are very successful like but maybe Jews are there their ethics, their morality, their systems, whatever like a lot of Hollywood a lot of them are getting a lot of writers comedians were all Jewish weren't they in America and it's very interesting that's the case and you got a lot of politicians like there's like why are these all at the top? Like clearly it's maybe very very cultural thing. It's very something about their culture that allows them to get there. I don't know why personally, but it's very fascinating and maybe because they are in what minority who's getting powers they will become the target of this these acts and stuff because then become the scapegoat and effectively going to renais your art there effectively everyone needs kind of a scapegoat there and you need to do it. So it's kind of that kind of progression that goes on one thing I want to point about the Nazis and stuff is that they were very much anti-christian. They were explicitly that so and as you said, they were very much they literally trying to corporate old Germanic paganism again. That's why they used all of the old paganistic imagery and such because they were trying to completely get rid of the Christian viewpoints. They knew that we don't agree with it. No the strongest thing because that's the Christian way thing is like is the opposite way around is very opposite to pretty much every other religion in the world in that sense. We're not so Christians about Judaism as well, but it's like the idea that that it's not the strongest is that are the best it's more of like it's not that few is completely turned up on its head. So it's an interesting viewpoint and also it's the idea that like Jesus Christ himself is effectively the unbreakable scapegoat in that sense of using renais your art approach again, but and it keeps doing that. It's kind of like oh, okay, but that but the Nazis knew that full well what that meant and they went right because I think they were many of them were brought up as Christian again in their youth, but then became Marxist of course, and then you know this they knew understood the thought like a get rid of as much as possible and eradicate it make as naturalistic and pagan as possible. So because they knew they needed religion. That's very interesting thing. They needed religion. So so Corvus Aussie and at the point she makes is like one of the first things that comes to mind for me and I hear for a number of people when they listen to malice, which is basically she says the arguments that the pinkers the Pinkerton's if without the state what you have are other private petty warlords CEOs and other course of organizations just coming in and the question is isn't the state that as well that would be a fanatic. It's like wouldn't that isn't the state doing the exact same thing and Augustine. I mean many have made that point of view before. What's the difference between a pirate? You know, what's the difference between a pirate and a government some sense of legitimacy and yeah, it's not ideal. It just made it and then someone could very sorry. Right that whole idea of legitimacy. Well, that's just a sham. And so how would how does malice answer? I think this is probably the most basic obvious reason people are skeptical about anarchism as a strategy to yield to a better world. Aren't you just setting up Somalia? Actually, Somalia is always a good people always bringing on like actually compare Somalia to itself and the neighboring countries when it was in its stateless period don't compare it to America. That's like a false equivalence compare itself like what happened when it was in a state of spirit before it was a state at stateless. It actually was doing better. Which is bizarre like would know that can't be true. It's like go look at the data and then compare it to his neighboring countries as well. Like that's how you can have to do comparisons and if you can when people have to always remember this is again, I'm going to Thomas O'Leary's compare to what remember you've got to make sure you got a good comparison. You're not going to compare the United Kingdom and I don't know Q8 like you're not going to compare those two countries because they're not really comparable but you do compare something for our okay Scott that you could do in the United Kingdom and France maybe that's more to fair comparison. So when people say look at Somalia and look at him like we usually comparing to the only country, you know, which is United States or the United Kingdom or whatever and they're not usually fair comparisons and I'm not saying defending the position of like yes, the anarchy at the stateless period of Somalia, but it's more like you have to understand compared to what? And another comment that malice is the quip he likes to use make sure I've written down all the notes is he says usually the best arguments against anarchy are descriptions of the status quo. Because usually when people says what happens in this situation when this happens on like well, you've just destroyed the current situation. Like that's what happens now is usually saying or people say what happens this situation is like, okay, so what happens currently now what would happen in this situation and people don't know it's like so why are you asking this hypothetical in a situation you don't know about and you don't even know what happens in the current situation. So that's malice is kind of under general anarchist viewpoint is like it happens now why you're talking about the the anarchic view is a hypothetical. Okay. I'm trying my best to fend anarchy here as possible. I'm not even trying to be an anarchist. That's what my views. I'm not saying I am it's just like when have you stopped being an anarchist? And I just start either. I don't know. When did you beat your wife? I mean, Paul made a point earlier that I misunderstood did God the father genocide the Canaanites so that Jesus could be slapped on both cheeks. Interesting darn phrase. Would Paul elaborate on this? I guess I'm not quite sure what you'd like me to elaborate on but but in Christianity. So a lot all of these conversations sort of us. This gets really difficult to talk about. So a lot of contemporary conversations. Presuppose let's say a natural state. We hear this. You know, I would very quickly imagine Jordan Peterson and he did in his conversation with Michael Malice. Okay. Now we're going to talk about chimpanzees and well, how does a chimpanzee tribe work? Well, the the dominant the top male can't get too autocratic or tyrannical or two or three other males will gang up and then there'll be a new top monkey and in order for there to be a stable chimp tribe. The dominant male has to listen to many of the females. Jordan Peterson loves to make that point. And to get back to your the point you just made gingerbell okay, so why chimps well chimps are closer to us. Well, yeah, there are things that we have in common with chimps and things we have in common with ants and you know, a really interesting question is why are there not more closer if you sort of take a Darwinian approach to to human development? Where are all the little you know, where's the rest of the hierarchy? We seem to have human beings up here way down here. Maybe you got some chimps and then everybody likes to bring up bonobos if you want more sexual liberation and then you know, technically genetically as well. So the technical closest relative bonobos are not but then the question would be why the big Delta why the big Delta between us and chimps now, I'm sure people have answers to that. I don't know what they are. Yeah, it's a good question. It's always like what separates us from animals effectively and again philosophers always throughout time like Aristotle said well, we are rational beings and it's like well, what do you mean by rational? I mean in a very and he doesn't mean it in a very technical sense as well. And then we have a rational so that's what separates us. It was the essence of us differently, but it's kind of viewing that we can do delayed rational delayed gratification long-term delayed gratification. Like we can plan years and ahead purposefully. We know we can because we like of course we know purpose purpose is a something that we know a priori. It's not something you can ever observe. It's not an empirical thing a reason or anything like that. So it's something we know a priori. Okay, we know this beforehand. But it's like, okay, but we can know we can do long-term to get that crunch. We can sow the crops at this time of the year. We know we're going to do we need to worry about okay, it's going to winter coming this for most animals. I'm not saying all hours most animals are very instinctual like the squirrel knows to bury the nuts at this time because it's built into his jeans and it's not like it's a rational thing. It's a non rational thing. So that's where many people say why we're different because and again, if you look at it, it's not like other animals don't use tools crows use tools Ravens use tools chimps use tools many of them make even very crude tools as well. They're not saying things but one thing is like and this is one thing I've always found like little fascinating around like chimps and stuff. I do know some primatologists is they can teach you can teach like a great to sign language and they can do it can get really good conversations with a champ as well as I in a gorilla a gorilla means a gorilla but the gorilla will never ask a why question even though you can teach it them you can ask a gorilla why and they can answer back. They'll never ask you a why. That's fascinating. It's like it's fascinating. It's like so they don't actually have a concept of purpose. Which is like we are weird beings. We have this thing that we we can we know this purposeful things. We are seeing purpose in world. There's a tea. Someone say this teleology or something like that. It's like tea lost at the world. It's like why can we do this and that's how we're out to structure these societies and get huge and huge civilizations because for millions of years like human humanoid things were in like little tribal societies maybe up to 100 150 people at max and yes, there would be different things doing some roles. But as soon as we've kind of discovered all these different technologies like agriculture and such we able to have support bigger and bigger societies and from that also things popped up like like organized religion not just religion but organized religion such other structures money currency writing systems. It's like to actually just organize all of this we had to create all this because we knew had to have two purposes to actually keep it going. It's like it's like wow. It's that's kind of probably why we are different from the animals, but that's Aristotle knew that back in the day many philosophers knew that but it's also fascinating that yes, other problems animals do have problem solving like you can see crows trying to solve problems. They'll use like a stick just to poke things out and do this and you can see that's kind of like a rudimentary form of it. And if you want to go into the philosophy of it, it's if you've ever heard of the philosopher called Kripke and there's all this wide area of like, how do you know you're not doing quadrillion? So it's like you think what do you mean one of the questions so instead of addition like you know in your head you can do a condition like 3 plus 5 is 8. Yeah, but Kripke is saying okay, but how do you know you're doing addition not something called quadrillion where quadrillion is like, okay everything it looks like addition until you get to a certain point like if it's above 57 everything equals 5 like 5 57 plus 3 equals 5. How do you not know that's your brain? What he's trying to say is animals can count but they're working like a very evolutionary standpoint. It's like a naturalistic emergence and he says how do you know you're not doing that? How do you know you are not reasoning and it's a good question. Like how do we know we are reasoning and it's like all this related together. It's like it's fascinating to me because I know my dog can count. He can count to probably I've got like 5 or 10. He can count them out and then he knows how much he's got and he knows one's bigger than the other. But it's like I could talk about this one even child of development you can see how people change how they stuff like if you were so I'm going to rant but ramble but the like children if you see like put the like five coins in front of them and they put them close they'll count how many there are and you spread them or cut they will do but a certain age they will think if they spread out further like only happens for a certain age like around about two or three I think they'll think there's more because it's further apart. So they've actually changed how they've thought even though previously they knew how many there were now the seniors of size and then that gets reverted. But it's a notice five. So there's a weird transition period in human development as well. It's fascinating how humans work probably the wrong line of profession, but oh well. Well a couple of things screw tape in in the things. He it's it's hard listening to the chat in real time because it's like molasses. Well, I'd say first of all on YouTube after we're done you can listen to this at fast pace. Also, I will take this and I will have an audio only version of this and I will post it on my podcast channel. The link will be below and so you can listen to this at whatever speed you wish and you wish to listen to it. Couple of other, you know, we've you know, one of the big questions is of course the the criminal the criminal gangs question in in all of this. Simp says what might ask is it possible for a kingdom or its rule to be just talking human Kingdoms Kingdoms here and you know that is a good question. That's a very good question. And if it were or weren't just would we know it most of our comparisons, you know, I think part of what shaped my perspective on much of this are, you know, I lived seven years in the Dominican Republic and the Dominican Republic by no means the worst run country in the world, but it was very clear that if you were wealthy, you got far better treatment in the courts than if you were poor. Now, I'm not saying that is the case in the United States as well. I think that's the case everywhere. If they can afford a better lawyer going to get better legal systemization. That's always been a problem, especially in our common law systems. It's been known since like the Magna Carta effectively. But yeah, but it was it was quite obvious that you know, I would the the Haitians that wanted me to work with them and wanted me to live quite close to them wanted me there because I was an effective I when I came around with my white skin my North American contacts the soldiers on the street the police treated them differently because they had connections and in fact in that society you had a different life based on how strong was your Patron now that it continues to be the case in the United States as well and one might say that well it just depends on it's just a level up or it's more expensive and I'd say fair enough and what's interesting to me about this which gets back to the question about the Pinkerton's is aren't we just dealing with fundamentally a Darwinian system that even though much of the status is now sociological instead of just violence status. We are all still dealing with status hierarchies and we stand a far better chance of getting what we want the more status the more money the more fame the more beauty all of that we have and in fact every government in the world is perhaps a an attempt at suppressing those dynamics to one degree or another but all such governments fail and so it could be perhaps that some anarchists say well, let's just give up the game entirely and let no I would say the anarchists would say that they have just consecrated those people in there and it's not like they've ever tried to stop it like it's not necessarily arbitrary it's more of that those are the elites that have emerged out of this system and they have formed this end organization called the state and that's what they're going to do and this is this idea of natural aristocracy appearing like that we're saying and keep someone your American tradition Thomas Jefferson Thomas Jefferson would usually talk about the natural aristocracy and rising up like in America in UK. We are very clear who the aristocracy is but America you seem to not understand who your aristocracy is in a general because you are a very you seem to try to get rid of the idea of this idea of class in America, which is very well understood in the UK but America seems no class will very individualistic were all the rugged individual states like kind of undertone. So there's no anybody can be president of the United States anybody can be president those myths you tell your children and it's like in the UK. It's very much like you're not everyone can be Prime Minister pretty much. We know who's going to be Prime Minister like where they're going to come from the last exception to those would been Tony Blair. He was a commoner and so was Margaret Thatcher and Margaret Thatcher her father was a greengrocer. So she's not from a posh background at all and Tony Blair he was kind of a commoner and stuff, but he's not he wasn't posh but he was not necessary poor was put it that way. So you can see their examples, but not everybody can going to be Prime Minister or even not everyone's going to become a politician in the US you get trolled that because you can do it because you got the what's the American phrase. I'm trying to think of the way you can there's a not defined Providence, but it's something boost not bootstrapping. No even something like that, but it's it's a very Protestant way of thinking at times. The very Protestant work ethic just work hard. This is you'll get there and you'll succeed and it's very I just think it's like no not everyone's going to do that. The certain people in classes and classes naturally emerge like they just naturally arise like even when you associate it's going to form like a different kind of class to some other people and that again, it's many people also attached of moral worth that class and that's not necessarily true any any at all. Most people say that but there's multiple different types of classes. It's not like there's only two or there's only three or four. It's like no there's multiple and they all overlap and they all different things and it's all different. So status hierarchy is effectively and it's just the overlap with each other over like hierarchy on hierarchies upon hierarchies and you're right and the elites the political elites are one type of class people and they are very different to let's say the general citizens or subjects of the country and you could view that as that view or you could look as the bureaucratic classes. There's so many different ways you look at it and that's for I know the class now is very more left-wing analysis thing, but it's very useful. I would say. Well, it's interesting because I wonder to what degree class is emerging increasingly in America, even though it's a far younger social system than let's say the UK and the systems in Europe, but it's this is part of the reason why people have a deep skepticism about some of the mantras of the woke class because why is it that all of these elite African Americans have degrees from all of the elite schools? So maybe it's not you're not born into a family, but if you can find your way into Harvard or Yale and then into, you know, the the elite the elite ranges of academia or these other places and one might imagine that perhaps this entire woke war is just sort of a fight between the academic elites and certain other ranges of the financial and corporate elites even though you know, they are flying flags of various sorts and I would argue that in a lot of ways that flag flying is sort of a preemptive strike to say we'll put up this flag and we'll you know, we'll hire tokens, but in other and I think in America that it's not really skin color. That's determining people's thoughts. It's where were you educated? It's what are the principalities that are functioning through you? Which is a point that malice brought up in Peterson Peterson. He said malice is look the modern modern University system, which is quite like say 150 years old is this idea that they are creating the elites for this country. That is the whole point of those universities because past the University was technically aspect of the church. They were just a repository of information effect. But that's what our University used to be you went to University to learn about all this information about other stuff. You didn't necessarily get an education. It was just a massive library and learning and discussing the new one was like, no, this is a way we're going to train the elites. This was a very conscious thing about how they design the newer universities. So when Peterson brought up so I know actually people get into the universities and like which is correct about peace and talking about yes people admitting it's usually an IQ test for whatever and Peterson is not wrong. But what malice was trying to point out is that yes, there's fundamental ideology here rather than this economic incentives and this fundamental ideology that's passing through is that look these people are going to University. They're now going to be this new middle class or upper class we're going to create and they're going to be and we're going to teach them how to be this way and is a piece of it's not for how many people thought I'm like actually yeah, they do. They just may not be woke. They may just have been like a center left person and they'll be teaching this stuff and they'll teach the things I can remember many of my University electors. Most of them were left-wing not all of them. I knew a few of them were conservative or even libertarian, but most of them were left-wing most of them when they some even had explicit political courses. They talk about I didn't do any of them because I thought that's boring. But it was like this clearly an idea of an ethos of how universities meant to structure and that acts as a principality in itself. It's kind of like this culture as a formed in it, which is what kind of I guess malice was trying to get across but clearly it didn't get it cross clearly enough. Last question. How comfortable do you guys feel about trusting the ideas of a guy named malice? Yeah, I don't think that's not his real name. He does that on purpose. I think his real name is like Kretschman or something like that. Oh really? I don't know. Yeah, that's nice. He's not. It's a stage name effectively. He's a Russian Jew from born in Ukraine. So I doubt he's going to have like an English surname, but he's going to have malice, which is very again. It's a stage name. It's a stage name effectively. Yeah. And I don't know. Part of me wonders to what degree can you actually embody the purity of your ideology? If you know, it's so funny because you know, the real enemies are the academic professors and Jordan Peterson is like, well, that's what I am. Oh, but you're one of the good ones. And it's like, I don't know. Well, I think malice wasn't saying it yet, but there are some good ones, but there are many who are not and they know what they're doing is what malice is trying to state like they know they've got it. They've got an ideology and they're propagating it and it's but the thing is is these ideologies aren't necessarily coming in like the more the science you things like especially not in the hard sciences. They weren't at least all that even like the psychology X's but they were in the humanities, especially many of the art things and they were manifesting there and like critical race theory stuff in general, like what they were talking about like, yeah, that's been going on for the past 25 years. Like it's well old and even older than that fact you can see the roots, especially in the 80s and such, but like you clearly it was and they were even talking about yes, we've got it pretty much in all universities. Now. They know their ideas are very popular. It's like this 25 years ago. So they're playing the long game in many cases, but it's like Peter says, yeah, but in my thing, I'm like, yeah, but you're more scientists. You don't really care about any of that stuff. So it's like, of course, you're not going to be seeing it because you weren't in those departments. All right. Well, we're, we're about out of time. So I want to, Rick is moving around. I got to watch him here. So he's putting out yet. Rick's Rick's heading for Rick's getting ready. So I just want to thank you Bill for being on the chair. And thank you for inviting me. This was actually a big surprise to me when you actually just messaged me. I was like, okay. Why I loved your comments. And I, again, I keep saying I run this channel as a, it's kind of a really selfish project of self-education for me. And I know you're very at the most, one of the most open chaps I haven't met and you do it because you want to learn about so much more and it's, it's beautiful to see. I'm sorry. It really is. I know it's really respectable and honorable to see because it's very rarely you meet someone like yourself. And I, you know, I think I, I don't know. I'll wait and see what all of you think about this. Actually, I think maybe what we'll do is we'll end transmission in a minute and then I'll stay or I'll get out of this weird middle space that Rick has us in and I'll drop into the voice chat channel as myself. And I'd like to hear some feedback from you as to the format of this because I think, I think there's a lot of desire to do one of these, let's say on Christian anarchism and maybe I'll talk to Nate Hile and, and then we can, you know, Nate and I'll maybe talk for an hour and then bring in others from the channel. We're always looking for ways that we can basically structure better conversations. And so I appreciate Bill you playing along with this experiment with us. No, this has been fine. It's been an interesting experiment to say the least. All right. Okay. So thank you, Rick. You can end transmission.