https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=y8LcVBFaoOI

 Okay, there you go. So keep talking, keep talking. Everywhere you go people. So people are coming to church and they say it's because of Jordan Peterson. Yeah, loads of times. So I would say everywhere I've gone in 2018, that has been a story from at least one person, if not a whole handful of people. They've said Jordan Peterson was the gateway drug. He breadpilled me or whatever. You just get talking to these 20 something guys mainly and they just start talking about, you know, I realized that I need to take more responsibility for my life. And as you press into, so who are your influences and who are you listening to online? Oh, Peterson. Shocked face. Shocked face. Yeah. Isn't he one of those basket of deplorables type characters? They usually look over both shoulders before confiding in me that they too have partaken of Jordan. But yeah, it's a really interesting movement and seeing you interact with people on a weekly basis. Tell me something about how Peterson lands your take on it in the UK because it's obviously different in different contexts. And he's done, he said some of his more, I was just watching the GQ UK edition interview that went up a couple of days ago. And that again was one of the more combative interviews. So how was he received in the UK? I mean, do people have to read 12 Rules for Life inside of a Playboy magazine? That's right. Yeah. I'm really reading Playboy. The real contraband is Jordan. Yeah. In a brown paper bag. Knock twice and ask for reg. Yeah. Yeah. He well, I mean, partly that is the UK's style of Oh, thank you so much. Got a couple of times coming in. You might want to clip that bit out. I never edit. Sandy is now a superstar. Okay. Did I say thank you? I don't even think I said thank you. That's all the noise here. That's no problem. I don't even think I said thank you. And now this is being broadcast to thousands of people. My rudeness. I will thank Sandy later. Christians are such cadds. Tea. So I think you've got a factor in the combative nature of UK journalism as well. I think in the last 25 years, there's been a real style of journalism that is the attack dog thing that Cathy Newman was just one example of an entire breed of journalists that are just like that in the UK. So one of the reasons I was so glad to see Jordan kind of get one over on Cathy Newman was nothing to do with Cathy Newman, but just to do that whole movement of attack dog journalism going for the gotcha. And then it was Jordan who got the gotcha. So that's what made it so delicious. So partly you've got a factor in that style of journalism. And partly you've got a factor in that the UK is a lot more left of center than the US more generally. But then I guess it's quite it's quite similar to Canada in that way. But I went and saw Jordan just six days ago up in Oxford, and I was expecting to see an audience of the basket of deplorables up close and personal and it's just a regular, regular Oxford crowd. Men and women all ages really, really resonating with him. And he looked dog tired, absolutely dog tired. But everyone hanging on his every word. And yeah, just an interesting phenomenon. What were the what were the questions? He did. He woke up for the questions. That was good. And what kind of questions were there? It was particularly animated on the subject of hate speech rules. So there have been a couple of incidents recently, one where Scottish police have had a bus bus advertisements. So in in like foot high letters, these posters that say, hey, bigots, your time is coming. We will not stand for religiously motivated hate speech. Signed the Scottish police. So the Scottish police are like provoking a fight saying, hey, bigots, we're against hate. And the irony was lost on them, apparently. And then the South Yorkshire police, they they started advertising on social media that they want people to report hate incidences. It doesn't have to be a crime. It could just be a hate incident. But we want to know this and we want to. And of course, you know, South Yorkshire police weren't brilliant at handling a whole bunch of sort of child sex abuse scandals and all sorts of things. And so people quite rightly wanted to know why they weren't turning their attention to actual crimes when they wanted to punish thought crimes. So Jordan got very, very animated at that point. He really woke up and said, what's happening to your country? You need to you need to stop this now. So, yeah, that that was where he cared the most, I think, saying saying free speech trampled on basically. Wow. Well, you you first came across my radar screen, Glenn, when you did some videos about Jordan Peterson. So let's what was your where did you grow up? What was your family like? How did you become a Christian? Why did you become a pastor? What's your ministry look like? Why don't you cover some of that territory? OK, in ten words or less, I grew up in. We have time. I know we have time. I grew up in Australia and it was a church going home. My mother always had a very, very lively faith. And so, yeah, we would we would go along to church. There were certain things that happened in the home when I was growing up. My sisters are a lot older than me, but they discovered a few things that made them want to run a mile from the Christian faith. And I don't I don't blame them for that in a lot of ways. So but I was a lot younger and I was sort of the good Christian boy going along to Sunday school, putting the hand in the air, getting the answers right. If you stick with the Jesus, usually a safe bet. And I didn't really get it. And by the time I went to the university, I think I had a picture of God as the distant individual, high on power, low on personality. That's sort of the the gods that I had sort of assumed to exist. And went away to university thinking I was a Christian, having no real comprehension of who Jesus is. And a friend of mine kept inviting me to church. And I remember going every Sunday night to this church, St. Aldates in Oxford. And I remember hating the preacher with a great passion and going back every Sunday to hate him some more. He thought he was so down with the kids. He was he was using all these contemporary modern examples of the gospel. And I just thought, you know, you think you're cool and you're so not. And now I'm a preacher. So now I see the same I see the same kid with his arms folded in the back. I think just wait. You just wait, kiddo. That was me. And of course, in the background, there's a praying mother. So that's that's always significant. And and then the same friends who invited me to church said, let's read the gospels together. And I just remember getting halfway through Luke's gospel and just being blown away by the person of Jesus. Just, you know, the the compassion, the love, the magnetism, the charisma that he could turn on a dime. I remember I remember as we were going through Matthew twenty three and just the denunciation of you hypocrites, you Pharisees and teachers of the law and you brood of vipers. And and of course, that really sort of resonated with me because both my sisters sort of walked away from the faith because of hypocrisy and to see Jesus. Hot with fury against the religious self-righteous. That was so interesting. And then the very end of that chapter, he says, oh, Jerusalem, Jerusalem, how I've longed to gather you like a hen gathers her chicks, but you are not willing. And like he ends that whole chapter of just blistering fury with this heartfelt appeal to come home. I still have the the mother hen compassion for you. And I remember just keeping on reading through and just halfway through Luke's gospel. I just thought, ah, if if this is what God's like, I mean, this is this is the God that I could actually trust. If it's the Jesus God, then I jump in with both feet. If it's just the distant individual, well, I'll just carry on not giving too much thought to these things. But if it's I've always loved Lord Byron's line so that Lord Byron, the poet said, if God is not like Jesus Christ, he ought to be. Yeah, that's yeah. So that was that was the age about twenty twenty one. And I got a job in the in the civil service in Australia, which was not I'm not really suited for an office job and do great. Well, yeah. And then discovered it took me a while to figure out, you know what? Actually, like shooting your mouth off about Jesus. That's that's actually a call. That's actually that's something that people do. So I started working for churches in 2000 and started working for a church in London and then back in Canberra in Australia and then back in London again. And then I went to a seminary and I got ordained in the Church of England in 2007. And then I came down here to Eastbourne where I live on the south coast of England, working for a church there. You're a sort of a curate. If you know the term curate, it's like you're a. A minister with your plates on your sort of in training. And I was in that training position on staff of all cells, Eastbourne for four years. And then at the end of that, I got this job where I am now at this charity that I work for called Speak Life. And I still go to that church and I still preach quite a bit there. But my day job is as an evangelist. So, yeah, that's fun. And so what is Speak Life? So we used to be known as the hour of the day. So we used to be known as the hour of revival evangelistic association, which is quite the mouthful. And that was back in the 50s. There was a guy called Eric Hutchings. He used to be known as the British Billy Graham. And he would he would go and have these massive crusades. And, you know, he would preach and the choir would sing and hundreds would come forward. And it was that that kind of thing. He had a radio ministry and then he he died in 1982, I think, with no real plans for the legacy or passing it on. And so nothing really happened. And then 30 years later, a large legacy was left to the charity and they thought, oh, we could actually employ another evangelist. So I'm only the second evangelist employed by this charity. There was a 30 year gap in between. And now I'm just I'm trying to get really back to not the not the crusades thing, but he he had this ministry of preaching and media, which back in the day was radio. And these days, it's it's kind of online. So we try to do the same kinds of things and make a noise for Jesus. OK, OK. Now, in the UK, does you mean in American terms, your outfit would very much be evangelical. And I know evangelical in the UK means something different than it does on the American context. Does evangelical in the UK have a political overtone to it? Not not at all. I could not guess what anyone in my church would have voted for with the referendum on Brexit. I have no idea who people vote for election by election. It's absolutely not segmented like that. This is the slightly more in the free church tradition. There's the slightly more voting for the Labor Party and the and the and the Liberal Party because they have those kinds of foundations, the slightly more voting, I would guess, for the conservatives among Anglicans. But yeah, among evangelicals, it's just not politically divided at all. And one of the reasons might be because most of the churches that would identify as evangelical in the UK are also Anglican. And I think the Church of England is the Church of England plays chaplain to the whole nation. So any anyone in our parish who wants to get married, we can marry them. Anyone who wants to get baptized, you know, we can have a chat about it. And if they really want to, then then baptize and anyone who wants to be buried and we bury them and we and anyone who wants to have a conversation about the deep issue. They can knock on our door at three in the morning and we do play chaplain to the nation because of this parish system. So I just think it can't we can't be politicized as much can afford to be politicized as much, which is ironic because in the US there's such a separation of church and state is the dogma. And yet religion and politics are kind of like this. Whereas in the UK, we've got bishops in the upper house of Parliament in the House of Lords. They're literally the bishops get to sit there. The Queen is the governor of the Church of England. And yet actually religion and politics are completely separate. I was talking to the leader of the Liberal Democrat Party, which is sort of the third party. There's conservatives, labor and then the Liberal Democrats, which are a much smaller party these days. But he he made an interesting comment just the other day. He said in America, you've got to pretend to have a face to get get on in politics. And in Britain, you've got to pretend not to have a face to get on the politics. That's fascinating. Now, yesterday I did a little video about Noah Plumb and he was explaining. I don't know if you saw that video. He's explained. Yes, I did. Christianity is our note. Jordan Peterson is good for good for Christians because it'll help them in their expressive individualism. You know, happier but bad for Christianity because he plays into the Church of England. Being, you know, on the fence about the only empty right. I played a clip from empty right in there that the only the only issue in the Church of England is, you know, do they or don't they believe that, you know, Jesus had skin on when he walked out of the tomb. So yes, yes. So what was your what was your take on Mr. Plumb in the game room's take on the Church of England? Well, I just think he I think it was it was correct. Well, what I don't think he got right was in order to quote from Anglicans who are just so utterly liberal. They don't even believe in the resurrection anymore. He actually had to go back to David Jenkins, who was Bishop of Durham. Well, he retired from that in 1994. And of course, since he was Bishop of Durham, there was another much more famous Bishop of Durham who was empty right himself. And David Jenkins was such such an outlier in his own day. And then the other person he quoted was Giles Fraser, who is known as the loose cannon. He was the cannon of St. Paul's Cathedral. And he writes a column in the Guardian newspaper, but he is by no means representative of the theological tenor of the Church of England. You know, we've got an archbishop of Canterbury who identifies as evangelical. The Archbishop of York, who is, you know, number two in terms of the structures of the Church of England, is also evangelical. So I disagree with that. And then on the stats. Yeah, there are churches absolutely hemorrhaging numbers. But what's interesting is when you dive down into the numbers, actually the churches that that most hold a more traditional ethical line and spend much more time in the scriptures, they are actually the churches that are increasing in attendance. So the Diocese of London is a much more conservative diocese than the rest of the diocese. And it's one of the only really growing and dynamic diocese in the Church of England. And evangelical churches are just about holding their own, maybe even increasing a little bit, while other liberal parts of that denomination and other denominations are absolutely going down the tubes. So I can agree with that. I can agree that people who start to say it doesn't matter what's happening, you know, to Jesus and whether he's risen from the dead. It's true that if you swallow that hook line and sinker, then you'll be relevant for about three and a half minutes and then you won't have a church in three and a half years. So that's true. You know, that's true. But I don't think that that's what Jordan Peterson is doing. I don't see why he's making that link, really, to Anglican Geology. So what do you think Jordan Peterson is doing? Your video is about him. I listened to him again this morning. The churches are... So there's lots of, you know, Peterson is in a sense a Rorschach test. And when I run my meetups, people come in and in many ways they hear the Peterson they want to hear, or others hear the Peterson that they want to hear in a negative way. They, oh, this is the one who's standing against progress and he's a bigot and he's misogynist and he's transphobic. So Peterson does act like a mirror and people see in him, a funhouse mirror, people see in him the distortions they're looking for. But what do you think is... And so Christians are listening to him and they're like, well, you know, this live as if and, you know, some of the other issues that come up, Jung, Darwin, so on and so, especially from evangelicals. But clearly he's having an impact. Why? Why do you think? I don't think it's what Noah Plumb says in terms of because he's so rational and he makes it intellectually respectable to be Christian again. I don't think it's really so much about the intellectual side of things. I think he cares and I think he's pastoral and I think that's psychological side of things. I think he's the father we wish we had and I think he is fathering a lot of guys, really, and speaking deeply and wisely to them about rules for living. So, you know, it's just interesting that it's a self-help book that kind of defines his phenomenon. It's not, you know, here are 12 arguments for the Jungian Darwinian framework. It doesn't sound like John Peterson to me. What sounds is here are 12 rules for life and stand up straight with your shoulders back and come on, you can do it and take up your cross and march to the top of the hill and take as much responsibility as you can. And this call to responsibility and adventure is what people are responding to. And yes, it helps that he can ground things scientifically and within a Darwinian framework. I guess that that helps with with a lot of people, but I just I don't think it's because he makes it intellectually respectable. I think it's because he cares. And what I've responded to in his teaching is has been that he treats the Bible as a human document that is meant to humanize us. It's addressed to humans and its intention is to humanize, which is just so helpful. Even as a Christian, it's just so helpful because I'm just surrounded by preachers who constantly treat the book as though it's this specialized text for specialized people called Christians to live a specialized life and tweak your discipleship over here. And for him to just restore the book to the center of cultural conversation and to say it is a human document and Christians shouldn't run away from that. Of course, it's a human document. We think something else is going on as well. But we also think it's a very human document addressed to humankind en masse and and it humanizes people. So I've I've loved that I've loved his existentialism. I've loved the way he you know when he's asked about what he believes he's not really interested in the question. I quite I quite like that. It sounds a lot like the Book of James in the New Testament. The devil's got a very realized theology. The devil the devil understands a lot about stuff and shutters. But you know that that's not what a Christian should be interested in primarily. So and his idea that you know the reason why he's not interested in just articulating a set of dogmas is is because you know what the hell do you know about what you think you believe you're not transparent to yourself. Which just seems thoroughly in keeping with a rounded anthropology that some atheists have like Jonathan Heights and and all Christians should have because of what we believe about humankind. And we are self justifying fools and all that kind of stuff. I think he gets human beings largely correct. So I think that's what people are responding to. OK. But now he's so he's he's he's being the uncle. He cares. You know Oprah cares. Dr. Phil cares. Dr. Oz cares. There's no end of at least in the in the United States seen in the New Age segment of American spirituality. Well caring is you know God falling all over themselves to care. And but here we have this guy who doesn't go to church. His his his answers about some pretty core. I mean nobody's really pigeonholed him on the virgin birth yet which which would be another fun conversation with him. But the impact he's having is not just that people are cleaning their room. But that people are reading the Bible and then you know partially through Jonathan Peugeot people are you know one of the things that I've noted in my meetups is I've got people coming in and well they're checking out the Orthodox Church now to get into an evangelical church in America. A lot of evangelical churches you come in one Sunday raise your hand and say I want to be baptized and boy they're going to grab you and put you in the water fast. Orthodox Church. OK. OK. Well let's start the process. You're going to be doing that for at least a year and then maybe we'll consider baptizing you and letting you near the table. So he is he is doing something really interesting that goes beyond kind of a self help fad. And for me when I began to realize this that that really said I want to figure this out. I want to know what is going on in our I want to know what's going on underneath the surface how you know OK people are showing up in church. That's that's way beyond him caring and cleaning up their rooms. So what's that about. Do you think. I think one thing would be Dr. Phil and Oprah and Dr. Oz don't examine their shadow side. They're not doing a lot of integration work with their shadow. So you know and so this is you know this is coming from Jung it's coming to the Bible it's coming from Solzhenitsyn. But I'm not hearing it as much from him but that's certainly certainly in his biblical lectures and certainly in his lectures at University of Toronto that comes across very very strongly. And I think people are gripped by that. And you would you would expect that not to not to create an audience because you'd think well I'm I'm no Hitler and. But there is something I think there is something about a doctrine of sin that that really communicates and really resonates with people on a very deep level and if someone who themselves has really been puzzling this out and themselves comes across with that humility that the Jordan Peterson comes across with he has clearly faced down his shadow he's feeling he's clearly faced down that part of himself that could have been a Nazi God. And when when he says that it's not a trite thing. Which I'm saying is you know but but when he puts flesh and bones on that kind of statement and says yeah the Nazi evil also resides in my heart. Wow I do think that makes people sit up and listen in a way that just telling people that they are perfectable you know largely decent human beings who just need a plan or you know just need a bit of affirmation. That's not how we take and and and I don't and when I'm constantly bombarded by affirmations my heart just says well if you're constantly affirm it you don't know me you don't it doesn't work actually. And so you know the old Lutheran and Reformed pastors would talk about law and gospel law and gospel and I and I think. Jordan Peterson does the law very well. You know he needs a bit of gospel as well but he does the law so well and I think it just resonates and grips people. And you know another thing that caught my attention was that so I have you know I have some wonderful friends who are amazing preachers and pastors in Toronto and there are plenty of empty seats for free available. And you know the Church of England I'm sure has plenty. This this message as you mentioned the church. Churches. So I was I was having a conversation with a with a young man from from New York City who's actually been going to a number of conservative Reformed churches in New York City. And one of the things one of the complaints that he had was you know even even in even in Calvinist churches a clear. A clear articulation of our need is wanting and lacking and and even when we do so. It doesn't have the the strange appeal that Peterson seems to have managed to do it with yesterday in the comments section someone brought up Mark Driscoll who of course out Mars Hill in in Seattle and Driscoll was a very controversial very popular Reformed minister young restless and reformed. And they made a connection between Peterson and Driscoll and I thought huh there's something there too but but how you know you would think if the church. We've had this stuff for a very long time and here Peterson comes along and you know if Peterson were if Peterson were talking weekly in a thousand seat church in Toronto. People would be flying into Toronto to hear him for free in a heartbeat and they'd line up afterwards to shake his hand and that's not the case for me so case for my friends in Toronto what what Mojo does Peterson have that the church has lacked. Question. Yeah. I think there is the pastoral side of things is the fact that he cares I think there is preach. I mean preachers are in the end though in one old saw preachers are quivering masses of availability. I mean that's part of the problem. Oh I care and even you know you look at I look at you know a lot of British culture that I see is British comedy and the you know the image that the image of the vicar and British in British comedy is you know this guy who sits around and he's just full of emotional availability. He'll care about anything, especially. Yeah. Yeah, but niceness is not the same as compassion and yeah. Yeah. So, Peterson isn't that nice. No, there's a there's a stern fatherly you know side of things and that's so that's why it's an interesting comparison with with Driscoll because Driscoll is a yeah Driscoll complementarian if you like on the on the genders and Peterson complementarian on masculinity, femininity and yeah. Yeah, yeah Driscoll is a shouty Peterson I don't know maybe. I don't know. I don't know I think because he clears the clears the ground with the seriousness of our shadow. I think when he when he lands the the scriptural truths and when he when he lands things from the Sermon on the Mount for instance in 12 rules for life. I think he has. He has so diagnosed the problem that I mean it's the scriptures. It's difficult to think of Christian books where the scriptures land so heavily, where the scriptures actually land in your heart with a kind of a weight that you think this is wisdom. Even in Christian books where you would think you know the scriptures would fit in a lot a lot easier. So I guess I'm defaulting back to my my my law answer he he diagnoses the problem, but I don't know what do you what do you think. Well, yeah, and this is you know so some people think I you know I need to see I myself should see a good psychiatrist psychologist besides Jordan Peterson because I spent over a year trying to figure this guy out and part of it is as a pastor and I would imagine for you as as an evangelist you would be over the moon. If you were getting the kind of attention and traction as Jordan Peterson if you if you were being asked to be on you know all kinds of of TV shows and talk shows and and I would be over the moon if if my church were brimming and and you know. There's and I don't obviously we don't simply see this as as popularity but he's been ironically potentially the most one of the most effective and interesting evangelists of the last he's only been had the attention for a year or two for the last couple of years and this now a lot of people are going to doubt that and there's good reason for doubt. We don't know we don't know where the buckos which is just a word I used to because how to describe these followers of the years and we don't know where this is going to land with these people it could be that Peterson ignites a flame and some people you know say well I want to be orthodox but you know next week they want to be you know whoever knows what we don't know if the basement dwellers are going to actually get out of the basement or if you know the the basement dwellers are going to be this is just their latest YouTube channel and the end of the the Truman Show that wonderful movie I mean the ending of it was everyone's everything's building to the climax and Truman walks off of the you know Christoph's sound stage and then everyone just turns the channel that could happen. Yeah you know and I'm fully aware of that but but my you know my the thing that has dogged me in this has been the poverty the poverty Peterson has exposed the poverty of the church in a very compelling way and that's something that that we should I think ponder deeply on you know Peterson mentioned in that interview with GQ UK British GQ whatever they call themselves you know he's given his his evangelistic crusade slash book tour you know he's spoken with you know he's spoken to a quarter of a million people in person over the last year or so he has you know when I when he came to Sacramento and they did the VIP I got someone someone very generously offered me a VIP ticket and so I was early on in the line and then I sat fairly close to where he was greeting people and just like he says on many interviews and tears up when he says so people come up to him and you know what I mean. Hundreds of people thousands of people come up to him and tearfully say my life was heading in a bad direction and you I read your book and I listened to your lectures and it it put me on a better track and my life is much better now. There's a there's a power there now obviously it's it's easy for us as as Christian ministers to theologically diagnose what Peterson is doing and critique it and I've certainly done plenty of that and I'll you know I'll continue to to recognize there's a stoicism in him we are dragging our own crosses up the hill for Peterson it isn't it isn't Christ carrying the cross now Christ does admonish us to take up our cross and we're dragging our own crosses up the hill for Peterson it isn't it isn't Christ carrying the cross now Christ does admonish us to take up our cross and we're dragging our own crosses up the hill for Peterson it isn't it isn't Christ carrying the cross now Christ does admonish us to take up our cross and we're dragging our own crosses up the hill for Peterson it isn't it isn't Christ carrying the cross now Christ does admonish us to take up our cross and we're dragging our own crosses up the hill for Peterson it isn't it isn't Christ carrying the cross now Christ does admonish us to take up our crosses as well so there's there's plenty of theological space in there to work but he has in some ways at least in this tiny little moment exposed the poverty of a good deal of Christian ministry and and done something that that I think we as Christian ministers should stop and give us and cause us to examine ourselves. And what is it what is he doing that we're not. I'm still figuring that out. I that this is why I've been obsessed with this. I want to know what he's doing to know why he's having the impact he's having. And perhaps part of the that is mercenary on my part because oh I want to I want to do what he does well except you know the thing was that once I began to realize what was happening I who am pastor of a very small congregation that is aging and you know very much could look like a number of places in the Church of England. Now suddenly and for years you know people aren't knocking on my door and sending me emails and asking to have conversations with me. I start trying to work through and diagnose Peterson and and suddenly I've got you know a queue of people who would love to have a conversation with me and what Christian minister doesn't want people coming to them and saying can we talk about the Bible. Right. Yeah. Oh I'm not sure if that's in my job description. We talk about the Bible. Can I can we talk about Christianity. Can we talk about you know the creator is the Redeemer. You know yes we can talk about this but why was it this quirky rough man from northern Alberta who teaches psychology in Toronto that linked this and why was it that I could just go to meetup.com and say Jordan Peterson meetup. And every week have 12 people many of them for the first time were willing to walk into a church and say I want to talk about Jordan Peterson. And most of the time we're not spending talking about Jordan Peterson. We're talking about all the kinds of things he's raising for them. And those are all the kinds of things that are that sit right in the center of a pastoral plate. So. So. Do you think it might be. No. Go ahead. Do you think it might be. So prodigal son so you've got Luke chapter 15. Here's the father. Here's the two boys. There's the bad boy the good boy bad boy runs off to the far country wants to be free. He gets lost. He's in the pigsty and he he comes up with his pigsty plan. How many of my father's men have more than enough to eat. And here I am starving to death. I will go back to him and I will say let me be one of your hired men. And I just think that's that's kind of an interesting plan for those who find themselves in a pigsty. You know those those who find themselves in the land of chaos want a course correction desperate for a course correction. And they want an antidote to chaos. And what they naturally want though is to be a hired man to be a hired servant. And of course the hired servant relationship is the order relationship. It's the older brother kind of relationship who you know who slaves for the father and that kind of thing. And I just wonder whether you know part part of what we're seeing is people who are they've had enough of the far country. They've realized that you know if you're lost the last person you need to find is yourself. You kind of need is finding a lost person is never much help. I don't know if you've noticed that. I've never heard a phrase that way before. So I'm going to. Yeah right. OK it's yours. It's yours. Pastors are not only liars they're also thieves. Where would we be without. Yeah. And I just I just wonder whether Peterson is kind of calling calling the younger brothers you know home and calling them far more towards the hired man kind of relationship. And some of them some of the find are finding the father. Yeah. True father that relationship with God as a child and that and that freedom and some of them are finding more order in their life than there was chaos. Yeah. But I do I do wonder with the order and chaos thing whether in the Bible disorder and this chaos and this grace and I want I I don't think either order or chaos are the grace option and whether we're the part of part of the job. So I was talking to a guy just up in Newcastle I was preaching and he was one of these guys was saying yeah I need to take more responsibility for my life turns out he's a massive Peterson fan. And we just we just sat down had a look at Luke chapter 15 and just the fact that it's much better if you're in a pigsty to want to be a hired man but it's even better to be a child in the household. And that that seemed to kind of resonate with him and that that's what I'm sort of trying to do but that's that's me diagnosing what's lacking in Peterson whereas you're asking the much more interesting question which is how is he died diagnosing what we're lacking. That's the key. I mean the churches he is exposing the church and this isn't you know he's not exposing the church in terms of you know the Roman Catholic pedophile scandal. He's exposing the church in its in its weakness and it's and not in its weakness like Christ's weakness he's exposing the church and it's in its banality and its worthlessness and. And that you know so I think of and you know when I think about you know so I was also thinking about the parable the prodigal son the younger son is that is the son who goes away. Well let's say the younger son comes back and becomes the older brother. Well I you know I love Tim Keller sermon on the prodigal son because here's the irony is that well okay maybe you do clean your room maybe you do get that job maybe you do marry the girl that you've been taking years of her. Her life from and maybe you now marry her and you have children and okay now you become the now you become the elder brother. Well as Tim Keller's great sermon notes that brother needs gospel too because there are two different ways to be your own savior and Lord. So you know I very much understand the limitation of you know Peterson doesn't even use the word gospel and I understand the limitations of his message but something is happening here that I think we as a church need to pay attention to and I haven't figured it out yet. I do believe and maybe again maybe a couple of years from now Peterson gets a daytime talk show and bit by bit by bit his rough edge wears off. I don't know if that'll happen he'll be a he'll be a Megan Kelly if he's on daytime TV he can't contain himself that long he will he'll say something to someone and he'll get fired from ABC that's just what happens. Yes yes yes no without without a doubt and I mean I've heard him describe it you know he's done a hundred foot wave and he can see very few ways that this will end well which yeah yes yes stunning kind of self-awareness with that. I think one of the things he exposes about the church is he just routinely says a whole bunch of stuff that we had assumed was unsayable and we thought we couldn't possibly say that and if we did we would lose any kind of credibility in audience and he just says it and then doubles down on it and triples down on it and wins the audience. But there are jerk pastors out there and maybe you don't have many of them yeah we have plenty in the US who go on all the time to say offensive things things that might be you know quite true but they don't have the impact that Peterson has. I mean they're just everyone just knows them as jerks so yeah yeah you know the newsgroup you know Westboro Baptist gets press coverage. I don't know I don't know I have not figured it out and I know the Jungians will be out there and they'll say well obviously I mean they're not going to be able to do anything about it. I don't know I don't know I don't know I don't know I don't know I don't know I don't know I don't know I don't know I don't know I don't know I don't know I don't know I don't know I don't know I don't know I don't know I don't know I don't know I don't know I don't know I don't know I don't know I don't know I don't know I don't know I don't know I don't know I don't know I don't know I don't know I don't know I don't know I don't know I don't know I don't know I don't know I don't know I don't know I don't know I don't know I don't know I don't know I don't know I don't know I don't know I don't know I don't know I don't know I don't know I don't know I don't know I don't know I don't know I don't know I don't know I don't know I don't know I don't know I don't know I don't know I don't know I don't know I don't know I don't know I don't know I don't know why life is so life isn't so simple and if so kind of what I like What I really deem life is, I love to live li인 so I love life is so simple and then also awesome. And in my eyes I love all these people who are in the same place in my bureau because they are in the same time are in that is what I value is all thischain vibe chilis long-term impact he will have in people's lives. It's way too early to know any of that. But it does lead me to ask questions about what should we be learning from him in terms of understanding how to talk about Jesus in this present context? Some people say, well, he doesn't talk about Jesus. No, he does talk about Jesus. We might say Jesus is Lord, but we're, say, ripping off a slogan from the first century. You know, we're ripping off the Roman emperor slogan. Roman emperors, there are not a lot of them around anymore. He, in a sense, is doing something in the present context. And when he says Jesus is at the top, Jesus is the archetype of the purpose to cure for human being, I've never had a thought of saying it that way. And that way is connecting with people. And I don't want to just be a me-to-evangelist that says, oh, all the young kids are doing music, or movies, the kind of preacher you used to resent to go listen to. So I really, and I don't think the best way to go about this is kind of the, what's in the evangelical hip pocket, which is, oh, Jordan Peterson is bringing a crowd. Let's all kind of go with the flow, and then we'll cap it off with, oh, and then Jesus. And here's, here's baptism. Oh, that ain't gonna work either. That is not gonna work. So I don't know, I don't know. And that's why I'm talking to people, because I learn from people. And it's not, but it's not Jesus smuggling with Peterson, which was sort of the line that Douglas Murray kind of brought up in one of the debates. It's not Jesus smuggling, because it's this ground up, it's this cathedral-like vision for reality, that your average evangelical kind of approach to evangelism is, look, here's the leaflet. Here's the thumbnail plan. And this is in as low resolution as possible. Let me download the data on you that you can get. So it's giving you the leaflet that describes a thumbnail of a plan of the cathedral. And Peterson's approach is, let me just in a really meandering way, and how long have you got? You got three hours, come on in. And I don't know why we spent all that time in the crypt, but he's into it. And so, and passion communicates, right? And it's giving you this vision. And you don't understand the cathedral. You have no idea how this bit relates to that bit, but he seems to think it does. And you need to watch about 15 different videos to kind of come on board. But that is how humans tick, right? It's kind of, you know, it's the difference between watching The Wire when you're watching the first four episodes of The Wire, and like, I have no idea who these people are. I can't understand this Baltimore accent, but I'm gripped. I don't know why I'm gripped. I don't know where this is going. And you're tempted to just look up Wikipedia and like, who is this guy again? And how is he related to this person? But The Wire is a lot more how people tick than the Wikipedia page. And so much of my tribe does the Wikipedia page and just tries to boil things down as simplistically as you can. You know, so I've got a gospel outline called 321. And it might sound like it's a simplistic thing because I walk you through in three steps. Okay, here's the gospel. But step number one, God is a loving union of three. So it's Trinity. Okay, let's dive deeply into that. This is not, I'm not starting with the simple stuff. Okay, here's Trinity. And then two is Adam and Christ. You know, not the most obvious thing to then go to. And then one is you're one with Adam, be one with Christ. So I mean, these, I did not pick the three simplest doctrines in order to do this thing. But I actually think persuasion is not so much the stepping stone thing. I don't think it's trying to like have stepping stones from your house to my house. And I don't think it's about throwing stones at your house. I basically think it's about like throwing open the doors and saying, come on over. I know from the outside, this thing looks a mess and it looks really weird. And, you know, I know you've heard the residents of the house squabbling upstairs. And I know we haven't done the best job, but can I just give you the grand tour? And it is, it's the cathedral tour. It's the meandering life is more weird and wonderful than you'd ever imagined. That people love and they're responding to when all the time what we wanna do is download the little 90 seconds thing on people. So I think that's part of, I think he gets our anthropology right. And we ought to get, you know, we ought to have a more rounded anthropology like that. But I think we've been far too enlightenment and people like Height and Peterson are calling us on that. Yeah. I think part of it too is he is himself quite clearly embodying the hero. I mean, the status rocket that he's been on since 2016. And I think people see that and they want to emulate it. I think that's deep within us. And I think that's part of his attraction. But yeah, there's, I, again, people will have problems with this when I say it, but I do believe God is doing something powerful through him. And you know, I did a video a couple of days ago on the unauthorized exorcist Mark Nine. And that, you know, and so the disciples are like, you know, who is, why is he doing that using your name, Jesus? Let's stop him. Yeah. That's right, let's stop him because we don't want those people getting, you know, having those demons cast out and not having our little stamp of approval on it. And Jesus says, you know, leave him alone. Yeah. He's not against us. That's right. And I think about, you know, I think about, you know, the last chapter of the Gospel of John when Jesus is dealing with Peter and Peter looks over at John and says, hey, hey, what about him? And Jesus says, you know, what's that, you know, what's that to you? You follow me. And I think Jesus says that to his church, you know, with respect to Peterson, you know, if I wanna use, if I wanna use Jordan Peterson to, see, I had been seeing a lot of one way traffic going down the Sam Harris Road or some other roads and saying, once people start going down that road, they don't come back again to the church. And what happened after Jordan Peterson was people start coming back and it's like, huh, I didn't think the spirit of God could do that. And, but what I really didn't think was that the spirit of God could use someone that looked like that to do that. And it's really threatening in the church when we say, you know, the spirit of God can use someone who is unauthorized, someone who won't go to church, someone who has some pretty critical things to say to the church. And I think, yeah, when we start believing that we're, you know, we've made ourselves into idols and we no longer are in fact servants of our great Lord. And when the Lord says, I'm gonna do this, we say, yes Lord, I will be with you wherever you go. So I don't know. That's what I'm saying. Yeah, whoever gets the credit, yeah. And we will rejoice. It was interesting on the day I went to see Jordan Peterson up in Oxford, Facebook reminded me that six years ago to the day, I was up in Oxford debating the chief executive of the British Humanist Association. And it was a really interesting and brilliant event and I loved doing it, but it was very much, he, you know, he's a friend of Dawkins and he's very much in that mold. Andrew Copson is his name. And there was the Oxford branch of the Atheist and Secular Humanist Association was there. And we had some fantastic conversations, but that was the 2012 moment. And that was the kind of faith, non-faith dialogue that was being had. And then it was just so interesting that six years to the day, I was back in Oxford and I was thinking to myself, I reckon so many of the same people who were in that crowd for that debate would be in this theater listening to Jordan Peterson and how times have changed and how the conversation has moved on. But I just wonder which one is the blip? Yeah. No, I think maybe the new Atheist thing was the blip. Yeah, yeah, yeah. For a number of reasons, obviously, I don't think they get God right, but also I just don't think they get people right. Yeah, that's true. You can't last for very long if you don't get people right. Yeah. And I think that kind of an enlightenment rationality thing, it just, it has to run out. Yeah, yeah. You know? Well, we've been going on for about an hour. Any last things you wanted to get in that we didn't talk about? I'm just gonna have to keep watching you, Paul, for giving me the answers that I want. Like, yeah, what is it? What's he doing that we're not? But I don't know. And again, to me, it's the Truman Show fascination because I was so happy to see that interview with British GQ because I hadn't watched I hadn't watched a Jordan Peterson interview and had that much fun in a long time. And it seemed like, well, there he's, you know, he's the poor, the poor beef eater is wearing down with all this stuff, but he's still got some fight in him. And she was a wonderful conversation partner and a wonderful challenger because she could, you know, she didn't get upset. She didn't get defensive. She held her ground and they were able to challenge each other and it was terrific. But I do believe God is doing something with this and my desire would be that more in the church could stop feeling like John in Mark 9 and say, you know, oh, oh, he should stop and then rather listen to their Lord and say, you know, I am Jesus and I am Lord and I will deal with Jordan Peterson as I see fit and I will use him as I see fit. You must follow me. And when I see and what I want, what I desperately want is that people who listen to Jordan Peterson and they can't reach him because, you know, how are they gonna talk to the guy? Cause he's got all this, his status rocket has taken them out of reach for them. But what I desperately want is that these people can find, can go to a church and meet a pastor who's not going to blow them off. And I hear those stories all the time and actually begin to find the church to be helpful. Helpful in terms of they're coming to the church and saying, I don't really know a lot about the Bible. And so for the church to figure out how to talk about the Bible in a helpful way for them and have the church come alongside them and they say, you know, I've got these, you know, I've got these addiction challenges, I've got these behavioral challenges. And what I really need is someone who cares and supports and for the church to be able to come around and be helpful. Because, you know, Billy Graham, you know, was wise enough. You know, he had his moment in the, you know, in the 50s and 60s, but he brought the church with him and tried to at least mobilize the church. And I find churches often hostile to Peterson on the right and on the left. And my prayer is that the church will stop and say, hey, people are coming to you and saying, I want to learn about the Bible. What's so hard about this? Maybe shut up a little bit when they talk about the Bible and figure out, well, what might be helpful for them? What are the questions they are actually asking? And have a conversation with them. Don't be the know-it-all, answer man, older brother. When the older brother comes back into the fold, don't sit outside in the field and say, that's my prayer. That's my prayer in all this. Right, because how does the father respond to the returning boy? He runs to him through his arms around him, throws the feast and he doesn't let him ask to be the slave. That's right. I love that when he practices the speech, he says, he practices the speech and he says, let me be one of your hired men. That's right. But then when he comes to give the speech, the father cuts him off. I don't want a slave. I want a son, I want a boy. And then what Peterson then I think helps you with is I often imagine the next day, the next day the prodigal son kind of waking up and just sort of patting down to the kitchen and there's dad making some eggs. And the younger son says, dad, about last night, I'm at about this whole thing, I'm really sorry. And the father just says, shut up and eat your eggs. And then at some point the son says, what do you wanna do today, dad? And dad says, I don't know, what do you wanna do today? And off you go. And then it's the embodied logos. It's what you wanna do now as this freed son. Right. Well, and actually I think the father will say, well, son, I sold a third of my property when you took it to the far off country. So let's go out to the field and they're calving today. So let's get out there with the workmen. Right. And let's do our work in this. Totally, totally, totally. And I totally think that like, one of the things I think Jordan Peterson fears about Protestants is that we won't have a work ethic, which I don't know, historically we seem to have managed a work ethic, but it's like, I think his fear is that the gospel kind of removes. That's right. Yeah, Calvinists don't know anything about guilt. Have you? Yeah. You're a psychologist, you said? Yeah, yeah. But it's like, my thing is that the shift from the Old Testament to the New Testament is not that you have one day in seven is rest, and then the New Testament is seven days in seven rest. It's the shift of, in the Old Testament, you work towards that day of rest. In the New Testament, you begin with rest. The first day of the week, day off, enjoy the Lord. Now let's walk out into the world. And those 12 rules for life might prove really helpful, as you had from that place of rest out you go. That's right. Well, thank you so much. Now stay on the line, I'm gonna stop the recording, but thank you so much for taking the time to talk. And I praise God for your ministry, and I would love nothing better than to see you be at least as effective as Jordan Peterson. I'm not sure I want that job. I really don't. The dude looks tired. Well, thank you very much, Glenn. Really appreciate your ministry. Love watching your videos. Thank you for all you do.