https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=zQl_3a4lPn4

 Hi, this is Paul. Just got back from my lunch with Freddie. Freddie and I did a Freddie and Paul show over lunch. Freddie loves it when I mention the Freddie and Paul show here in my other videos, because he's always looking for a little bit more visibility. But that comes into the... my process of thinking with the video that I released this morning, the reality scene in the concrete by the simple Oliver Sacks' book. The next video I was planning on doing was going to be about music. Music figured fairly prominently both in the Ian McGillchrist and in the Weeds video. The Weeds video is the one with Jordan Peterson and Jonathan Peugeot and John Ravecki, because music presents itself as an interesting pattern. There's an interesting discussion about the relationship between narrative and music. All that stuff I want to get to, I hope I can get to it this week. We'll see. Today I recorded a conversation with Jonathan Peugeot that by the time you watch this video, you will likely have already seen. But after going out to lunch with Freddie, even before then, this morning I came across a new newsletter by Aaron Wren. He's writing here about the managerial. He refers back to a newsletter that he published back in April, Understanding the Managerial Revolution, which I want to treat there. Freddie and I went to Taco Bell. We had a nice lunch. We were at the regional transit place. I was getting him his bus pass. One of the things that our church deacons do is make sure that Freddie has a bus pass. Freddie has a limited income. A bus pass is a good thing for the church to help him with. He gets a reduced cost monthly bus pass from the city of Sacramento. If he has a bus pass, he can pretty much get himself around, get himself to church, get to his mom's house, get to the library, get to the mall. Wherever he wants to go, Freddie can pretty much get around and get done when he needs to get done. He has a bus pass, so we give him a bus pass. Usually after we go for the bus pass, we go out for lunch. We usually go to McDonald's or Taco Bell. It reminds me a lot of Chris Arnotti and his walking around the world with his camera. The thinky-talky space that we inhabit here in the internet is in many ways divorced from the masses of people who aren't dealing with all of the abstractions that we are. Now, mostly not working is, I know the guy actually have an offline conversation, and he tweets at me fairly frequently. He follows the channel quite closely, and he's often feeding me really helpful stuff. Toolmaker's paradigm is his real big shtick. But he sent me this little description this morning, this little diagram that I thought was really helpful, described the concrete what is, the existing implicit current, and then abstraction, the model of what is. Some people had comments in this morning's video about the fact that even the simple work from models, and that's true. And nothing in the Oliver Sacks treatment of the simple implies that their inability to manage abstraction isn't a disability. The human capacity to abstract and self-consciously model and manipulate models is part of the package of, I would say, the image of God that allows us to be God-like over this earth and to together create the kinds of things, as Peugeot says. I think I'm going to probably just start using Peugeotian language to create bodies, because that's in fact the Pauline language. Not just principalities and powers, which are sort of the spiritual forces that move these extended bodies. But when we get together and we meet and we do things, we create these bodies. And a lot of that is involved in abstraction. Now, even though in the modern era, on one level, there's been intense skepticism about the spiritual operation and influence of these bodies, in the modern era, in many ways, it's been an abundance of body creation, government bodies, corporate bodies in terms of economical corporations. Of course, it was the Dutch that created the modern stockholding corporation with the Dutch East India Company. And the British sort of came roaring in as a larger nation and took over and pretty much eclipsed and replaced the Dutch in many ways and in the colonial world. Over the summer, I've been reading histories of World War II. As I mentioned before, I went through Ian Tolles and now I'm in James Hollins. Tom's a better writer. Don't tell anyone. I've been enjoying James's book, but he doesn't have the way with words that Tom seems to have. Plus, I'm a little biased because the kind of the area, the era that Tom writes in is, even though I'm very interested in the Second World War and I've been sort of obsessing my way through these major works, this broad sweep that Tom Holland is doing as a historian is, I don't want to set two brothers against each other. That would be that would be unseemly. Anyway, the modern era has seen the proliferation and the multiplication of bodies in a sense with a degree of, now I'm going to use an Oliver Sack's term, agnosia about the spiritual realities that are involved in what these bodies create in terms of their cultures. And I really like this diagram that's on the screen. You have basically a four-square area of researching and prototyping. You have interpret and describe what is sort of going up into the abstract interpret model of what is suggests, and that's very much right brain, according to Ian McGillchrist, model of what could be that's very telotic. I don't think you really get to what could be without having at least an implicit telos that you're pointing to. And then it gets manifest as what could be in the concrete. And so again, we see that part of this machine that the simple that Oliver Sacks is noting are are sort of cut out of because of their inability to manage the abstract, yet with, in a sense, their profoundly prophetic ability to manifest some of the ways that the society of the abstract neglect many other aspects of reality with their very left brain, targeted, focusing, dissecting, specifying gift, which is what the left brain does. And again, it's a powerful and important gift. You get then in the machine, these these evils which crop up, these these things that all this wasn't these unintended consequences of the things that we've made. Now, in order for this multiplication of bodies to happen, what you really have is the rise of the managerial class or the managerial revolution. And so this was Aaron Wren's newsletter 63. And on his YouTube channel, he reads these newsletters. So instead of me having to read them, I thought, well, let's let Aaron do the reading. He's the author, and then we'll do a little bit of commentary as we go. Issue number 63, understanding the man. I sped it up a little bit because you all speed speed me up. So so you're going to really listen to him fast. Jury revolution, originally published on April 10th, 2022. I'm about to embark on a series of red hot newsletters. But before doing that, there's one more foundational concept I need to explain. This will be educational. I already discussed how industrialization led to the fall of the household. This newsletter is about how industrialization created the managerial revolution. The managerial revolution is, in essence, the rise of managers or bureaucrats to supplant business owners or political leaders as the de facto ruling class in America. The revolution in scale and speed. Prior to circa 1830, America was a capitalist country, but the economy consisted of a vast number of small scale businesses or household enterprises. Only a handful of businesses, a couple of armories and textile mills, had as many as 100 employees. Essentially, no businesses operated in a multi-site, multi-unit or vertically integrated manner apart from the short-lived Second Bank of the United States. Production, distribution and sales happen through market transaction, facilitated by an array of trading companies, jobbers, agents, etc. The important takeaway is that these firms were small and could be managed entirely by their owner or owners in the case of a partnership. Record-keeping needs were limited to simple double entry financial accounting of the type in use for hundreds of years previously. Industrialization changed this through enabling a revolution in scale and speed, which portended a radical change in the structure of the economy. The railroads were the first modern corporations. By their very nature, they spanned long distances across multiple locations, requiring tight coordination of scheduling, ticketing, maintenance, etc. Now, the entrant, you know, the word corporation, corpus, body, I mean, this is, I think Peugeot's term is the best term to use because we create these bodies that are the modern corporation. Now, the managerial is built on the capacity of abstraction. Railroads involved massive capital investments that needed new forms of accounting. Railroads had to hire managers to oversee each aspect of their business, organized on geographic and departmental lines. This led to not just senior management reporting to an owner or president, but to the development of middle management as well. Through expansion, mergers, etc. The railroads grew into gigantic firms like the Pennsylvania and Union Pacific. The railroad's need for new forms of managerial control is most famously illustrated by the institution of time zones and uniform timekeeping in the United States in 1883. Now look at the way again that these corporations then force the rest of the bodies into certain structures. Now force in some ways, sometimes you have government coercion, but it's also perhaps more of a seduction because well things just go better if we're now we have these time zones and these time zones are really handy things. And again, I'm not I'm not against time zones. I think it's helpful that I can have some kind of agreement as I'm zooming with people all over the world in terms of what time we're in rather than having, you know, San Francisco is their time their noon is slightly different from Sacramento's noon is slightly different from Reno's noon is slightly different from or significantly different from Denver's noon or Albuquerque's noon or Alberta's noon or on and on and on and on and on. These time zones were in many ways now watch our language here a step forward but notice how these bodies are moving in the world and how they're changing things. This illustrates how the needs of modern business reshaped governance in America. Similar stories were repeated in other industries like the telegraph, steel, oil, chemicals, tobacco, packaged food and consumer goods, electricity and retail. These draws the development of vertical integration where a company owns everything from the raw materials due to production distribution and sales, cost accounting and the rise of the public accounting firm, the professionalization of management, the modern consulting industry, and of course a vast explosion in the number of managers. Now, how this sort of connects in with James Holland's books. So, James Holland hasn't finished the trilogy but I'm currently in the second of his books which is the Allies Strike Back and even on this cover illustration. What Aaron Ren is talking about is in many ways what both motivated many of the actions in the Second World War and what in many cases sort of won the Second World War, which was that the Second World War was in a way the triumph of the managerial over the world. America not having its cities bombed was able under Roosevelt and a bunch of others was able to create this enormous machine that could pump out planes and ships and materials and could send them all over the world. And this was in many ways the Second World War was the creation of the American Empire but it was different from the kind of empire that let's say the communists were trying to found or the Nazis were trying to found or Italy was trying to found or Imperial Japan was trying to found. In fact, in many ways part of what prompted Italy and Germany and Japan to really pursue in the short timetables they did the kinds of empires they had was the seeing the rise of the managerial ahead of them. Because what Italy and Germany and Japan all have in common is that they are these powerful civilizations and nation states that don't have an abundance of raw material that sort of what separates them from from Russian part of why Hitler had to attack Russia and Ukraine was he needed the raw materials. Now in some ways Japan or not Japan in some ways China is in exactly the same place today they don't have petroleum. They they have difficulties with certain key essential raw materials which sort of first set up the British to be able to gain food from America oil from America all these things from America and from India and from around the world. But then just on the way back back from the my visit with Freddie you have the Atlantic Charter and in many ways the terms of the Atlantic Charter are and on our continued development of this type of empire which in some ways the British had difficulty with the Atlantic Charter hardly endorsed empire. Nonetheless the charter was significant and placed the war firmly on the moral footings in the eyes of Britain and the United States. Now let's see if I can get get back to it. Yeah. In it meaning the Atlantic Charter Churchill and Roosevelt declared to the world eight common principles they sought no aggrandizement no territorial or other. Of course Soviet Union wasn't going to keep their word about all sorts of things and they certainly didn't follow this charter. They also respected the rights of all people to choose the form of government under which they live. The sixth point dealt directly with Germany after the final destruction of Nazi tyranny. They hope to see established a peace with which to afford all nations the means of dwelling and safety within their own boundaries and which will afford assurance that all men and in all lands may live out their lives in freedom from fear and want. It's there's ways in which this Atlantic Charter I think really sort of takes from the Book of Deuteronomy in terms of the vision that the Book of Deuteronomy has of what life is supposed to be like. It was heady utopian stuff and back in Britain caused some embarrassment for Churchill. India for example had been on the cusp of independence before the war but there were many who believe that they were not being given the chance to choose their own government. The Atlantic Charter hardly endorsed empire. Nonetheless the charter was significant and placed the war firmly on a moral footing in the eyes of Britain and the United States. And so part of what is built into this managerial revolution is the rise of multiplications of bodies. And one of the things to Tocqueville and then of course far later Robert Putman in bowling alone makes the point that America was sort of it was abundantly filled with intermediary bodies between let's say the state which which sort of has the top of the hierarchy. And America was just good at proliferating these kinds of bodies while in some ways being a little bit fuzzy on what what spirits are exactly controlling these bodies. So let's get back here. At the same time the country began urbanizing and there was a similar revolution in scale in cities. In the nation's first census in 1790 the largest city in the country was New York City, Manhattan, with only 33,000 residents, a small town by today's standards. By 1890 Manhattan Island had 1.5 million residents. That's 100 years from 33,000 to 1.5 million residents. These large cities required extensive public services, waterworks, police, sanitation, transportation. These required large professionalized government workforce, and thus also a large number of managers. The kind of self government and democracy Tocqueville extolled in the small New England township became obsolete and impractical. Additionally, state and federal government had to grow too, in order to regulate and oversee these new large industrial concerns. Now all of these corporations and anybody who works in them knows that they work by all these different little sub bodies. These different sub bodies are sort of like organs, but these little sub bodies all have their own culture. In Jonathan Peugeot's terms all of their own angels. And anybody who works for one of these major corporations or at this point even someone who works for let's say a mega church or a church that is large enough not to just sort of be run by the pastor and a few volunteers understands that cultures develop in all of these tiny little sub bodies and you just get layer after layer and level after level, which in some ways continues to create and exacerbate the spiritual nature of these bodies. And that they have culture and they have spirit and everybody understands that every meeting you go to has its own spirit. Every committee you're a part of has its own spirit. Every board you're a part of has its own spirit. And one of the things that we are as human beings are incredibly adept at recognizing those spirits. But again, it's this level of abstraction that the simple usually can't work in or the autistic for that matter because it's all these subtle clues. One of the things that arose out of my conversation with Jonathan was, you know, I've been thinking about this, but it's so often in the midst of conversation that things sort of come to the fore was the need to help people develop skills and working with other people. Interpersonal relational skills. And, and I think in terms of the loneliness that we see, it's so often the lack of those skills. I was. It's the lack of those skills. These are some of the most vitally important skills that people really need. The managerial revolution. By the early 20th century, there had been a radical change in the nature of corporate and governmental control. James Burnham called it the managerial revolution in his 1942 book of the same name. Burnham was one of the things I things I love about Aaron Wren is he doesn't just read books that were written in the last two or three years. He goes back and he finds these older mid 20th century books because there's so much back there. And one of the things that I've appreciated about, let's say 10, 15, 20 years ago, having relationships with pastors that are a generation ahead of me, my father's generation, for example, they were reading entirely different books. And many of the ideas founded books that are being written today by no means, you know, aren't completely new in many respects. There are ideas that were there in past generations. They're sort of recycled and repristinated and then brought forward today. A former Trotskyite, who later became a major contributor to National Review. The thesis of his book was that while capitalism was indeed failing, socialism would not be the replacement system. Rather, the replacement would be managerialism or rule by the managers in capitalism or the bourgeois economy. Control is in the hand of the business owners, the business owners. You know, and even with some of the theories about deep state and all of that, that in many ways is sort of analogous to the this managerial revolution. The bourgeoisie are the ruling class. Burnham believed this economic system created ideologies and governance structures that fabled business owners, individualism, sacredness of private property, freedom of contract, the pursuit of happiness, the nation state, limited government or laissez faire economics and parliamentary sovereignty over a hereditary aristocracy. This was the system of classical liberalism we had in the 19th century with our robber barons and whatnot. Burnham took it as axiomatic that the bourgeois economy was doomed because of its recurring crises. But he observed that rather than a turn towards socialism, something else was happening. The early 20th century saw the emergence of the separation of ownership and control in major corporations. Rather than an all powerful owner like John D. Rockefeller or Andrew Carnegie running the company, professional managers ran it on behalf of the owners, who were often second or third generation heirs more interested in dividends from their trust fund than operating a family firm or else a widely dispersed set of stockholders. It's even in Batman. Bruce Wayne doesn't run the company. He has people to run the company and give him the tech and give him the money and do all of that, but he doesn't run the company. And that tension comes through in a number of the more recent Batman movies. As is still the case today. While the stockholders may have legally owned the firm, the management team, who themselves owned only a small amount of stock, controlled the corporation. In Burnham's view, this made them the real owners. Additionally, because large corporations and governments are so complex, they require specialized technical skills to administer. Only the managers possess the requisite skills, which makes them irreplaceable. Even were the owners to oust the management, they could do nothing but replace them with other managers. And part of why I'm really enjoying James Holland's World War II book is it's exactly this level of analysis that his books are engaging in. And I think that's a that's a vital contribution because many of the World War II history books that I've I've read, you know, you have the leaders and their decisions and sort of broad swaths of the culture. But James Holland gets down to the uniforms that they're wearing and the truck parts that they have. And why? Because if they had knocked out Russia, the Soviet Union, if Operation Barbarossa had been able to succeed, the history of the war would have been radically different. But it's also the case that Hitler, even though he conquered France and conquered Eastern Europe and had and Poland and all of what we would imagine to be, you know, many natural resources, basically he just sort of raped these countries, took all the resources, harvested them immediately. But what he didn't do was sort of allow them to continue to work under their managerial class and, you know, continue to produce in the way that Poland and France and Czechoslovakia and Austria had been producing before the war. That, of course, would have well, he didn't really have time for it. It's another thing that I think James Holland is is right on. But what it shows is you cannot simply ignore the managerial class now or you won't simply be able to receive the fruits of these corporate machines that the fruits of which draw all of our attention, all of the resources, all of the information, all of the stuff that you look at. If you look at a Google or an Apple or an Amazon or a Microsoft or a Tesla or a General Motors or any of these massive corporations that seem to be giants on the earth. An owner could only manage the company if he acquired the necessary skills and experience to do so. And even if an owner were technically skilled manager and CEO, as happened with some family controlled firms, this process of acquiring managerial skills would have given him the outlook and disposition of a manager. And if he somehow retained the mentality of an old school capitalist owner, he would still have to depend on an armada of other senior and middle managers to administer the company's sprawling operations. It would be impossible for even a new and determined CEO to turn a large bureaucratic corporation like General Motors into an instrument of the CEO's personal will. This focus on management in general versus senior executive ranks distinguishes Burnham from Edig B. Balzal or power elite theorists like C. Wright Mills. Now this has happened in the megachurches in the United States as well. And again, I don't use megachurches as a pejorative as they often are. I think James Wellman has really demonstrated the power and really the blessings of the megachurch. But it has fundamentally changed who pastors are, what they do, and that change will always have consequences. The impact of managerialism. Burnham's managers preferred an administrative, bureaucratic approach to directing corporations and governments on grounds of greater efficiency. While we associate bureaucracies with inefficiency today, the reality is that the economies of scale achieved by large corporations make it difficult or impossible for smaller firms to compete in many key fields. One of the pieces that James Holland notes is that before, in 1940, when Roosevelt is really trying to position America to become the arms dealer and arms provider of the world, it's the major corporations that they have to get to kick in. And then, because it's American society, a lot of smaller corporations are howling, why are we not let into this largesse of government money in what's going to be this massive ramp up and transformation of American consumer industrialism towards war machinery? Why not the smaller businesses? Well, the smaller businesses couldn't put out tanks and planes and ships like the big boys. And again, once you're at corporations of that size, it's the managers. And so FDR is looking around and he's picking captains of industry who are going to be able to look at all of these things pragmatically and get planes and ships and tanks and uniforms out the factory door as quickly as possible because, of course, that's the goal because Germany, their strategy, and to a degree Japan and Germany were sort of in the same boat. Toll doesn't emphasize this like James Holland, but for Japan and Germany to succeed, they needed a fast war and have a negotiated peace that would basically allow them to keep their holdings from their fast war. And what doomed them was that Churchill and Stalin and Roosevelt were not going to settle because they knew that time was on their side. And just like Japan couldn't swallow China, Germany couldn't swallow Russia. And eventually when the vast industrial might of the United States came online and started flowing through Britain, Germany and Japan just would not be able to succeed. World War II was the triumph of the manager. That's why over half of US workers are employed at an establishment with more than 500 employees and almost 30% work for companies with at least 10,000 employees. Some businesses employ hundreds of thousands of people and operate globally, a far cry from pre 1850 America. Now what's amazing is that you regularly hear, oh, the small American small business. Yeah, American family farm. Yeah. But in terms of numbers, big farming and big business is a pretty significant piece of the pie. As managers gain control both of corporations and the government through the civil service, they begin changing the ideologies and governance structure of society away from classical liberalism. Some of these changes have been a shift towards administrative governance, the rise of global governance, a symbiotic relationship between business and the state, the shift in the distribution of wealth towards managers in the therapeutic turn. One, the shift to administrative governance managers prefer administrative law and procedure to formal lawmaking and politics. Thus, Congress has become nearly inert and the workings of government are increasingly insulated from the voters and elected officials through a wide range of mechanisms. This is the creation of what conservatives complain about as the administrative state. The ideologies of the managerial class globalization, wokeness, gay rights, climate change, mitigation, etc. are treated as moral imperatives, not subject to ordinary political debate. Should an election go the wrong way or elected officials go against one of these ideologies, those actions are considered illegitimate. Now, part of what's key in this is the reduction of human beings into, well, large demographic terms or just into nothings, into widgets. CS Lewis writes about this in Equality. It's an alternative view of, let's say, what you find in the Apostle Paul, in the body of church. Each member of the body, they're not lined up like so many little widgets. They're not members of Costco. They're not members of REI or some corporation where it doesn't matter what their sexual desires are. None of those things matter. It's all whitewashed. What matters is that you pay your fee and you receive what you are contractually obligated to. That's the kind of relationship you have in terms of the hierarchy. And so it's I think Ren is right here that sort of what washes is let's make everyone the same. And because that's how we're going to treat everyone the same. The difficulty, of course, is that everyone is not the same and the differences between people are significant. Two, the rise of global governance. While they may not, at least not yet, support world government, managers support global governance because lots of small countries with unique legal and cultural regimes are inefficient and painful to deal with. Hence we see the rise of the rules-based international order of international governance and regimes ranging from the World Trade Organization to the international seabed authority. The European Union is probably the best example of this as it created a single economy out of many nominally independent states. One of Burnham's spectacular misses in his book was his prediction that Germany and Japan would win World War II, leading to a three block world. The Western Hemisphere under the United States, Europe under Germany and Japan over Asia. George Orwell used this basic setup as the basis of the world of 1984 with three large empires, Oceania, Eurasia and East Asia. However, it did come to pass that the world was largely divided into the US and Soviet blocs. Modern warfare requires mass mobilization and mass deployment of technology via the revolution in scale and speed. Small countries cannot maintain full sovereignty in this environment. As political scientist Darren Beattie has noted, only the United States, China and maybe Russia are fully sovereign nations today. Now, if your YouTube algorithm feed looks like mine, you may be seeing a lot of Peter Zeehan. Is that how you say his name? I'm not quite sure. He was just on trigonometry. And he's basically saying the same thing in a lot of these channels. And it sort of links up with we're coming to the end, perhaps, of the managerial world. But it's we're probably just in the beginning of the end. And again, in these liminal spaces, it's really hard to know what exactly will emerge because the need for managers doesn't really end. And we're certainly not going to go back to sort of the pre managerial world. It's very difficult to know exactly which world we're heading into. Is willing laser has done, et cetera, et cetera. But isn't it fair to say as well that the period you're describing since the 1950s. Oh, stop with the heartbeat, please. Let's let's just start at the beginning. Maybe I'll learn to pronounce his name then. Hey, Francis, do you need new investment ideas? Bring a coin to Swellenbollivar. Now, it's about three quid then control of your finance. I got the commercial. You had name nowadays because of the disruption it's caused, particularly to our countries, the loss of manufacturing jobs, all sorts of other things. The fact that suddenly in the middle of a pandemic, we realize we get a lot of our drug. Please. I mean, there's we've got enough manipulation already in these things. Please stop with the overt heartbeats and the booms and in a world and all of this theatrical stuff. From China and China may not be sending them quite as willingly as it has done, et cetera, et cetera. But isn't it fair to say as well that the period you're describing since the 1950s through to about 2015, we've all benefited massively from this process. So the end of globalization is not all good. Oh, the end of globalization is going to be a disaster for most of the world. Most of the world cannot feed and fuel itself without either direct imports or the inputs that's necessary to allow them to feed and fuel themselves from another continent. You break that down. You're talking about food shortages that are global in scale that affect billions of people. You're talking about an end to manufacturers trade in the way that we know it, which basically strangles tech in the cradle. And you're talking about a collapse of the ability of energy from one region to reach another region, which Europe is discovering right now means the lights go out. This these are not positive things. It doesn't mean that there won't be winners, just as in any system, there will be winners and losers. But we've had a lot of winning in the last 75 years that's about to go away. One of the things that living in the developing world like the Dominican Republic or Africa will teach you is that in many ways this this managerial class and this managerial society goes all the way down. Because when you live in undeveloped and what do we mean by that? Again, just it's interesting how the stuff scales all the way from Oliver Sacks and the simple all the way up to nations. These other nations are sort of often half hearted trying to live by the managerial ethos that was founded in the West, but never quite succeeding and often only half hearted. Usually in a place like Latin America, you've got older systems, the patronage system. You know, you have the Patron, the Caldillo, you have all of these other layers that are mixed in. And so then you get this you get what, of course, the managerial, the globalized managerial nations will will call corruption because, well, corruption of what? Corruption of this pure managerial, this pure managerial world where everything sort of works as it should. One of the ironies that I've seen in this little corner of the Internet is that on one hand, you'll have some who keep flying the flag of Capra of classical liberalism and say, oh, classical liberalism is the way things should be. That's going back, let's say, seventy five, eighty or a hundred years. And then you have others who are anti liberal. There are the true conservatives as they know, we should go back to we should go back five hundred years before the Protestant Reformation and the Enlightenment and the Industrial Revolution sort of destroy the old world. Well, I don't think there's going back. There's any going back to either of those worlds. And in fact, while moving forward into new worlds will possess some of what all of those other pieces have, it will also be in many ways a new thing. The the elements of the various different old worlds don't really disappear. They sort of get integrated into next into next iterations of what the world looks like and how the world works. Three, a symbiotic public private partnership approach. Rather than business being opposed to government, as in the classical liberal model in managerialism, business and government collaborate. Both business and the government are run by managers who think and operate in similar ways. Burnham believed this meant state control over the economy, as in the Soviet Union or Nazi Germany, both of which he classified as managerial. Now, James Holland's take on Hitler is very interesting. Basically, Hitler was this guy who thought himself brilliant and so very much wanted to sort of steer and direct the German army managerial establishment and not listen to it. And sometimes that served him like, yeah, we can take France. And they did much to everyone's surprise. At least half of the reason being France. But then, OK, well, we just have to take we just have to take the Soviet Union and the officers are like, this isn't going to work. We we've got we've got knowledge way down into the weeds. And we know that at some point, as as James Holland makes note of, at some point, the wheels are going to literally come off this mechanized assault because there's too many different kinds of cars. There's too many different kinds of trucks. We don't have enough parts. We don't have enough fuel. The whole reason why we want to capture the oil fields that and the food supply that Ukraine and Russia have is the reason why we are not going to be able to actually simply knock them out. But in the US, it would be in the form of a public-private partnership model with a de facto fusion between the state and private enterprise. Well, perhaps it never quite fused to the level Burnham anticipated. Undoubtedly, the public and private sectors are tightly interlinked and mutually interdependent today in a way that they were not in the 19th century. We see this, for example, in the health care system. Other countries have a government health service. We have a nominally private health service, but the government pays for about half of all health care expenses and micro regulates every aspect of the industry. Businesses do have conflicts with the government of the US today, but the relationship is fundamentally more symbiotic than adversarial, at least for big managerial firms. Four, redistribution of rewards to the managers. Burnham defined the ruling class as the class that A, controlled the means of production, and B, received a disproportionate share of society's rewards. We certainly see today that the reward structure of society has shifted away from workers towards managers. Undoubtedly, the plutocratic billionaire class has been enormously enriched, but the wealth flowing to the professional managerial class has also been substantial. This group, the top 20 percent, or the 9.9 percent, as the Atlantic called them, has done very well for itself. Conversely, production or line workers have struggled at best. We see this, too, in the response to COVID. White collar workers, that is, managers, were heavily insulated from its effects by work from home policies and the like. Small businesses, which are bourgeois-type enterprises, were often forced to close, and many working-class people, such as delivery drivers, were forced to risk their own health to service the managerial class. Now, it's very interesting, too, again, going back to the individual perspective with someone like Oliver Sacks. You see this hierarchy where the simpler, the absolute bottom, they cannot be managerial because they cannot sort of get up to this vision of abstraction and this little movement through this paradigm to say, well, what is? I'm going to model what is, and then I'm going to – this is basically management by objective. When I came back to North America from the Dominican Republic, the hot thing in pasturing was apply business methodologies to the church and achieve the objective. And then we had sort of abstracted and conceptualized what the objective was in churches. And these were fully devoted followers of Jesus Christ. And even if you look at Willow Creek today and a lot of the work that they've done. So after sort of the heyday of the seeker movement, Willow Creek had their reveal study. And what they did was in business practices, they tried to sort of look at you – well, what is the Christian life? Well, you sort of abstract and you try and get it down into measurable things. It's sort of psychology. Again, if you read Molly Worthen's Disciples of Reason, this is deep into neo-evangelicalism. And you just try to break down what the Christian life is into certain psychological, measurable aspects of what the Christian life is. And so then once you know, once you have the objective of exactly what the Christian life is, then you can create an institution. And you have all of the businesses and all of the business leaders or team leaders and managers. And you have your programs and your programs are supposed to bring this kind of change into people's lives. And you just break this all down. And then, you know, somehow you can change people and change the world. Five, the therapeutic turn. In the post-war era, managerialism took a turn Burnham did not anticipate towards a therapeutic approach to society. That is, the managers came to see society and the belief structures of the people as problematic and in need of therapy and reconstruction. Professor Paul... And you can see this move in churches as basically a very similar thing. We are going to fix human beings by our programming. And now, obviously, in a secret church, you're going to use Jesus mechanics to change people into fully devoted followers of Jesus Christ. And in that way, you can change the world from the bottom up. Well, Gottfried says that the original in the Xerox machine for this was the post-war cultural reconstruction of Germany and Japan. This was then undertaken domestically to... Now, I should comment back to Ian Toll's book. What happened in...I was quite moved by that section of Ian Toll's book about the transformation of Japan. Maybe I can pull some of that up. Days after the ceremony on the Missouri, heavily armored advance patrols of the 1st Cavalry Division and 11th Corps entered Tokyo, securing the main roads and bridges in preparation for the arrival of major occupation forces on September 8th. By the end of September 1945, the U.S. 8th Army had a total of 232,379 troops in central and northern Japan. Now, those of you who are old enough to remember the 2003 war in Iraq and how that went in terms of the occupation, Japan is a lot bigger thing, but the occupation of Japan went very differently than the occupation of post-Sodom Iraq. The U.S. 6th Army had commenced airlifting troops into the Osaka, Kyoto, Kobe area, the remainder of southern Honshu, and the island of Shikoku. The 6th Army Headquarters Force landed at Wakayama at the mouth of Osaka Bay and set up shop in Kyoto two days later. Two Marine Divisions, the 2nd and the 5th, landed at Sasebo in Nagasaki and Kyushu and moved overland to occupy ports and cities throughout the big southern island. It's important to remember, too, that this happens after the United States nukes two Japanese cities, something that might, you know, provoke strong feelings against the occupying power. At the high tide of the occupation, more than 700,000 Allied troops would be stationed in Japan. In many outlying areas, there was little more than a token occupation force, which could have been overrun quickly if recalcitrant extremists in the Japanese military had chosen to fight. A report produced by General MacArthur's headquarters called the occupation a great, though calculated, military gamble. The Americans wagered that the Emperor's will and authority would cast a psychological spell over the Japanese people. It's important to remember that there were hardliners in the American government that said, well, we simply must get rid of the Emperor. And there were others that said, no, we should keep the Emperor, because if the Emperor basically surrenders and gives his blessing to the occupation, then the occupation will go better. And especially the rank and file of the Army and Navy, which were not yet disarmed. The gamble paid off in spectacular fashion. Across the length and breadth of the populous country, not a single shot was fired at Allied occupation troops. The shift from war to peace was jarring in its suddenness and totality. Three or four weeks earlier, the Japanese people had been preparing to meet the invaders with bamboo spears and kitchen knives. Now they bowed and grinned and welcomed the newcomers as honored guests. U.S. Army Sergeant Richard Leonard went ashore at Wakayama on September 11th. His platoon made an assault landing from Higgins boats. As they strode up the beach, weapons at the ready, unarmed Japanese civilians welcomed them with warm smiles, and vendors offered trinkets and souvenirs for sale. The sailor James Fahey of the cruiser Montpellier went ashore at nearby Kobe the following day and explored the area on foot with a few shipmates. The Japanese stared at them in curiosity, but without fear or hostility. A group of women standing in line for sweet potatoes were amused by the freakish height to their eyes of the American sailors. We laughed along with them, Fahey wrote in his diary. Everyone had a good time. They were very friendly. Separately, both the occupation forces and the Japanese had been warned against fraternizing with one another. But the prohibition seems to have been widely ignored on both sides. A young Japanese man invited Fahey and another sailor to visit his home and meet his family. Fahey described the visit. They had a very nice place. I could see that they came from a good class of people. In one room there was a large fancy table and a radio in the corner. They also had a picture of Emperor Hirohito hanging on the wall. To them he is their god. Before we left, we shook hands and waved goodbye. As a veteran of many ferocious naval battles and kamikaze attacks, Fahey was surprised to find that ordinary Japanese were honest and hardworking. No different from the people in any other part of the world. Sergeant Leonard agreed. In a letter to his fiance, he observed that the average Jap doesn't give a damn about ruling the world any more than you or I do. He's just an ordinary joker who went to war because he was told to, and he did the job the way he was told. You really get the sense of the machine there and the difference between the machine and the little guy. During the war, Leonard had hated the Japanese, hated them all. But now he found the feeling dissolving like a half-remembered dream. I'm pretty skeptical by nature, but who am I supposed to hate? Can I hate the boy who ran alongside my train window for 50 yards to pay me for a pack of cigarettes that I had sold him just before the train left the station? Can I hate the old man who took us to his home for dinner and made us accept his family heirlooms for souvenirs? Can I hate the kids that run up and throw their arms around me in the street? Or a Jap truck driver who went miles out of his way to drive me home one night? Or the little girl about four who ran up to me and gave me her one and only doll for a present? My answer is that I can't. For the Japanese, likewise, the discovery that most Americans were instinctively decent and courteous came as a great relief. Fear had gripped the communities scheduled to receive the first advance units of occupation troops. Civilians still under the influence of wartime propaganda, or perhaps with some inkling of how Japanese forces had behaved overseas, had assumed they would suffer brutality, pillage, massacres, and rape. Many women and girls fled to remote mountain villages. Others stayed off the streets, hiding themselves, or disguised themselves as boys, or smeared coal on their faces in the hope of making themselves ugly. Some even carried a sharp blade, intending to take their own lives by severing a vital artery. As American soldiers first arrived in Miyagi north of Tokyo, a group of evacuated school children hid in their dormitory and peeked through a hole they had poked in a paper screen. They did not expect to see human beings. It occurred to us, they must have horns, one recalled. We had images of glaring demons with horns sprouting from their heads. We were disappointed, of course. No horns at all. Some of the boys went out and returned in triumph with chocolate bars. Small acts of kindness were noted by the Japanese. On streetcars, Americans often gave up their seats to pregnant women or the elderly, a custom that had not been common in Japan. It was noted that American officers and enlisted men were on relatively easy terms, and that officers and NCOs did not strike their subordinates. American GIs were instinctively generous with children, who soon learned that begging from the newcomers was a profitable enterprise. They picked up snippets of English. Gibumi candy and Gibumi chocolate. A Japanese woman told a US SBS surveyor. During rain, American vehicles try not to splash mud on the pedestrians, and I appreciate this. A man pulling a wagon on a narrow street in Tokyo was blocked by an American truck coming in the opposite direction. They stopped the truck and lifted my small wagon to the other side of their truck, the man recounted. Smiling, they said goodbye to me and left. Tears came to my eyes. Yes, they are very much human, aren't they? It was funny, but I started to pull my wagon with strength that I did not experience before. The Japanese had assumed, as a matter of course, that they would be required to feed the occupying army. In foreign territories occupied by the Japanese, it had been a standard practice to requisition food from conquered populations. But since farm production had been badly disrupted by the war and the occupiers could be expected to eat heartily, mass starvation seemed inevitable. After the surrender, officials of the Agricultural Ministry and the Economics Board warned that domestic food production would fall far short of minimum requirements for the coming winter. But on August 18th, MacArthur's headquarters announced that the occupation forces would ship in their own provisions. Indeed, the occupiers would often provide food relief to local civilians, much of it in unofficial or ad hoc gestures of charity. At Yokosuka Naval Base, shortly after the surrender, the Americans provided 20 truckloads of flour, rolled oats, canned goods, and rice for local civilians. And the next day, another 11 trucks arrived with medical supplies, blankets, tea, and other goods. At an army barracks south of Tokyo, small hungry faces pressed against the wire enclosure. Flouting regulations, the soldiers fed the children. Word spread and more appeared, until queues of women and children formed at the gate each morning, and soldiers passed out canned sea rations from a gunny sack while their commanding officer looked the other way. In one Tokyo neighborhood, the Americans passed out cans of Sterno, but the function and purpose of the portable cooking canisters did not penetrate the language barrier. Recipients opened the cans and tried to eat the fuel. Spitting it out in disgust, they exclaimed that the Americans had tried to poison them. The theory gained credence when a neighbor who read a little English noted that the word poison actually appeared on the can. The confusion was finally cleared up by a Japanese American woman. How odd they were to see me strike a match to it, she said. Fuel was scarce, and when the people understood the use of the Sterno, they were grateful to have it. The occupation was not uniformly friendly and law-abiding. The old hatreds died hard. Many of the soldiers and marines in the occupation forces were veterans of savage battles on Pacific Islands. Some found the apparent kindliness of their recent enemies to be bizarre and unnerving, and refused to trust it. The emaciated condition of liberated POWs aroused their fury. Crimes were committed by American and allied troops in Japan, including robbery, rape, and murder. But the statistics for such crimes are elusive, as the occupying authorities did not allow the newspapers to report them, and did not keep detailed records of their internal military judicial processes. The subject has received little attention in histories of the occupation, and there is little to be found in American archives. In hopes of limiting incidents of sexual violence, the Japanese government had established a Recreation Amusement Association, and recruited thousands of lower-class Japanese women to work as prostitutes in brothels near Yokosuka and other bases. For a time, U.S. authorities tolerated these establishments, and even allowed military doctors to examine the women, as had been done in Hawaii and other locations. Many Japanese were scandalized and offended by the sight of Japanese women in the company of occupation troops. The Pan Pan Girls, as they were called, were young Japanese women who wore bright red lipstick, nylon stockings, and high-heeled shoes, and were often seen riding with American servicemen on jeeps and trucks. During the hard-scrabble early years of the occupation, they obviously ate and lived better than many of their fellow citizens. According to General Eichelberger, there was only one case of concerted resistance to his Eighth Army troops. In Yamata, a community between Yokohama and Tokyo, a vigilante group banded together to keep allied troops out of Yamata during their off-duty periods. Two Americans were abducted and beaten. Eichelberger ordered a show of force, and armored vehicles in battle array cruised the streets of Yamata for several hours. The perpetrators were arrested and imprisoned. But such incidents were seen as the exception rather than the rule, by both the occupiers and the Japanese. By and large, the Japanese embraced defeat and made the most of it. The existing agencies of Japanese government continued to function under the supervision of MacArthur's headquarters. Japanese military forces accepted the authority of the occupiers, generally with no outward manifestations of hostility or resentment. Military officers cooperated willingly in demobilizing their own forces and destroying remaining warplanes, ordnance, and weaponry. Professional relations were cordial. Captain Tamaichi Hada recalled that when he surrendered a suicide speedboat base in Kyushu to a US Navy captain on September 23rd, the American captain astonished me by behaving more like a friend than a conqueror. Exceptions were rare. That same day in nearby Nagasaki Harbor, the captain of a Japanese coastal defense vessel acted in an insolent and provocative manner to an American naval delegation. When the incident was reported, the offender was arrested and dismissed from the Japanese Navy, confirming that the authorities were determined to enforce cooperation. The early stages of the occupation proceeded so smoothly that General MacArthur announced, less than a month after the Missouri ceremony, that the total number of Allied troops in Japan would be reduced to 200,000 by July 1946. The surprise and relief felt by the Japanese, upon learning that their former enemies were largely decent and honorable, was accompanied by another sensation. With a sudden rush, ordinary Japanese understood how thoroughly deceived they had been by their own leaders. The propaganda was still ringing in their ears. They could hardly forget it. But it all seemed demented in retrospect. The Potsdam Declaration had insisted, The wartime military leadership was held in widespread contempt. These attitudes had been prevalent even before the surrender, though never uttered publicly for fear of repression. Now they came to the surface. A potent, instinctive, deeply felt hatred of war, and for those who had plunged Japan into it. I abhor military men, said Shigeo Hatanaka in a typical opinion. I consider them a separate race of humanity because of education. Military men put on ceremonial uniforms for special occasions. Theirs is childish, simple-minded thinking. As Japanese soldiers were repatriated from overseas, many ordinary civilians learned for the first time of the extent of Japanese war crimes. One young girl overheard soldiers speaking callously of the atrocities they had committed in China, and laughing about the number of women they had raped. She was horrified at the thought that she had supported the war. Now I couldn't bear it. As Gwen Tarasaki observed, looking now at themselves more carefully than they had ever done in their history, the Japanese perceived not only the fanaticism of the militarists, but also their own great ignorance in having trusted them. The people's disillusionment penetrated to the marrow. Looking back on the war they had just lost, Japanese leaders, That's Twilight of the Gods, Ian W. Toll, construct America for a reconstruction of Germany and Japan. This was then undertaken domestically to reconstruct American society in areas like race and sexuality. Bourgeois economy norms around thrift and delayed gratification were replaced with a consumerist society more suited to a managerial aid. Bourgeois economy norms like sexual continence and the nuclear family were subverted. The therapeutic regime, which operates through schools, courts, the media, etc., had the added benefit, from the managerial perspective, of undermining potential sources of resistance by the non-managerial elements of society. A country of atomized individuals without families, deeply in debt with little savings, but still able to consume and glued to their phones scrolling through social media, is not a likely source of robust political dissent. None of these changes in ideology and governance necessarily resulted from a conspiracy or calculated self-interest. The managers are true believers, just as the people who believed in classical liberalism were. It's just that, like most of us, the managers tend to think the policies that benefit them are in fact the best policies. And this is where you sort of see the spiritual manifestation, the managers are a manifestation of a particular spirit. The Limits and Weaknesses of Managerialism The growth of pure managerialism was restrained for many decades by a number of forces. There were still powerful elements of the old bourgeois capitalism still remaining. These ranged from rich families like the DuPonts to independent oil and gas billionaires in Texas. There was still a powerful WASP establishment, whose social cohesion allowed them to tame managerialism for a time. The necessities of the Cold War also provided a certain level of discipline. The end of the Cold War was a watershed moment, allowing managerialism to run rampant for the past 30 years, and arguably triggering the shift to the neutral and then negative worlds religiously as well. Although managerialism has extended its tentacles into every aspect of our society today, including the church, there's still a vast base of resistance to it. There are a large number of small and medium-sized privately held businesses, car dealers, construction firms, farms, manufacturing firms, that are still fundamentally bourgeois in their organization and outlook. No surprise that the managerial elites have painted a target on them. Close to half of the country, the core of Trump voting base for example, has stubbornly resisted at least some of the elements of therapeutic reconstruction. Managerialism in the United States also has some key weaknesses. As with the bourgeois economy before it, there are now recurring crises in our managerial economy. These have mostly been addressed through vast money printing and the like, but is there a limit to how much money can be printed? Also, managerialism was legitimated by delivering the goods, in Marcuse's terms. It provided for rising incomes and high level of consumption. But real incomes for most Americans have stagnated or declined. Similarly, efficiency and competence are justifications for managerialism. This perhaps reached its peak with the Apollo project that landed a man on the moon. Today our system is beset by poor management, as we see with everything ranging from the problems at Boeing, to the increasing unreliability of the electric grid, to rising opioid deaths and homelessness. This is where you get into some of the meaning crisis, because implicit in managerialism is again the idea that what's needed is management of the machine. And we are fundamentally machines, and so we ought to be managed for, but for what? For pleasure, for to have our desires met. And I think this view of the machine turned inward makes us believe that there's no there there. That fundamentally we are simply the product of all of the external stimuli. And what we've discovered is that, well, you can give people enough money to live. And in a sense we're all the way back to Dostoevsky in Notes from the Underground, that no, this is more complex than that. To some extent the ideologies of managerialism are now undermining it, as competence and merit are under siege. Managerialism is based on administrative efficiency, and the resistance of the non-managerial elements throws sand in the gears. For example, the vaccine rollout was a fundamentally an administrative matter, but large numbers of people simply refused to comply. This ultimately collapsed even the attempts to impose vaccine through mandates. Our managerial system is not set up to handle widespread non-compliance, fraud, or gaming the system. Now it's interesting looking at China and their zero COVID policy. I don't know, I can't evaluate the kinds of videos that I see about China, but the banking crisis and all of this. I mean, if anything is set up as a single party state managerial task, it seems to be China with their social credit score. And there are a lot of people sort of like Burnham, who he talks about here, who was thinking, well, the Nazis and the Japanese are going to triumph. A lot of people, all the Chinese are going to triumph with their social credit score. Human beings make the same reason why human beings make terrible slaves. Human beings make terrible subjects of machines. For all the reasons Dostoevsky pointed out. The latest popular surge, as with the previous one in the early 1990s, shows widespread discontent with managerialism among the workers. While these people can, from time to time, rally behind a charismatic leader like Trump to achieve political victory, without managerial skills they cannot govern. In the managerial epistratus itself. And you know, that's such an interesting thing with Trump because I watched The Apprentice. I watched a couple of seasons of it. I was little, you know, I had, you know, for years, Donald Trump was always in the local New York news where I grew up. And you just look at Donald Trump and he had a degree of managerialism with him. He had his managerial guys. He had the old guy and the younger woman. And they were the ones who were supposed to be managing these apprentices, yada, yada, yada. But the whole point was it was Trump working from his gut. You're fired. And, you know, one of the one of the realities of the Trump administration was that did he have any capacity to govern? Did he have any capacity to actually wield the machine? E.G. the government bureaucracy is largely insulated from political control and will be a locus of the resistance to any non managerial officeholder. So long as the managerial elite remain united, and they are unusually united at this time, attempts to discipline the managerial system will struggle to achieve fruit. But the failures of managerialism and the existence of a large and very unhappy population provides a potential base of resistance waiting to be activated by the right kind of leadership. Lessons from managerialism. An understanding that we live in a managerial system provides several key lessons for us today. One, small is not beautiful. Many of you know I'm a fan of Ivan Illich and the other great incisive critics of industrialization and gigantism. I enjoyed reading Patrick Sale's Human Scale. I probably made many public statements extolling the virtues of small scaled communities and urban development. But after the revolution in scale, power resides in large institutions, whether that be the government, corporations, NGOs. And this, of course, now we're getting into Aaron's view of and this is pretty consistent with with pretty much everything he writes. Et cetera. Yes, the occasional upstart like Google can be a disruptive innovator only to turn into a large organization itself. But small scale organizations cannot wield the power necessary to confront the power of managerial institutions. Again, even small countries are not fully sovereigns. So fantasies about micro states or seasteading in the light are just that the idea many conservatives have of rebuilding the country from bottom up through small scale community and institutions will not work. Also, while I support revival of antitrust enforcement and the potential deep consolidation or regulation of some of these industries, the reality is that we need large corporations. Big companies are necessary to achieve economies of scale, to operate on a global basis and to compete geostrategically. We need American tech giants in order to compete with China's rising state backed tech sector. We need big pools of financial capital to fund the investments we need to make. Two, big government is here to stay in an era of big corporations, big cities and a very large country. We are inevitably going to have big government. The idea of rolling back the clock to some materially smaller government or laissez faire type system is a fantasy. Also, the nature of the revolution in scale leads to the logic of the international block system. It's not clear that America could realistically walk away from its empire. And make no mistake, we are an empire to become just another country, even if we wanted to. Three, the administrative state is a misleading term. Conservatives love to complain about the administrative state, or the way that government agencies and bureaucrats make rules, laws really, and control the economy and our lives. That's true, but by singling out the managers in the government, they ignore the private sector managers who think and act in very similar ways. Private sector managerialism is part of our regime. Also, singling out an administrative state implies it could conceivably be eliminated, which it can't. We are going to have big government, see point two, and it needs to be administered. The term administrative state is designed specifically to retain the legacy conservative view that big business are the good guys and governments are the bad guys. Reality is much more complex. Four, executives matter, but perhaps not as much as we think. I happen to think Burnham underrates the continued power of plutocrats, presidents, etc. Today, we see that tech executives like Mark Zuckerberg or Jeff Bezos can wield enormous power over their organizations. But look how limited even they are. Zuckerberg controls a majority of Facebook's voting rights, but even he is hemmed in by managerial elements, by his own employees, by the media, by the government. Look at how a relentless series of attacks by the major press, employee leaks orchestrated in careful concert with connected PR firms, congressional hearings, etc. have put him on the defensive. Zuckerberg, like Twitter's Jack Dorsey before him, had a vision of free speech. Yet Facebook is extremely censorious today. This is the triumph of the managers. As another example, Elon Musk recently took a nearly 10% stake in Twitter. Revolver News took a look at what might happen if he bought the company and tried to restore free speech to the platform. It will be interesting to watch this one. Conservatives love to focus on electing a new president, a new governor, etc. But a change at the top only accomplishes so much. The president has to make about 4,000 political appointments. But how many competent and qualified people do would-be reformers have in their rolodex to put into even the limited number of political positions? That's not to say that pursuing executive change is not worthwhile in many cases. But don't think that fundamentally changing a company or a government is as simple as replacing the CEO. Only a large organization can go toe-to-toe with other large organizations. The labor movement, for example, understood this. But becoming a large organization turns it into a managerial organization. This neuters it as a force of resistance. Again, the labor movement is a good example. Labor unions today are just another node in the managerial network, and often don't represent the preferences or interests of their members, but rather those of the managerial elite. Similarly, religious institutions have become managerial. Historian Christopher Schlect made the intriguing argument that managerialism even paved the way for women's ordination. Once churches and denominations became dominated by administrative functional roles, restricting office to men only made less intuitive sense. The elite-based split in evangelicalism can also be seen as an artifact of managerialism. The elites are part of the managerial class and thus share its class outlook and interests. I want to conclude by departing from managerialism in a key respect. I don't think power elites are as relevant as Burnham's theory might suggest. The billionaire class in America wields immense power. Bill Gates has been able to effect a large-scale transformation of primary and secondary education in America through his promotion of common core, social and emotional learning, etc. However, these elites, other than a handful of dissidents like Peter Thiel, tend to follow the managerial line. Their own positions are not really secure. Should Jeff Bezos be caught on tape making a racist statement, he might well be finished, for example. But billionaire money, particularly deca-billionaire money, matters a lot. Also, presidents still retain vast formal power that can be used in ways that matter, even when the bureaucracy is opposed. While managerialism is not an all-powerful explanatory lens that explains every aspect of our society, it's an important concept that is seldom known. Thinking seriously about the implications of the revolution in scale and speed driven by the Industrial Revolution is necessary to make full sense of what we see around us. I'll put the links in the show notes below. I really like that article because what I thought it illuminated is the complexity that is beneath the system and the machine that includes the simple, but not just the simple, others in terms of their capacity to participate in this vision of move to abstraction, management of the abstractions and then down to the applications. Those who have either they have limited capacity for it or they're simply not inclined to it. You can have that from temperament, personality, culture, all sorts of reasons. Naturally, again, in a managerial culture, there will be created a hierarchy that that tends to do this. And the managerial cultural itself will, in a sense, create its own culture and express certain spiritual powers. And all of the all of the manifestations of these different bodies will, in fact, have an impact. Now, could it be that we're with the we're seeing the decline of some of this managerialism? It's it's hard to know. And in any case, these things are of such great power that they'll reasonably outlive any of us who are listening to this video. So I thought Wren's I thought Wren's piece was really good and how it tied into the conversation around the simple, the conversation about the abstraction and just understanding the way the world works in terms of the zeitgeist and these principalities and powers and the bodies and the way this sort of works. And then obviously, for those who wish to critique the way the world works, this is an important thing to keep in mind and to watch as well as the world continues to turn. So I hope you found this interesting. It's you know, it's thinky talky. It's a little esoteric, but I think it brings us along the way to understanding why things are as they are. So leave a comment. Let me know what you think.