https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=ow472YCCWp0

 Hi, this is Paul. I don't have time to give the Jordan Peterson, Brett Weinstein piece on Brett's channel, the full treatment right now, but I'm going to read some of the tweets that I had this morning which sort of give a sense of where I'm going with this and then this is going to be the beginning of an extended version I will probably post tomorrow where I go into some of the clips and some of those things. I can't listen to Brett Weinstein speak to Jordan Peterson without hearing Brett as Gnostic. This I get from Sam and I'll play that in the longer version. It's all genes until we transcend our code and I have the secret path to transcend the evil demiurge behind the genetic spelling bee. Brett Weinstein says to Jordan Peterson, we can no longer afford to be unaware of the evil but dim genocidal machinations of the agenda of the genes because now we have the capacity to destroy not just a small community but all of humanity. This is what Brett says again and again and this is very much at the heart of his meaningful mission. But he doesn't notice is that the astounding good fortune that we at the same time have evolved the enlightening to unveil the evil genetic genocidal impersonal unconscious conspiracy to avoid our destruction. That's one hell of a fortuitous timing scenario in this cosmic zero-day attack, especially because no one planned it and there's no script it was even following. Now let's pull together to thwart the zero-day attack just from the foundations of the earth, metaphorically speaking. Look, I just happen to have our salvation plan right here in my back pocket. Follow me. And then I put in a GIF of Arnold as the Terminator. Come with me if you want to live. Come with me if you want to live. Now of course, Arnold in the Terminator is sort of a good symbolic illustration of what we're talking about here because Arnold in the second Terminator movie was a Terminator captured by his future self which was rewired and then sent back in time to save the young boy who would lead the revolt. So I think it's a perfect symbolic entry into this strange way that Brett sees salvation in as Sam pointed out a very gnostic way. So I'm just going to make this quick little video now. I'm going to post it to my channel now. It's just sort of a little teaser, a little short one, and tomorrow morning I'll post the video that has all of the big stuff in it.