https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=3Gk_mcqvf38

 Paul, this is rough draft for Sunday. I didn't know I was going to do one this week, but I am. I, it's Saturday and I finished another draft of my sermon. I usually wake up in the morning and work on this stuff first, first thing when my brain is freshest. And I've usually been mulling over it for an hour or two and then devote something to PowerPoint and then put it down. And today I'll run through it and tomorrow morning I'll get up early and I'll do the same thing and I'll preach it tomorrow at Living Stone. So that's the, that's the plan. Why do bad things happen to good people? It's a very common question and it is a very common complaint. But what is less common are exploring the assumptions beneath the question. Am I responsible for my goodness? Or it's usually the assumption that I am responsible for my goodness, that this puts God in my debt and he owes me whatever I want. That's pretty much what we think and the, often, the often, not always, but often the assumptions beneath the question. A number of years ago I used to watch this program, My Name is Earl, and Earl said, do good things, good things happen, do bad things, bad things happen. He was working karma the whole time and he was trying to make his life better by by doing good things to people. And it was a, it was a little comedy show about how when he would do good things he would find karma would finally reward him. And now there's some truth to this because obviously doing bad things often doesn't produce good results. And we know this. This is part of wisdom. This is part of sewing and reaping. This is, there's obviously truth to it. But when you get into the question of karma, especially as the, as the, as the religious idea that comes out of, that comes out of the East, karma in this life, karma in the next life. I remember hearing a story about a Dutch soccer coach who, who converted to, who was interested in some, some Hindu religions commenting that children born with, children born with birth defects were suffering the sins of their previous lifetime. And even the Dutch who are pretty tolerant didn't, didn't take that so well. Now I'm going to ask you a question, which is an old preacher trick. And these are, these are, these are kind of standard things that float around between preachers and they get trotted out again and again. And they get trotted out because they work and they work emotionally on people. So here's an old preacher trick. This is what I call the universalist revelation test. Imagine an angel comes to you and says, guess what? The universalists were right and you're wrong. There's no judgment day where God rewards good people for what they did on earth and punishes the wicked. Here's the question. How would you feel about that? Would you feel annoyed? Would you feel robbed? Would you feel that God is somehow doing you an injustice because perhaps you have tried very hard to be a good person and there are many times where you could have been petty and vindictive and gotten back at people, or are you annoyed because you spent all those Sundays in church when you could have been going to Starbucks or watching football or on and on and on and on and on. And what this old preacher's trick is designed to reveal is the degree to which we imagine that our righteousness is something that we have done and not something that basically we imagine that God will reward us on the basis of the righteous things we've done. Now this gets into a very long, very deep, very old conversation slash debate about our agency, God's agency, to the degree to which we have free will or real agency. All of these things, all these conversations have been going on for thousands of years and so I'm not going to pretend to try to wade into them all, but the goal of the old preacher's trick is basically to suss out in our hearts the degree to which I feel I have placed God in my debt and he owes me. Now there's a very interesting story in the Old Testament with King Hezekiah and we talked about Hezekiah last week. In those days Hezekiah became ill and was at the point of death. The prophet Isaiah, son of Amos, went to him and said, This is what the Lord says, put your house in order because you are going to die, you will not recover. Hezekiah turned his face to the wall and prayed to the Lord, Remember Lord how I have walked before you faithfully and with wholehearted devotion and have done what is good in your eyes and Hezekiah wept bitterly. And here we might imagine that Hezekiah is now basically saying, Look, I have done all this work. I have worked hard to destroy the high places. I have concentrated the worship of God into the temple of God. I have been terrified by the king of Assyria. All these things I have suffered and now for what? You're going to let me die? Now it's important to also recognize that the rather what we might perceive as the secularist perspective of a lot of the Old Testament. They didn't have a very vivid image of reward in an afterlife. There was perhaps some but mostly it was dark Hades-like and so here Hezekiah is thinking, I've done all this for God and now he's going to take my life away now when I'm, he's clearly not very old, when I still have many good years left in me and he's upset. Before Isaiah left the middle court, the word of the Lord came to him, Go back and tell Hezekiah, the ruler of my people, This is what the Lord, the God of your father David, says, I have heard your prayer and seen your tears. I will heal you. On the third day from now you will go up to the temple of the Lord. I will add 15 years to your life and I will deliver you and this city from the hand of the king of Assyria. I will defend this city for my sake and for the sake of my servant David. Now questions multiply, okay? Was God not paying attention before? Did God change his mind or was he negligent or distracted? Did God heal Hezekiah on the basis of his obedience or goodness? You might notice in the text that in fact where he says, I heard your prayers and I see your tears and I will heal you, it doesn't say, oh Hezekiah you've been so good I'm going to reward you. It doesn't say that. In fact the whole business about saving Jerusalem seems to be based on God's promises to David and for God's own sake. God doesn't seem to be weighing into Hezekiah's pity party and imagining that Hezekiah has done so good that God somehow owes Hezekiah a longer life. Now this the implied narrative behind this is just such faithful stuff in terms of atheist debates because this the questions just multiply and people, you know, given our particular context, now this doesn't seem true in the ancient world. In the ancient world people didn't have any of these questions or at least not near the degree that many have them now. Does God involve himself in our affairs? Does God pick and choose winners? Does God answer prayers? Now a lot of you listening to this especially on the rough draft on the rough draft series will say this is just laughable stuff and I understand your complaint but then the story goes on. Then Isaiah said prepare the poultice of figs. They did so and applied it to the boil and he recovered. Well what does this mean? You know, why the figs? Is this a naturalist narrative with a convenient supernaturalist cover exploiting it for religious ends? Is Isaiah the doubter? Does Isaiah think well maybe not? Did God tell Isaiah to do this? The text doesn't tell us. We should keep in mind though that Jesus once used mud, spittle, and mud to heal the eyes of a blind man and we might ask well why didn't Jesus just say say so? Jesus had done greater miracles with just a word than the healing the blind people so what's with the sacramentalism? What's with the physicality? What's with the embodiment? What's with all these issues? Is this a test or obedience or is it to make it more believable for Hezekiah? Does he doubt the prophecy? His father Ahaz doubted and refused Isaiah's prophecy. Well there might be something to this. It certainly doesn't seem to be Hezekiah's faith because Hezekiah needs more proof that he's going to recover. So what kind of a guy is this Hezekiah? Isaiah said this is the Lord's sign to you that the Lord will do what he has promised. What? Hezekiah doesn't believe him? Shall the shadow go forward 10 steps or shall it go back 10 steps? It is a simple thing for the shadow to go forward 10 steps said Hezekiah. Rather have it go back 10 steps. Then the prophet Isaiah called on the Lord and the Lord made the shadow go back 10 steps and it has it gone down on the stairway of Ahaz. Now here again there's a lot of skeptics are going to cry foul and say what did God change the rotation of the earth because King Hezekiah prayed? Well then so now we're going to go back and we're going to look for look at tree rings and we're going to see if we can find other records of eclipses or anything else like this even though you could actually duplicate something like this with an artificial light but they didn't have artificial light so on and on and round and rounded and here we go. But I want to take the conversation in a different direction and I want to ask the question how good was Hezekiah really? This is kind of a question skeptics would enjoy because we enjoy being cynical about people's goodness. He had different circumstances than his evil father. Hezekiah rode a wave of nationalism when Assyria and Egypt were weak and again and again you see this in terms of the fortunes of Israel and Judah between Egypt and the Mesopotamian powers. Whenever those Mesopotamian, whenever those great powers, those great empires were strong, basically Israel and Judah are a minor people along the roadway between the great drama between Israel and or between Egypt and Mesopotamia and the relative incapacity of the Assyrians and their struggle with the Babylonians and the Medes and all the other rival kingdoms in Egypt that afforded Judah's fortune. So you know Hezekiah, he sees an opportunity. Was he really motivated by true religious devotion to the Lord or did he just see an opportunity and knew that his people were chafing under the under the Assyrian deities that Hezekiah's father had brought down and maybe Hezekiah was just an opportunist and wasn't really a good guy. His father was an opportunist, seems likely that maybe Hezekiah was an opportunist too. But then you have the God agency dilemma and that wades in again because did God engineer the geopolitical climate and was Hezekiah motivated to do into doing the right thing by seeing an obvious opportunity? Did God set up Hezekiah for goodness? Can we in fact take credit for the goodness we have? Now let's say you might imagine or you might be cynical or skeptical about this that that I'm a good person, that I'm a minister because my father was a minister and because my grandfather was a minister and because my parents were good people, my father wasn't abusive and my mother wasn't abusive. They were wonderful, terrific parents and so of course I believe in the Dutch Calvinism of my parents and my ancestors and of course this has worked for me. Isn't this basically the devil's charge in the book of Job? Of course this has all worked for me and well where I'm not a wealthy man or now even I have a little degree of celebrity on my little YouTube channel, how about that? But hasn't this all worked quite well for me? Is my goodness just a fabrication of mine to make my life better? Do I hide all my evil temptations and wicked thoughts and do I cover up my sin to enhance my reputation? Of course I do. This is what we do. So to what degree can my goodness be attributed to me? Again this is Satan's question to God in the book of Job and that's what the entire book of Job is about. So can Hezekiah claim responsibility for his own goodness or did God set him up to be good? Well then we have the terrifying question of did God set up Ahaz, Hezekiah's evil father, to be bad? Was Hezekiah's goodness a gift from God to him? Now I noticed some some conversations about C.S. Lewis. C.S. Lewis deals with this in his in his great book, Mere Christianity actually. How good was Hezekiah? Well the story following this one in the years added to Hezekiah's life, he welcomes a Babylonian emissary and he brags about his wealth to them. He must have accumulated something after his unsuccessful attempt to pay tribute to Assyria to get them to leave. That was hardly an act of great faith and Isaiah scolds him for doing this because the Babylonians were returned and destroyed Jerusalem and then Hezekiah is upset by hearing this and and then great relief to hear that oh this won't happen while you're alive. It'll happen while your sons are alive and I can imagine his son saying well dad great great job we're really glad you're terribly relieved that the misfortune won't happen while you're alive and now we get to suffer it. How good was Hezekiah? The book of Kings says he's a great man, he's a great king, he was he was devoted to the Lord but there's lots of other things that the book of kings is telling us. That's that's our that's our source for this on this information, our source for our judgment about his goodness and his badness and again you know if you start multiplying other criteria for exploring his goodness did Hezekiah hold slaves? Was Hezekiah a polygamist? Was Hezekiah a patriarch? You know on and on and on there are near infinite numbers of dimensions to which we can apply moral judgment upon Hezekiah. Was he good? And of course all of this moral judgment comes from us. So where does Hezekiah's goodness come from? Was it a product of his free will? Was it a product of his circumstance? He didn't seem to have a righteous father, maybe his mother was a good woman, we don't know. But where does our biased moral goodness we see in ourselves come from? Well we like to imagine it comes from us. Well what is us? What is this this thing within us that chooses? These are really difficult and complicated questions. Then we get into Hezekiah's illness. Was God setting this whole thing up to teach him a lesson? We don't know. Can God change his mind? Can we answer a question like that given the fact that all we can do is project our experience of changing our time-based, mono-focused consciousness minds upon what we imagine experience looks like to a being that transcends time and space as we know it? We're in absolutely no position to evaluate any of this. All we can do is project up from what we have and given what would be rational to imagine the kind of being capable of creating the universe like this is compared to us, we can't answer any of these questions. Do bad things happen to good people? Yes. That one's easy. They do. Why? I don't know that we can answer that. I don't know that I can give an answer. Let me rephrase that. I don't know that I can give an answer that will satisfy anyone. Never mind even lay my own questions to rest. But do bad things happen to good people? Yes. You don't need to be a Christian to believe this. It's just obvious. But doesn't the apostle Paul say all things must work together for our good? Well, maybe we should read the passage itself. In the same way, the Spirit helps us with our weakness. We do not know what we ought to pray for, but the Spirit himself intercedes for us through wordless groans. And he who searches our hearts knows the mind of the Spirit because the Spirit intercedes for God's people in accordance with the will of God. So in other words, God is answering prayers according to his will. And we know that in all things God works for the good of those who love him. He seems to play favorites. For those who have been called according to his purpose. But are those who love him those who have been called according to his purpose? Is this love something we generate for God or is this love something God enables in us? Can we answer this question? For those God foreknew he also predestined to be conformed to the image of his son, that we might be firstborn among many brothers and sisters. And those he predestined he also called, and those he called he also justified, and those he justified he also glorified. Now this gets into, oh now some of you out there, oh that's that darn Calvinist again, and of course he would read a passage like this and and and and and and and. What theology is is a very long conversation that we have with generations of people over questions that we may or may not be capable of answering. Answers that we may or may not like in terms of whether they settle well with us. But what Paul basically tries to give us here is hope, not hope in our capacity to engineer the world to our liking, nor hope in our capacity to engineer the world according to whatever criteria of good you're bringing to it. But basically what God, what Paul here basically says is that as in the words of Freddy, Freddy wants me to promote the Freddy and Paul show more in my other videos. If you're watching my channel you've seen the Freddy and Paul show. In the words of Freddy, God is large and in charge and that's the image here. And in my opinion that's really about the, that's that's a very rational position. Is the good God is pursuing what we in any given moment would welcome? That's a hard question. God seems here to be arranging the world and our lives according to his plan. And he's not really so much asking us when when we're you know reach about the age of 12 or 13 or 18 or 25 or 30. He doesn't come down with a little menu and say would you like this or would you like that or would you like that? There's this idea called moralistic therapeutic deism that Christian Smith after his extensive interviewing of young people in America said whether they're they're Baptist or Presbyterian or Reformed or Orthodox or Catholic or Muslim or Jewish or or spiritual but not religion. The majority of American teens think that life is about having good experiences and God's job is to facilitate this for us. That's a terribly bad philosophy. It's a it's one that is forgivable for teenagers. If you're an adult and you're still living it seems pretty small. God seems to be arranging this world and our lives according to his plan and often not according to ours. So how does that make you feel? I wouldn't be surprised if it doesn't make you feel real good but then again that's a lot of life. But then again Jesus' disciples saw zero good in the arrest, trial, beating and crucifixion of their hero and in fact Jesus' rivals looked upon this as good and Jesus' crucifixion was vindication of Jesus' wrong-headedness of the fact that in terms of their culture war the one thing that rivals and enemies could agree on was that the world was better without Jesus so they killed him and for his disciples this was an absolute catastrophe and what's really remarkable is that what happens in the wake of this and I think this is a terrific argument for the historicity of the resurrection is that the community that follows Jesus sees this event as Good Friday as a glorious turnaround and right there in that moment in that event the Christian community says in the greatest calamities that we see and experience God can work the greatest reversals that is at the center of the Christian faith. Does it now look good to us? Well it looks different but we're not the one suffering the panic and anxiety of Jesus and his disciples in that moment. Can you see the complexity in making judgments from our perspective? We always see from a perspective, we always judge from a place that we stand, we can't help this, we don't have any much, we can't do any, we don't have a monarchical vision of the world that is pure and true because it always is seen through our own eyes and from our own biased perspective and within the stream of human history and we simply cannot escape it. Now what do we do with this? A lot of this has to do actually more with managing our own emotions and judgments. Management of our emotional judgments just keeps coming down to trust in my opinion. Can we believe God can use unwelcome things, difficult things, even evil things for good? That's really a pastoral question. That's really a question that we have to ask to our emotional matrices. These are really the central questions of our lives. Does God risk and allow suffering in pursuit of the good? I'd say yes. Now actually when I look at a lot of the atheist conversations, I think a lot of these conversations come down to trust. I think a lot of these conversations come down to perspective. We act and we pretend like we're making up answers for the universe, but the truth is we're telling stories to ourselves that make us feel better and the deep reason, listen to the Sam Harris Bart Ehrman conversation, the deep reason Bart Ehrman gave up the faith was not all of the different ways that he could poke holes in the Christian story or in the Christian Bible. It was evil and he couldn't trust. Talk to a therapist about how many people they see sitting in a chair across the table from them and their biggest issue is they cannot trust. You might look at this world and say well what is trustworthy in this world? People are a mess. People are cruel. It's true, but this world is also filled with glory and there are also remarkable stories and I would rather believe that is it me choosing or did my parents set me up? I can't answer that question. I would rather believe that there is a God and that this God is good and that all things work out for those who love him or are called according to his purpose and I cannot answer all of the questions that all of these things entail and if I imagined I could, I think quite frankly that would be hubris because even within the Christian community we've been debating and working through these questions and in many ways I think even the atheist conversations are just extensions of these theological questions. These questions are happening in the post-Christendom West which is more impacted by Christianity than very, very many would like to admit. This has everything to do with our capacity to trust God. Does this mean that we are wrong or untrusting to pray for the things that we want? I say no. People ask me this and I say you pray for whatever you want. If you want to get wealthy, pray for wealth. Be careful. God might give you a yes and you might discover that a lot of what you want and a lot of what you desire and a lot of what you count as good might not have the outcomes or the consequences you'd imagine. And even just growing older can teach you this. But no, pray freely. Ask God for what you want. Make big audacious claims. Ask him repeatedly. Knock down his door. Drive him crazy with your requests. You might say, well pastor that doesn't sound very good but this is Jesus' teaching. Here's the thing. Don't trust in your capacity. Trust in his goodness. That's a better bet than whatever thin thing that you think your goodness is based on. Can you even take responsibility for it? I don't know. It is a good thing that our prayers do not control God because we are not good enough nor wise enough to have that kind of prayer. Would you let your two-year-old govern your house? Some people who do let their toddlers govern their homes, some people who do let their toddlers govern their homes, we see them to be unwise and we see the misery that they live within. Well, if you imagine any kind of narrative like the Christian narrative, God would not be so dumb as to cede control of this planet completely to us. And in fact, the degree to which he does, we sometimes question his responsibility because we see what we do with things. But this is Jesus' advice. This is after he gave them the Lord's prayer. Jesus said to them, suppose you have a friend and you go to him at midnight and say, friend, lend me three loaves of bread. A friend of mine on a journey has come to me and I have no food to offer him. And suppose the one inside the door, in that context people baked bread together because of big enterprise and so you might run out but your neighbor would have some. And suppose one inside the door says, don't bother me, the door is already locked and my children and I are in bed. I can't get up and give you anything. I tell you, even though he will not get up and give you the bread because of friendship, yet because of your shameless audacity, he will surely get up and give you as much as you need. What is Jesus saying? Jesus is using an illustration. He's saying, we know how we are. How should you pray? Whether or not you believe, people will write to me and they'll say, pastor, I'm kind of interested in this Christianity and so on and so forth. What should I do? And I will almost always tell them, you should start praying. I don't know how to pray. I said, you don't need to learn how to pray. Just start asking. You know, Verizon Lisa can figure out how to talk to the universe because she wants a new smartphone. You can figure out how to talk to God. It won't take much. Open your Bible and read Luke 11 and God gives instructions. Go ahead and try that prayer. Try anything. Just be audaciously demanding. Go to God and drive him crazy. Luke 18 has a similar parable. Go ahead. You're not going to outlast him. You're not strong enough. You know, it's like, it's like, I love the, I, one of the pieces, now I'm rambling, but who cares? It's rough draft for Sunday and I'm on a quasi vacation. Not really, but anyway, one of my favorite passages in 12 rules for life is Jordan Peterson, Mastering the Toddler. And it's just such a great story because it's something I see all the time. People live in fear of their toddler. Say, Hey, look, you need to be a parent. Your toddler needs to be a toddler. You need to be a parent to the toddler because your toddler needs a parent. Are we going to outlast God? Are we going to waste God? Now we might drive him crazy. We might annoy him. We have no idea what his emotional world is like, but go ahead. Jesus says, go ahead, be demanding, be audacious, pray for huge, scary, audacious things. And don't just pray once, pray every day. Wear him out. I invite you. Jesus does too. And he goes on to say this. So I say to you, ask and it will be given to you. Seek and you will find. Knock and the door will be open to you for everyone who receives. Everyone who asks receives and the one who seeks finds and the one who knocks the door will be open. Maybe be a little careful what you ask for. Here I'm having this sermon where I'm dealing with choice and events and all of this. And I bump the mute button on my microphone and I lose the last three minutes of the sermon. So I have to tape it over even when I was happy with it. It's God's sense of humor. So I ask you, ask and it will be given to you. Seek and you will find. Knock and the door will be open to you for everyone who asks receives and the one who seeks finds and the one who knocks the door will be open. Which of you, fathers, if your son asks for a fish will give him a snake instead? If he asks for an egg will give him a scorpion. If you then, though you are evil, know how to give good gifts to your children, how much more will your father in heaven give the Holy Spirit to those who ask him? Now people write me and they say, okay pastor, I've listened to Jordan Peterson and I'm kind of curious about Christianity. Is there a book I should read? I can give you a lot of books. Is there something, is there a church I could go to? And I say, yeah look for a church. Churches are hard. It's hard to find a good church. It's hard to get into a good church. That takes real determination. But what I'll often say to them is I'll say, why don't you try praying? And then I'll say something like, well I don't know. And I understand that because well you don't necessarily believe there's a God so why try and talk to him? That just feels weird. But you know, Verizon Lisa can ask the universe for a cell phone and say, well I don't know how to do this. Well read Luke 11 and Jesus gives instructions on prayer and he even gives you a prayer to start out with. You don't have to pray that prayer every time but there's one to start. You can try praying the Psalms. Boy that'll twist your noodle. You can do a lot of different things. Yeah you can talk to God and my advice is just start relating to him. And notice now some of you who know your Bible pretty well will compare Luke and Matthew here and say, well why does Luke say how much more will your father in heaven give the Holy Spirit to those who ask him? Now this is where it gets funny because on one hand you might say, well I just wanted a better job or I just wanted my relationship to work or I just wanted to be happier or I didn't want to be sick or I didn't want to have cancer or I didn't want my my child to suffer or I didn't want I didn't want all these things. I don't want the Holy Spirit. And I would say, well that's a function of not really knowing the better thing to ask for. Well should I ask for the Holy Spirit? Well yeah. Well why? Seek first the kingdom of God and all these things will be added to you. And in the words of Freddy, hallelujah hallelujah hallelujah. Freddy likes it when I promote the Freddy and Paul show. How much more will the father give his Holy Spirit to those who ask? See maybe our problem is that we don't really know what to ask for. Maybe the problem is we don't really ask for good things. Maybe the problem is we don't know anything. But but be audacious. Ask. Knock down the door. Ask and it will just go ahead and do it. And I would invite you I think about Tolkien and Bilbo that you know Bilbo doesn't want to leave his hobbit hole and the and the dwarves are a terribly inconvenient crew and and somehow Bilbo for some reason decides he's going to go on an adventure. What a terribly un-hobbit like thing to do. But he does. And well now we're into Jordan Peterson land again. This isn't this the hero's journey? Don't we travel into the underworld? Don't we travel into the unknown? Don't we travel outside of our little hobbit holes and all the little comforts that we desperately want? Is that the extent of your dreams for your life that you will have a comfortable hobbit hole? Well I would encourage you if you are in any way interested or curious about God start to ask. Start to pray. Start to question. Start to even if you're full of doubts start to say okay God what about you? What about this? What about any of this? Go ahead and try. How much more will your father in heaven give the Holy Spirit to those who ask him?