https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=Qiwk-I4NhCo

 Hi, this is Paul and this is Rough Draft for Sunday where I run through the current version of my Sunday sermon and I just did this and it didn't record and I'm pressed for time and I have to do it again. So I might rush it a little bit but it'll all be there Sunday. Two tables of the law. If you look at Ten Commandments monuments often you'll see four in one and six on the other and that's because of the Protestant Reformation that well they were expecting the tables of the law to reflect Jesus understanding of the law which was common in his day. Love the Lord your God with all your heart, soul, mind and strength. That's the first tablet of the law and the second love your neighbor as yourself. All the law and the prophets hang on these two commandments. Now your first neighbor and your most godlike neighbor are your parents and so because the commandments really come in a rather deliberate order, no other gods before me, don't reduce me to representations from creation, don't lift up my name upon a lie, keep a weekly witness to the goal of creation, your Sabbath rest. Prioritize your love of neighbor to the most godlike neighbor, your father and your mother. Now why are our parents godlike? Well they created us. They brought us into being. They produced us physically. They code us culturally. They bestow upon us the first draft of God, authority, normativity, our picture of the world. If anything, modern psychology has validated this assumption with respect to them. The Heideberg catechism's take on this very much falls in line. What is God's will for us in the fifth commandment? That I honor, love and be loyal to my father and my mother and all those in authority over me. That I submit myself with proper discipline to all their good teaching and discipline. Now this might sound a little authoritarian, but very quickly it acknowledges that, well, it's not all fun and games and parents are not all good and not all good parents are all good either. And also that I be patient with their failings because they will have failings. For through them, God chooses to rule over us and God chose to form us. Now it's very interesting because some people will balk at that last statement, but people on their way out the door of the Christian church will very quickly embrace karma. And I might add that this sowing and reaping that you'll find pretty commonly in the Bible attributing to God things that happen, and this again if you watch my videos gets into God number one and God number two, people will throw off Christianity and very quickly start to talk about karma. And well this is sort of a karmic idea of sowing and reaping with respect to, well, these are the parents God gave you. And that begins to make us wonder, do we feel comfortable with that? Do we like that? It might not have been optimal for all of us. Now the commandment itself according to many interpreters is actually pretty straightforward. John Walton in his cultural backgrounds commentary makes this note. This verse has been subjected to many interpretations. Most ancient readers would have understood this as an admonition to care for one's elderly parents. There's no social security, there's no retirement home. Throughout traditional cultures all over the world it was simply assumed that your retirement plan was to have children and that when you're too old and infirm to work they will take you into their home and they will feed you. In fact many laws similar to this and other ancient codes stipulated just how much food one would owe their parents. This was quite simply the way the ancient world works. Even in the book of Acts the food distribution going out to widows, well that was the community taking care of their seniors. Now the apostle Paul makes a note that this is the first commandment that's given with a promise and the promise is really quite reasonable. Honor your father and mother so that you may live long in the land the Lord your God is giving you. What does that mean? Well if you grow up watching your parents care for their parents and you might very well decide well that's what you should do when you grow up. Remember our parents are our most God-like parents in that they we learn what is right from them. And so if you take care of your parents and your children watch you take care of your parents odds are they'll take care of you. If you treat your parents like dirt well they might treat you like dirt. And so the Heideberg catechism says be patient with them in their failings and hopefully your children will be patient with them in with you and your failings and this long living a lot to do with well getting to eat when you're old because again in most of human history there's no social security there's no retirement there's none of that it's just your kids. Now traditional cultures around the world work in this way. Your parents are your first neighbors your family is your first community caring for aged parents by the family is a marker of one's moral quality. My particular part of California as many people from Asia who come from much more traditional cultures than many of us Anglos and guess what they place a high mark on this and there's frankly horrified sometimes at the way some of us from Europe or of European descent care for our parents. They would never allow a stranger to care for your parents but we do that. But these family ties these family bonds these things go deep we have a lot of sayings about it. Blood is thicker than water family is the most important you'll hear again and again on Arrested Development. But how well does that importance really play out and haven't we in the last couple of hundred years be ready to get rid of it. In fact in many ways kingdoms and empires have mitigated against family. Kingdoms and empires performed important tasks such as waging wars building roads constructing palaces and for these purposes kings taxed their people. But they were pretty reticent about intervening in things down in the weeds. Traditional agricultural economies had few surpluses with which to feed crowds of government officials police social workers teachers and doctors. Consequently most rulers did not develop mass welfare systems education systems or health care systems. They left such matters to family. All this changed dramatically you've all Harari says over the last two two centuries the Industrial Revolution gave the market immense new powers provided the state with new means of communication and transportation and placed at the government's disposal an army of clerks teachers policemen and social workers. At the first at first the market and the state discovered their path blocked by traditional families and communities like churches. With little love for their outside intervention Pam parents and community elders were reluctant to let the younger generation be indoctrinated by nationalist educational systems conscripted into armies or turned into ruthless urban proletariat. Over time however states and markets use their power to weaken the traditional bonds of family and community. The state sent its policemen to stop family vendettas and intervene in domestic disputes and replace them with court decisions family doesn't decide the court decides no Ricky you can't spank Lucy. The lawyer sent his hawkers to drive out to wipe out longstanding local traditions and replace them with ever changing commercial fashions or laws. This was not enough in order to really break the power of family and community they needed the help of a fifth column. The state and market approached people with an offer they could not refuse become individuals they said marry whomever you desire without asking permission from your parents or your church. Take up whatever job suits you even if the community elders frown or the church elders frown live however you wish even if you cannot make it to every week to a family dinner or to your church service. You are no longer dependent on your family or your community. We the state and the market will take care of you instead. We will provide food shelter education health welfare and employment and we will provide pensions and insurance and protection and most of us said whoo glad to be liberated from all of those traditional norms. Romantic literature often represents the individual as someone caught in a struggle against the state and the market. Nothing could be further from the truth. The state and the market are the mother and father of the individual and the individual can survive only thanks to them. The market provides us work insurance and pension. We want if we want to study a profession the government provides schools. If we want to open a business the bank provides money. If we want to build a house a construction company builds it and the bank gives us a mortgage. In some cases subsidized or insured by the state. If violence flares up the police protect us. If we are sick for a few days our national health insurance takes care of us or at least our employee health insurance. If we are deliberate if we are debilitated for months national social services steps in. If we need around the clock assistance we can go to the market and hire a nurse usually some stranger from another side of the world with traditional values who takes care of us with the kind of devotion that we no longer expect from our children because we didn't raise them that way. If we have the means we can spend our golden years at a senior citizens home. The tax authorities treat us as individuals do not expect us to pay the neighbors taxes. The courts too see us as individuals and never punishes us for the crimes of our cousin. Surely Jesus is against this. Jesus seems awfully anti-family in some of these quotations. Large crowds traveling with Jesus and turning to them he said if anyone comes to me and does not hate father and mother wife and children brother and sister yes even their own life such a person cannot be my disciple. Wow that doesn't sound like honor your father and mother. Another disciple said to him Lord let me go and bury my father. Now the point wasn't that his father was dead and needed to be buried the point was his father was old and needed to be cared for and the man said wait until my father passes then I'll be your disciple and Jesus says let the dead bury their own dead. Well that sounds harsh. On one occasion an expert of the law asked him about you know what must I do to inherit eternal life and Jesus says well follow the commandments how do you read them love the Lord your God with all your heart soul mind and strength and your neighbors yourself exactly what we started out saying here. Jesus says do this and you will live but he says ah who is my neighbor seeking to justify himself. Jesus told him a story of a man going from Jerusalem to Jericho and he was attacked by robbers and he was stripped and beaten and left for dead. A priest from his own tribe saw him went to the other side. A Levi from his own his own countrymen this is his brother goes to the other side and passes by and then a Samaritan a religious and political rival saw the man took pity on him went to him bandaged his wounds poured oil and wine on him put him on his own donkey brought him to an inn to take care of him and the next day gave the innkeeper two denarius and said look after him and when I return I'll pay you the nursing home guy whatever it is and so then he asked the inquirer who was this man's neighbor well the one who had mercy on him and Jesus says go and do likewise. Wait a minute you're so harsh on the dude who wants to take care of his father and now you're applauding this man who's taking care of a total stranger which side are you on Jesus. Jesus does this fairly often you have heard it said in the sermon on the commandment ten commandments Jesus is often twiddling with he's living in a traditional society love honor your elders care for them in old age certainly this is good failure to do so will have disastrous consequences for you the ten commandments says but now you've got empires and nation states intermediary you know getting involved in the family and well liberating people to be individuals and to do as they please no longer dependent upon the broad and granular expectations of family and Jesus seems in agreement. Ivan Illich was a former Roman Catholic priest who looked around and said you know all this institutionalization of education and elder care and medicine is a betrayal of the Christian message we should be caring for people directly not paying some low-skilled wage earner from the other end of the world to do it because when we care for someone directly doing the dirty work it changes us. Henry Nauman was a very successful Roman Catholic priest and also an author wrote many books that Protestants loved was a lecturer at Harvard much in demand as a as a lecturer and a speaker was also a closeted gay man which came out after his death. He leaves this very lucrative career that many pastors would aspire to have and very few actually have and he spent the remaining years of his life caring for disabled adults. Why would he do that? He did it happily and he said this is the most meaningful work of my life. Isn't that strange? Jesus for having told this man let the dead bury his own dead when Jesus himself is dying on the cross looks down at his mother and doesn't say oh mom I don't have any attachment to you. Jesus saw his mother there and the disciple whom he loved standing nearby and he said to her woman here is your son and to the disciple here is your mother and from that time this disciple took her into his home. Didn't say go find her a nursing home. So how to understand this Jesus and this commandment. Jesus seems to break a certain categorical essentialism politically right now this is actually at the center of a lot of our cultural disputes where a wash in demands for categorical essentialisms demands that people status be raised or lowered by race sex gender identity ethnic hereditary we're going to clump people into groups and those categories are going to govern. So it seems Jesus well a lot of individualism comes because of Jesus. Jesus in a sense sort of breaks the ancient familial essentialism or a tribal essentialism and well you can read about this in Tom Holland's book Dominion cover of which shows up in many of my videos and sermons. Jesus disrupts that with his discipleship demands and says care for the stranger. I thought I only had to care for my family that's the point of the good samaritan parable isn't it. Jesus also disrupts it with radical humanism that has become so common to people they no longer recognize it as Christian. So then how should we apply this commandment when it seems Jesus had been muddying it and I think actually the Heideberg catechism gets things quite right that I should love honor and be loyal to my father and mother. They're my first neighbors and they're my most godlike neighbors in some way maybe not godly but at least godlike. They're my first draft they taught me the world they produced me all of those things that I submit myself with pride and to all those in authority over me that I learned from my parents to respect authority and hopefully my parents were worthy of respect and when parents are not worthy of respect. Oh these things get muddled with down the line as modern psychology obviously knows that I submit myself with to them with proper discipline to all their good teaching and discipline and that I also be patient with them in their failings because they might be godlike but they're not necessarily godly for through them God chooses to rule us and to form us and to make us and that's true. This isn't somehow a nod to authoritarianism but an understanding that each of us functions better in this world if we understand and can submit to authority. But our lives are messy and they're a muddle. John Van Donk has been on my channel a number of times he visits living stones from time to time and when I first had him on my channel I had him tell his story. Now many duchies in the US, Dutch immigrants will brag about their parents or grandparents or ancestors hiding Jews because they want to be on the right side of history and many did so nobly and rightly against Nazi aggression. John Van Donk doesn't have this story his father drove truck for the Nazis something that would be shameful. His father and his mother didn't stay together and John wasn't fathered like he had hoped for from his father and for John that became a source of bitterness and it's something he carried with him and it impacted his image of God the Father and it impacted his image of himself and he had to live with that for a number of years until another Roman Catholic priest with some funny ideas kind of helped John see something about fathering and see something about his father in heaven that although there were lapses in John's biological father, John's father in heaven had managed to father him through many other men through his life men who would step in and be a father to him and teach him fathering and teach him fatherhood. In fact one little job that John has right now is he works for an organization that's called Pro Fathers that encourages us to pay attention to the vital need that fathers are in our lives. Many of us recognize the role that mothers play but fathers are sometimes in our current categorical essentialism a little bit shoved to the side and so what this did for John Van Dunk is it taught him about maybe my earthly father wasn't what I needed but my father in heaven brought in much fathering to me and I should learn from that. Our parents are God-like and they ought to be honored. They might not be perfectly godly and in some cases they're dramatically not godly and we have to deal with that and we should deal with that with patience and generosity not only because of them but also not to wound ourselves. Jesus in fact does come to liberate and that's the theme of this entire series when we started the beginning of Exodus and are going through the sermon on are going through the Ten Commandments because we need to be liberated from a lot and the commandments are for our liberation because sometimes the only way to be liberated from certain aspects of ourselves is to recognize other authorities. Jesus comes to liberate from categorical essentialisms that bind us generationally, liberates us from escapist statisms. Well I'm just free and I'm not bound to anyone because the state will take care of one or state escapism. Well let the state do it, not me. And from limitations of our own stories, the failures of our fathers and mothers and yet learning how to honor even parents who were not trustworthy and even if they were generally trustworthy and they bestowed upon us a good first draft of many areas of our lives, let me give them the honor that they in fact deserve. And all of this comes with the ability to love not just our family, not just those in our tribe, not just like us, but to love the stranger as well. And all of this opens us up to stories that are painted on a much broader canvas where our heavenly father fathers through our earthly fathers and mothers and fathers through the limitations bound by this time frame even over into the age to come.