https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=Z0Y3XYVA7dg

 Hi, this is Paul. I just watched the video with Jonathan Peugeot and Sevilla King and I'm so excited I gotta talk about it. I don't have time to make a PowerPoint You got all these other things I gotta do this week, but I gotta talk about this video It was so good. It was so good all the way through. I cannot talk about it So here we go Now a number of you have made comments about sound level sound level is perpetual problem with my process So I'm gonna try out some new things to maybe do better part of the difficulty I have with this is that when I'm playing multiple videos multiple videos on YouTube have different sound levels and because I don't do any post-production I Can't really equalize them so I'm gonna try to pay a little more attention to that because I am sensitive to that because some of you only listen to Audio and if I'm going on ranting and raving loud and then the person sounds like this It's really frustrating for the listener and I get that but I've tried to do better with this video So it's only one video I'm talking about and again, I'd love to comment on the whole video, but I don't have so much time I think this first section hits on a whole bunch of things that I've been thinking about and again this sort of this convergence of Conversations, I really feel like in the last few weeks things have been hitting a new level. So here we go It's so much of your of your content but a lot Ironically a lot of what you and Paul, you know there are things that you and Paul discussed the other day that actually rose to the surface as as points that I could connect with piercing probably as well as anything and Now I haven't I haven't really followed People always call me I Haven't really followed Her channel that closely I've started dabbling in the book and I've liked so some of the book But when she taught her her description of metaphysics of quality now, so Villa and I have had a previous conversation I'll put the link to that in here You know, I'm starting to get my mind wrapped around that I'd remember vervekey making a comment in one of the comments about Neoplatonism and and I really get that so this was really helpful this video for helping me understand where Persigs metaphysics of quality is coming from and how that relates into the conversation And and I think her description of it here and where this goes and actually later in the video that I probably won't get to Unless I decide to blow out my time frame this afternoon and talk for two hours, but let's hear it Let me I want to just you know I had gone through the meta like an introduction to metaphysics of quality in that second video I did so I don't want to go into it too much Because it's fair but but the metaphysics of quality is a is a philosophy that reintroduces value as As the element, you know like like in subject to object and scientific and materialistic There's no room for value, you know in the in the actual rational framework and and that's something that's hugely important I was just re listening to this is a this is a video that I have real Problems with because all the the Pang burn videos their volume is so low that I have to really adjust my settings to use those videos but I was re listening to Jordan Peterson and Matt de la hunty and Now after everything I've learned over the last year and a half I've listened to that video and it's like I'm I'm I'm watching you know in the matrix when they're looking at the green and we're all sitting there say go you can't see anything and then and they're seeing everything going on because I felt like that when I was looking at that video because it was like These Peterson was laying out these arguments that I probably only half understood a year ago And now I'm listening to him. I'm like, yep. Yep. Yep. Yep until hunty talks. It's like nope Nope, and just point right here about there's no value Oh shoot. Where's my cell phone stand? I got a default to the water bottle. This is not Taylor's water bottle This is my water bottle and you see me drinking from it always The value and this is where actually when Jordan Peterson was talking to was talking to Sam Harris when they're talking about Elton John's Water cup or Elvis's the guitar. That's what they were getting at is where is the value of Elton John's Water cupper or Elvis's guitar or guitar that was signed by Elvis. Where is that value? Where is that value and and you might say well that value is in the subjective Yeah, and then Sam Harris wanted to say the intersubjective But the point that's the villa is making here is the point that piercing is making is that in terms of the materialistic System there is no value and this is part of the reason why You know when I heard Dan Dennett on unbelievable he snuck in there's matter and information. It's like whoa Dude, that's not just a little aside here That's that's huge. It's like if this if this water bottle if you go to the moon and you find this water bottle Um, yeah information is really important because it's like I recognize this water bottle I you can buy this at Costco. They're a really good deal and what's it doing on the moon because Yeah, Costco wasn't around in the 70s and this water bottle wasn't around in the 70s with this brand and Information is a really big deal. And if you're just going to sneak that into your worldview, it's like, uh, where does that information? come from Because again what we're dealing with a lot is this the separation of the world between Matter and mind and this is what a lot of the Owen Barfield stuff is going to get at the inside and the outside and by the way, unbelievable had a Conversation with with Mark Vernon and Malcolm Gait on Owen Barfield and CS Lewis And I thought I was going to do that video next but you know weekends i'm really busy and Monday yesterday was my 31st anniversary with my wife. So I didn't make any videos because we just had fun and So today it's like back in the office But i've got all this stuff I got to do and the whole week is like jam-packed But I gotta make a video because this video was so good. So it even bumped up The mark vernon malcolm gait video and so this business about there being no value in the materialistic conception That's exactly right and kind of the clutch That has been that that the materialists make is to say well Subjects introduce that value but what that does is that means that the value has no ontology There's no fixedness to the value the value only comes from people because they have to drink water And so I have this water bottle. So that's the only place the value comes from it's like What if what if value itself and that's what i'm slowly understanding by this Metaphysics of quality, you know, I I start watching these channels I mean first I couldn't pronounce john verveckis name before that. I couldn't pronounce jonathan Peugeot's name now I can't remember civilla king's name and you got all these issues going on in vanderkley's dull leaky brain But bit by bit I learn and it's like yeah, you know what? That's a huge problem and you you would have thought someone would notice it. Well, someone did notice it but We as human beings have a huge problem in learning stuff. It takes a while for us to learn stuff. So, okay back to the time What you say is no there is because it's ensconced in this greater value and I think and and that's and and that's what you have in a sense So a big part of where this goes is what we mean by the word god and what we mean by the the value divine okay, because god is not a name god is a god is a A being let's use that word because it's god is not a thing because we usually talk about Created things as things god is a being in three persons in the christian theology and so on and so forth and so obviously value is not a problem for a classical theistic position because value is coming from someplace just like mind is coming from someplace just like And value is really important because one of the things that I I've referenced in a recent video about Ravikhi is that when I listen to to john talk and listen just about any conversation now i'm so attuned to Tell us, you know, what is the end? What is the goal? What are we reaching for and and so often I listen to these conversations say we have a sense of what we want But we can't articulate it. We can't just plain say it We not only can't we fully know what we're reaching for we can't even rough draft it We can maybe do a little ab testing looks this sort of like sam harris's idea of of good and better. Okay, so so Starvation in the desert is not good a water having a water bottle in the desert is better good But and that's give us a little bit of a b testing down below within this within this frame But this is where you get into what we don't have any stars to navigate by partly because in the secular world We're in where you have these buffered selves and and we are skeptical about knowing that which is beyond What we have encapsulated with our five senses and then five senses plus reason let's say That would be the world view of matt. Dillahunty or sam harris or a materialist. All right now when you start saying information well, baby, you're you're just a little step away from revelation that's Your your your your it's a it's a sign that your your house is about ready to fall. Anyway It's very similar to what pierce would say he would say that the metaphysical quality is value creating the universe Mm-hmm and uh, and and and when you listen to her talk about value so often You can almost just swap in god and a little bit later. We're going to talk about why we're so Bashful about talking about god and why we so much would rather talk about value, but let's keep going um, and I want to just briefly mention one Thing about his philosophy, I think that I think makes it um makes it a little bit more apparent so so when um When fedris fedris is the character and it's in the art of motorcycle maintenance and what he is is he he's the um original piercet before pierce had Electroshock therapy for what was diagnosed as schizophrenia and and pierce is really brilliant, you know, so so he's often this Just by the way, because i'm adhd and I can't stop but put in a tangent here I've been I rewatched the movie about david foster wallace and i've been reading that book about him Very interesting about brilliance and sometimes when i feel i'm dumb because I had to listen to a video five times before I got it through my thick skull. I look at some of these geniuses I have to go for in for electroshock therapy and think uh, I'll live with a little dumb and happy Anyway back to the show Trying to unite trying to Do a lot of what we're talking about here um He's he's identified that there's classic Quality, which is you know, the the more rational the the mechanical the rational and then there's romantic which is aesthetics And so as he's he's trying to you he realizes that if if you're just looking at things in these polar opposites Like you were saying polarization Um, you're not going to get the full picture you can you can Explain most of the world with the subject object way of looking at things, but you're not going to explain these ephemeral Qualities that you have in romantic quality So he makes a really big breakthrough when he discovers the mathematician panqueray And panqueray is is where you know looking like we said now There's all these facts and now even we have even more because the internet introduces just you know An explosion of facts and they and these facts will present themselves and you don't know which ones are right So say you're working on something and you care about this project, but you don't know What the next step is and you can't just observe everything objectively and figure it out You have to care you have to have this essential state of of wanting it to be better and so Now here again that wanting that's that value. That's that you know, that's that's that's something that that is They didn't build it in the factory the taqeya factory in their 40 ounce Insulated water bottle that paul van der klee picked up at cosco in sacramento, california two bottles for like 21 bucks Great deal that I mentioned cosco. Where's where's my where's my uh product? You know, where's my um, Affiliate status for cosco. I'm there every weekend. I'm listening to verveky as i'm walking through the cosco and elk grove. So But the value that the wanting and and a little bit peugeot is going to put that together I can't I can't wait on this. I can't wait on this business about god and person because if you've been watching my videos You know, that's what i'm the more I listen to conversations Conversations and there's i've been wanting to put together a video about this for a while and I keep having to put together Other videos before I do it and it's continuing to to gel There's this very interesting conversations with three guys. I mentioned this before about how there's they're just asking this There's not really enough room for for for randomness to have created the universe and that's a huge problem It's like well, why is that a huge problem? It's a huge problem because if it's not randomness then there's some intentionality that put together the universe Well, why is that a huge problem? Because if there's intentionality that put together the universe that intentionality Has ideas about what I should and shouldn't do there's an obligation built into existence And and there might even be a lot more than an obligation. There might be a judgment day and and there might be Expectations and there might be all of these things and so what I what I watch is that this this this resistance We have to god. Well, I don't think this is hard to figure out This is this is basically what thomas nagel says and I don't have a quote And this is what happens when I make a video without making a powerpoint first But thomas nagel says it's picked up in a in a tim keller book and it's picked up by alvin planega But he basically says I don't want there to be a god because if there's a god then someone has expectations and intentions and actually Obliges me to think and to do and behave in a certain way and I really darn it like my freedom and I and I don't want that and and I think part of the reason why as As the materialist worldview continues to disintegrate continues to just plain fall apart under the weight of evidence And the the the whispers in the in the universe that we have been resisting Read romans one. This is this is what we suppress paul says in our hearts We resist this stuff because we don't want it to be true. Well, why don't we want to be well? Because what if there is a person? And this gets into my conversations with nathan jacobs, too And we're gonna have another one a little bit later this month and also john vervecki and someone else coming on this week That some of you might find interesting so more conversations to follow and also more regular conversations as i've i've opened that up a bit Yeah, they're all full but some more will open up. So be patient leave room for first timers anyway We like to phrase it in impersonal ways And this is where it gets into the spirit of finesse and the spirit of of geometry that what I talked about pascal You see the way you deal with the spirit of finesse is you try a little something it comes back and you try a little something It comes back and you try a little something it comes back and when it comes to personality This is exactly how we want to be treated because when we're treated as geometry we rebel Because it's hey, it's not geometry from the inside. Why do you treat me as if it's geometry? Yeah, you see I didn't even finish getting dressed this morning. Well, what a slob anyway, um Where was I going geometry and and finesse? Well, we we treat the world that's too big to know as finesse And and that's exactly the proper way to deal with it It's exactly the proper way to deal with personhood now a little bit later in this video with jonathan and and civilla I such a sucker for book mention, so I ordered that book that she posted because it's like Peugeot's been talking about this stuff. I've been trying to get it through my thick skull And I think i'm finally getting it through my thick skull but you know the understanding what a personality is and And understanding that what what a person is is actually all of these subpersonalities the many and the one you can listen to barren And peterson talk about that you have the many and the one is actually integrating again all of these subpersonalities Getting it into a cohesive whole well, what is the difference when everything is is put together into a cohesive whole? Well, the difference is that there is actually a center to that whole And that is exactly that is actually the agent where well I can be the angry man or I can be the jealous man Or I can be the rational man or I can be the loving man or I can be the passionate man Or I can be all of these things, but they're all integrated and what happens Mysteriously again. Oh so mysteriously even within us Is that there's somehow way down deep inside an agent and a chooser? And when we're not treated like we're an agent and a chooser when someone treats us with the with the spirit of geometry Boy, do we not like it? Boy are we angry? We'll burn down the house over something like that Why because we know that something in us has been violated Okay, and now and so this is where we go with this this so a An ontology of quality or an ontology of value See I think part of the reason we what we want to say value instead of god is that When we look at value something in our heart suspects I can treat that with the spirit of geometry I understand what value is and probably don't but It's just a little word and and part of what happens with If you're a christian for a long time too is sometimes you look at that little word god and think well I understand what what god is What god is well all the theologians have forever been saying, ah, no you really don't but You should probably understand a little more than you do understand but When we have value or something like that or if it's just psychology Well, then we can approach it with the spirit of mathematics and now I can discern it and and now I can take this Other human being and turn them into an object I can turn them into a water bottle and I can rip any value off it and place my own values on it This is the story of this is the story of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil This is the story of lord of the rings This is how many stories that that people look to dominate and i've been thinking a lot about the word violate because I watched the the eric weinstein Uh peter teal the first portal. I thought that was a really good conversation And and the second half of it was better than the first half of it because sometimes it takes a little while to get a Conversation going and actually in this video even though i'm playing the first half of the conversation the second half might even be better because they get a little bit sharper and Boy, they talk about some really important things towards the end there. It was really really good But but one of the things that I noticed with with peter teal is he keeps talking about violating and I thought and right away I thought in the back of my mind I gotta do a little bit of I gotta do a little bit of oh and barfield on that word violate And I gotta see if the word violate is in the bible and you might say oh just pick up a concordance and see if violate is in the bible no, I gotta look at the hebrew and the greek and I gotta look at that concept because Violation is is something like you know, some of you've been responding to my plow sermon my rough draft for sunday sermon and I mean violation is that something? some shalom has been You know the reason we we use it in sexual references for rape is something has entered me and taken something from me that And an illicit agent has done so it's so funny how we we're so quick to To to get rid of agency for things that We think we can manage but then when we've been violated boy, there's where you we're ready to ascribe Agency all over the map So so back to the value thing here. So so we so often want to take that which let's say for In in theology has a person and we want to make it we want to make it an object And I think part of this and I want to really think a lot more about this later I think part of this is because in modernity we have taken on a a feature of our social status structures of We have an overactive peterson in his conversation with matt delahunty talks about our overactive agency detector Sometimes we detect agency where we shouldn't so we get a tax bill from the government and we say ah They've been watching me or or something comes up. Google's been reading my email. Ah There's a conspiracy against me and and we're so ready to go and do that That's why I say we're so willing to attribute agency to the negative side And we don't want to attribute it to the positive side because I think we want to be at the top of the hierarchy So so in modernity this this overactive agency detector We kind of realized that and so we've compensated on the other side and say yeah weather that's you know And in fact now we've done it to the whole skies. There is no agent up in the sky Okay, but it's still way more complicated than we can imagine and really the default human mode That we use to engage with something more complex than we can master in other words to to rightly opt for the The esprit de finesse say I got my spanish. I don't know french So I spanishize my french the spirit of finesse instead of the spirit of geometry And this is why we say well, that's more art than science. Well as we should well Well again naturally and I think rightly we in a sense personify that which is greater and so then by Because it's we have to approach it in that way And when we deal with people with the spirit of geometry rather than the spirit of finesse And if you don't know what i'm talking about, you won't see my video that I did talking about pascal If we're looking at it with the spirit of of of Of geometry rather than the spirit of finesse we're doing it wrongly yet Go ahead and treat your treat your significant any significant other in that way and see how well that goes Peterson is dead on right with that point, but I think part of the reason we implicitly want to Because we implicitly want to Depersonalize the universe is this is a motivated decision We want to do it because that leaves us in charge Now once we've reduced it to the spirit of geometry now We can have control we're all little saurons in the making concrete found that when he's working on a mathematical problem The right There's a there's what you would say a quality detector in this is his theory There's a quality detector. That's right. This is the this is the newman This is probably something like the numinous and if you look at the beginning of cs lewis's problem with pain or or Or the the idea of the holy this is another sense we have It's it's the sense of the numinous and we know that there's value out there and we sense it even though It's not one of these five materialist senses. We have we got way more baby in Pre-intellectual awareness, you know before conscious like like consciousness, but unconscious And in that pre-intellectual awareness Um That's where that's where quality Makes itself known to you. You don't actually have a will you can't Now listen to the language quality makes itself known to you. That's the language of agency, but we have this modernist disposition to demythologize it and say we Spirit of finesse and we kind of have to deal with it with the spirit of finesse because again, it's not Flat to it's it's not explained. Remember explain is to flatten it out and lay it out all before us So we have mastery over it in a way It's but it's a detector and we know it and but we don't dare say it We don't dare say it in front of each other and that's why people when People shut up and they only tell their pastors when they have spooky experiences Oh, that's too woo for me to talk about but we see it all the time and then oh we don't talk about that in public I mean, yeah, well, let me go into it in a second, but in there The next quality step kind of kind of presents itself and then that comes into awareness Yeah, so it's a form of intuition. I mean it's it's this It's just this like it's the click right the aha, you know, it's that click. It's the aha. Yes But but but even more than that it's like an essential quality is an eternal thing that comes up to you You know, it's it's always I mean, it's so funny when I listen to her talk in this video It's like you just slap god in for that and gosh you're You're you're you're part of the way there present and it comes up to you in that subliminal state And then you'll detect the right facts there if you're caring about it Conscience that's what you want. You know, you can't just like sit back and wait for it and so Jonathan smiles, I I wonder are you thinking what i'm thinking here john so There's a quote here the difference between a good mechanic and a bad one like the difference between a good Mathematician and a bad one is precisely the ability to just select the good facts from the bad ones And and all of the latest videos from john vervecki on the salience and the relevance and boy that's been good That that that series has gotten so good with the last Five eight videos on the basis of quality. He has to care This is an ability about which formal traditional scientific method has nothing to say it has you know, it has no no room for value So so the last part I and this I think is the most important is there's a metaphor in zen in the art of motorcycle maintenance of the train so there's a train that that is known as knowledge and that and and The train is classical knowledge. It's um, it's rational knowledge That's represented by the engine and the box cars and everything that's in the box cars That's everything the sum total of human experience plus your own Understanding of that everything you've learned so far your innate biological traits Um, you're not going to see romantic knowledge. So If you look at the train, you're not going to see see the romantic part So this is materialism but romantic knowledge is The leading edge of the train And that's what's going to keep the train going and it's going to keep the train going on the track of quality And without this ephemeral thing that can't be measured by science, you know, nothing's going to work So this is the stimulus quality is the stimulus and what is valuable propels the train forward So the romantic quality is the leading edge of experience that keeps the train on track The box cars of the collective memory of where the train has been and the leading edge tells us where to go so, um The and that leading edge is right in the moment So so the structure of the future is selected pre-intellectually The structure of the future. What is the future? I mean listen a bunch of jordan peterson stuff on the future And you could say that pre-intellectual selection is kind of like what you were saying about god's will Because value is the predecessor of structure not the other way around And the manner and and and let me again slow this the value is the predecessor of predecessor of structure Value says I was just talking, you know There needs to be a bridge here that value is the predecessor of the bridge. It's a whole idea behind markets You know, this is the stuff is just built into everything and uh, you know again materialism That's the reason it's the reason it's falling apart. It's a water bottle. Well, you can't even say that And and this is what you said the matter in which the infinite account uh encounters the particular So that's that pre-intellectual awareness encountering The next thing and that thing will will specify into what's needed Now now i'm getting another piece the the thing that I wanted to talk about the mark bernan Malcolm gait video on is Is a big part of my thinking about this is the question. Okay, what about materiality? So so we have all of these ideas and and you have this value and then the question is why a water bottle at all? Well, not really a water bottle because again the value brings the water bottle into existence via marketplaces and technology and engineering and engineers and all that kind of stuff the value brings the water bottle into existence but Why stuff? why particularity and again, I think I have a lot to talk say about this in the next few weeks I hope because it's all been running around in my mind and if I had to put it in one word i'd say glory That's why it's glory well will be because it's the it's the trans It's the transmission of glory But once you have the possibility for the transmission of glory you have the possibility for the transmission of the opposite of glory Which boy that gets complicated But it's glory it's and and this is where this is where the mystical This is the limits of the mystical because and and i'm again another video that's in the video I was going to make today, but didn't have time to make and i'm using time. Look, I don't have a lot of time I'm running out of time but The video I was going to make today talking about why don't we if our if our if our friend is wasting their life Like jordan peterson has on the on the on the sofa covered in cheeto dust playing video games all the time Why do we call that a waste of the life? Even if they're staying in the flow state and in the video game world they're on top of the hierarchy and we have no value for that why It's because of the water bottle. It's because of stuff. It's because of glory and because we know well, you know, that's That's kind of like and it's the same reason that we have no more monasteries today We look at a monastery and we say what's it for? Why why what's the relationship between that and the protestant reformation? everything But now we're getting to the point of saying well, maybe we should have a monastery or two and you have all these protestants sneaking into Monasteries now and saying this is kind of cool. This is kind of important But it's but hey your aunt your your ancestors destroyed the monasteries and now you're sneaking in What's happening with that? Well, we're gonna have to talk a lot more about that, but i'm distracted. I'm adhd. I can't help it It's my lack of personhood. Here we go And like you said, it's gonna look like it's our will but it's really this quality Showing us what it is People in persons how many of this are there It's interesting. What's interesting is that i'm I guess i'm i'm interested in the or curious about the fact that he uses the word romantic Ah Yeah, and my just about my favorite verveky video is this Romanticism video, okay because your verveky basically says what happened in the romantic period is that well, I probably Intuitively they began to realize that I can't say it like john does I thought john laid it out really well But something huge was left behind and so now we have this facsimile that we that we put forward and actually There's a real relationship between romanticism and various forms of idolatry now Now it's all about romantic love or it's all about the family And and you know you find these you find churches getting suckered into this every time I hear a pastor say It's all about family. I think yeah, you should uh, you know that should get you in real trouble Just like my friend whose video i'll play, you know Having problem with the trinity saying it's all about family that's about as idolatrices as a whole bunch of other things. So And so yeah, what's what's what's with the romanticism? It's I think it's because In this framework, this is what so many are simply left with It was such a powerful movement Oops play Uh Just Intuition of the pre-intellectual in the sense of of a trance it's it's over the It's actually the word in in greek is news, which actually is intellect But it's intellect in the sense of direct intuition of what is yeah, you know, um, and that's different from the kind of the kind of wispy, uh Feeling that you get in the in the what I noticed to be kind of the romantic sense of this This kind of sentimental, uh ebb and flow all of that Is is that that would I would put? That below the the thought rational so you have I mean, this is like this is like traditional christian, you know So you have the noose which is which is above then you have the thoughts the the will all of this kind of the thing that we consider consciousness would be uh below that and then below that you would have the desiring quality and the irascible Quality so that all the emotions all the all the pulls all of that would be kind of this bubbling This bubbling thing underneath, you know, so so in in a way there's The unconscious in normal psychology. It was almost like the unconscious would be this below thing But then you have supra kind of supra consciousness, which is not I don't fear framed a lot in modern And it isn't framed a lot because we have a problem with other persons and because we have this bias about Agency and so that that's in a sense what what secularism is it's a bias against agency above us other minds besides the ones that are walking around between like all of this stuff that we're used to Recognizing unless they're aliens and then suddenly where you know, oh I can believe that Modern way of thinking it's not it's not the same as the unconscious in the sense of these these secret desires and all these secret Pulls that you have but it's actually something above which is this kind of intuitive grasp you can have Yeah, I don't know if persing talks about this this difference or for him. It's the same like let's say the the romantic part of the wispy kind of Connection to to that aspect to the belly to all that stuff is different from the the the top part let's say I don't know if that makes sense when i'm trying to know it does make sense But what he does is he changes the terminology in the second book. Okay, so he Now I gotta read another book changes it from a romantic quality to dynamic quality And it changes classical quality to static patterns Okay, so it's this dynamic quality which is in the pre-intellectual And that like the train metaphor he uses um classic and romantic so I used it there But in lila he changes it to you know, the second book where he really you know codifies the theory He changes it to um this dynamic quality and that's what was going to be detected in the pre-intellectual net dynamic quality You're in the static patterns You know and the static patterns um in in the metaphysics of quality Very much are are like um in your brother's book um this this here you know this this um with with uh the the Inorganic on the bottom and then it's um, uh biological Then it's social And then it's um intellectual So it's it's similar to that. I mean not not exactly the same but it's a very similar hierarchical structure and um and So these patterns and and they can be of any of the four the dynamic quality acts on these see and and and when she said that I I I'm just too much of a bible reader to let the greeks kind of get away with that hierarchy in some ways because because again of what I think the role of the material world is in the narrative and again christian churches get this wrong all the time and I Regularly hear christian people say well the gospel is believing in jesus and then you go to heaven when you die And it's like nt right takes a big swipe at that one and it's like well if that was the case the resurrection wouldn't make any sense There's a reason jesus comes back and eats a fish and says thomas Touch the hand dude put the hand in my side Something important is going on here. There's a reason there's an ascension Even though jesus seemed to just kind of pop in and out It's like we're gonna do the ascension thing because you need to know the narrative And the narrative has everything to do with glory and stuff through our thick heads Is to transform them And so it's not uh, it's not romantic in that sense. It's it's dynamic in the sense that you have Things that are stable And and this is the transformative agent must say Interesting, yeah, I mean and and the transformative agent again the trans and this is This is why jesus miracles are so foundational and they communicate so cross culturally and i'm i'm I just last sunday school. I really should be posting my sunday school my sunday school lessons on time because Not anywhere near enough of you are watching my sunday school lessons because it's i'm working out all of this stuff as I talk To this class none of whom are watching any of the videos and what I have to do is translate all of this stuff into language that that Eight randomly chose eight senior citizens from my church can understand It's all the same stuff i'm putting out But I have to I have to work it through right now the gospel of john And when jesus turns water into wine, that's this entire transformation Well, why doesn't jesus turn water into the idea of wine? No, because wine is this transmitter of glory That's what it's for and and and that the materiality the The instantiation the the the the the stuffness the matterness matters And that's why we're not gnastics and that's why when jesus does a miracle they say he's the son of god Why because he's got mastery over? This and why we're so impressed with ourselves when we can make a water bottle That's so darn good and economical that you can buy at cosco and alcrove for for like 22 bucks for two of them So Endorsement, right? What do they call that official officiate? affiliate thing anyway That's that's what's going on with this stuff I mean, it's interesting. I I I guess I should probably at some point actually just read the read the book I I I was you know, I I have No, jonathan, you got to read too. I have a secret. I have a secret thing, which is my my It's not a secret. I guess people probably have figured it out by now And you're not alone We all have biases. Not all of them are good. Not all of them are bad a certain a certain a aversion to uh, this kind of california buddhism Why does california get a bad name for it? Yeah, we all know why anyway, i'm gonna jump ahead a little bit because uh, Yeah, this is true and I call it motorcycle mania you just I I A book and to judge a a fallacy just by its title and because I have this this weird thing about about uh people using buddhism to as a deconstructive agent actually, you know like And and I think actually that bias is part of what I actually love what Peugeot says there as a deconstructive agent because they're they're trying to break free of let's say christianity And so they need something they need something and so whatever Low-hanging fruit idea about buddhism becomes a knife and so it's so funny because I watch california because i'm in california I watch all these california buddhists and they're like, yeah, i'm so into buddhism, but I really want that new car and it's like You know whatever happened to the noble truths and whatever happened that the the source of your suffering is your desire and and you go into These amazing houses where people have been working their butts off and made all this money and all these little heads of buddha All over the houses and I think actually did a sermon on this once I mean, can you have a statue of buddha in your bathroom? What does that say you would not want to have jesus buy your urine all we went all through that with With art back in the 70s, but you got all these disembodied heads of buddha all over these enormously priced houses and it's like There's something psychological going on there something archetypal They're using the the foreign something outside of their own Tradition and culture to to wreck their own thing, you know, it's a it's a it's a normal move You know, it was there the romans did the same, you know, the young people would dress as barbarians As the barbarians were at the gate, you know coming in so it's like you use something The outside to kind of to demolish your thing. So so hopefully so hopefully I can get over that little thing Read the book Well, I think I think actually a lot of people didn't read it for that reason. Oh really Be and and and as you know, I didn't read it for that reason I confess In the 70s as people read it, they realized wow, this isn't about zen at all It's it's I mean it is, you know, but it's not it's not what they thought it would be. It's really going back into western philosophy and figuring out where the problem was And kind of revivify and see that's that's just it when I keep talking about there's that we're we're haunted by a telos Well, we know there's a problem so we got to figure out where the problem is but we keep figuring out what the problem is and we don't have a solution because We're not we're not masters of this. We're just people and together. We're a whole lot more than we are by ourselves, but Yeah I'm uh Taking that and using that to revivify our our a new philosophy for the new age which I think is is is similar to Uh, you know john burvick is going back and and to the ancient greeks and looking for and and other philosophers and looking for direction there and And it and it seems to me that that eastern orthodoxy is is bringing back an old practice into the modern age So so there's a similarity there. I think yeah. Well for sure. There's the I mean I it It's funny because what i'm saying has absolutely nothing to do with actual buddhism like if I read zen texts, I I get a lot from them and I you know, i've read some some some really you know if I read uh a series of koans for example, like I find them extremely powerful and so In and and I think it's obvious that it's inevitable to notice their resemblance between uh mindfulness and remembrance of god or you know remembrance of sin in that you find in uh in the The hezikastic practice it's it's it's very similar. So obviously there is there are it's inevitable to see the resemblances So yeah, so like I said a lot of it a lot of my a lot of my reaction might not be As profound as I you know, it's it's more just a it's almost like a social problem that that I see Rather than an actual philosophical problem. Um, and so I'm sorry. Go ahead. No. No, no, I I was gonna say so So how do you see let's say so so in terms of because i've seen you're doing a lot of stuff on per se and then you're You're kind of looking watching john's lectures, uh following paul and myself. And so what's your how do you see these things kind of? Coming together. How do you see them connecting? uh in in in the different way because you you have your own very Particular perception about john's work and my work and and all that so so maybe you can talk a little bit about that For people who also even people haven't watched the the video that you put out by the way There are two videos that she did trying to connect some of these ideas together I'll probably put them in the description for those who want to get a little bit more of that Um, well, I think that my goal in all of this is to actually be able to practice it in the world you know, um Not not just as a therapist Now that's a really key thing in the way she said it to practice it in the world and this is exactly why We're not gnostic's And why when jesus turns water to wine We call him the son of god But then later forget that the disciples saw that and then didn't believe that's that's how flaky we are but we want to practice it in the world because somehow we know that this is This is power and this is mastery and so this this ambitious part of us wells up But again a fully integrated person Well, actually that fully integrated person this is where we you know christian language a fully integrated person is formed by christ and becomes christ and becomes Um becomes christ on the spot. That's that's the goal in christianity and and I know you know, I I Sometimes hear the way jordan would sometimes talk about well. Well orthodoxy is about well, that's about transformation. It's like what? Protestantism isn't roman catholicism isn't Christianity is about transformation. It's it's about becoming becoming the likeness of christ Becoming part of christ if you look at the gospels the synoptic gospels have the kingdom of god and And the gospel of john has eternal life, but the apostle paul has being in christ and it's like well, I become one of those Sub-personalities within the coherent personality that is christ That's christianity That's but my own personal uh personal journey because I think we really Uh, as you're saying as we come to the end of this cycle as everything's kind of falling apart is everything is so Superficial Fragmented What are we going to do to um to read here that? and I think And again, what's what's so nice about the way she said that is that's so boundaryless What are we what are we who's the we what are we it's all of us and and and we and we we we feel it in our in our Families in our nation in our cities and our communities we feel it in all we all we feel we feel the whole thing coming apart At the same time And and how is it going to recohere and and we're actually all working on that and that's why people Indifference to the plight of your neighbor is not a virtue You Neither is enmeshment in the drama of your neighbor. So figuring out exactly how that works. Oh, that's that's an important thing that All of us, you know you all of us here in this corner Are trying to do that are trying to figure out a way a philosophical way of being in the world that can manage What's going on to manage all this fragmentation and I think fragmentation is a beautiful way of putting it and so um you So so john is looking at a variety of practices and you and paul already have established christian practices Which you know work work beautifully and I think that um For me, it's sort of to follow to follow you and to understand what you're doing um sort of gives me Ideas of what is the next direction? And is the next direction going to be something secular or is it going to be something where I do in fact turn around and start believing in god and I And and right there. I mean the way she set it up was was so right in terms of This this place we now are at in the west The west Secularity was developed By people for a reason and and in many ways it developed in the west because of the Ongoing wars that the protestant reformation Yielded now now those who are talking about the The violence in the islamic world say something like well, they need a protestant reformation You know I I can I can understand the analogy But the the time and the issues are by no means the same What what they're really talking about is we have this imagination that we have all this abstract theological stuff over here Which is indifferent to the things down below That's in a sense the nature of secularity and as As the world gets increasingly secular now notice this with the the verveky meaning crisis video Why is it in the secular world? That that we are having all of these meaning problems. Well No coincidence And in fact, that's what this whole conversation about the meaning crisis is about that's what this whole move is Well, we got rid of christianity because it was problematic And then you have douglas murray. Well, maybe Being without christianity is more problematic Whoa, what do we do? And then the question is well, can we make a new one? Well, I don't know making the old one was pretty costly especially for the dude on the cross And that resurrection thing Yeah, you pull that off We're in a we're in a we're in a bind And and and I think she articulates that well and I love what this conversation goes for the next few minutes I don't mean to put that as superficially as it sounds because And jonathan giggles because it's the Yeah Because it's not superficial. It's exactly the right word. It's turning around because the the problem with this is um I don't know and and I don't know How you feel about this, I don't know if you can sort of fake it till you make it I I don't know what happens in those terms because It seems to me that I've this innate sense that unless I truly feel it With the entirety of my being and most a person feels it with the entirety of their being it's it's somehow counterfeit Hmm Jonathan's answer here is so good. Well, I I Understand what you're saying. I think that if you One of the this is I guess one of the problems with christianity in general is that you also don't want to Confuse the beginning of the road and the end of the road, right? It's If you could if you could completely Inhabit it with your entire being then you would already be a saint and so then then you know, you'd be fine so I think that we and ps None of us are doing it that good either There's there's a little bit fake it till you make it in in in this in this in this here pastor in sacramento And I don't want to put jonathan on the spot, but I guess it's true of him. We have to be careful not To look to be to to find illumination before we just actually walk enter onto the path of you know At the bottom of the mountain Now he used the term illumination. I would get back to what we were talking about what you will talk about boy I feel like you know, I know the future of this conversation When you talk about what a personality is because it's one that coheres and we're we're formed in christ and you know when I When I meet with people and and they're struggling with their own sin with the people who actually The people who actually I have hope for the ones who struggle with their own sin And can actually do that with someone else and as a pastor i'm often in that role. They're struggling with their own sin It's like can it cohere? Because they say well, I don't think i'm a christian because I did this I'd say no, you're a christian because you noticed And you noticed that that was outside of this formation that you're being formed into And if you actually work the process of bringing that into the formation Well, you're going to be a powerful person. You're going to you're going to be put together You're going to know some stuff you're going to know when this is I love the verveky salient stuff You know, you're going to know it's it's not just knowing stuff It's knowing the moment it's the skill and the timing and it's all of those things that's that's the moment um Also, but at the same time you don't also want to To pretend in the sense you don't want to you to lie to yourself, which would not be not be appropriate um, but there you know, I think that you might not need as much as you think to kind of Start the the journey And and that is I mean The the classic example the thief on the cross what's great about that is one minute He he and the other thief are mocking on jesus like ah, you putz you're up here on a cross with us you loser And then one thief gets a different idea How he sees that That makes me a calvinist How he sees that And he recognizes and jesus says today you'll be with me in paradise. It's like what what No communion. No baptism bang right there How much sanctification did that other naked guy on the cross have? not much God can do stuff. Um And so what is your in terms of the notion of Maybe what is your a little tell me a little bit of your story. Do you did you ah, you should have watched my video with her Let's see, you know, there's a lot of and um of being episcopal So she's going to church and so I think that they kind of They kind of pulled back And and I don't know how much of the more of this can play because we're running out of time but And I don't want to you know, I say that a little flippantly. Yeah, she's going to church or she's visiting church and then and And All of this stuff gets into all of these Questions of well, what do you do in church? Why do you go to church and what does that have to do with? With persons and it has to deal with once you decide you're going to treat God even if you're not quite sure As a person You're going to respect it in that way just like you respect other people You're going to try and engage and you're going to try and get in alignment and have that formation and Now this is where a lot of the mysteries begin and um Yeah, yeah, so Yeah, watch the whole video. The whole thing was great and maybe i'll make another video out of the other hour of it, who knows but I was just so inspired and and um Blown away by this conversation that I I had to make a video. So I hope the sound quality was okay I I hope um You know sometimes I think about my channel I just think i'm the i'm the biggest jerk out there because here are these Wonderful people are having sweet conversations on the internet and look at the size of this nose I just get that beak right in the middle of it and put in my two cents and the sound's all messed up And who asked me anyway, and then I get comments my favorite comments are the comments like I wanted to listen to the video And you kept interrupting and I said you could listen to the original because I don't talk in that one Which is why i'm a buddinski and why well, that's probably that's probably Probably not nice to the the slavic nations. But anyway Um watch the video. It's really good stuff and I i'm busy this week. I'm too darn busy I want to make more videos, but anyway watch it