https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=8b2toQW5yXI

 Hi, this is Paul. What most of you don't know about and what probably many of you don't care about, which will come as a surprise to a certain group of people, is that there's actually a pretty interesting and fierce debate going on in this little corner of the internet, more specifically in my little corner of the internet around Bridges of Meaning Discord Server and Jacob's Just Chatting channel. I have to try and, as you can see, I've been playing around with chairs and trying to sort of dial this whole thing in well. But there's been a pretty interesting and fierce debate going on in this little corner of the internet about what exactly has been happening and where is this going? And I wanted to, I'm going to include a lot of that conversation in this video a little bit later on after I'm done talking, and so that you can hear for yourself and you can participate and get up onto Jacob's channel if he'll let you on. Grimm Grizz, of course, has his own little Discord server. Jacob started his own Discord server after some drama surrounding the German Festival. We haven't talked about that much. I think it's fine that we haven't talked about that much, but it gets into these big questions about, well, what exactly are we doing and where is this going and what should we be doing? Now, it's really helpful to know that, well, first of all, in this conversation with Rezi, I'm going to try to get the names right, Rezi really sort of guided well in this conversation with Jacob. I thought it was amazing how well he was sort of moving this conversation forward and asking salient questions about, well, what exactly is this and are we getting done? So as many of you know, the sort of the story, I saw what Jordan Peterson was doing and I wanted to engage in it and engage with it, and I wasn't getting a lot of traction amongst my own colleagues, and so I decided to make a video, and people watched my video, which surprised me because I'd been making the Freddie and Paul show for over a year, and not a lot of people had watched that, can't imagine still, many people don't watch the Freddie and Paul show, but I made a video and people watched it and people talked back, and then people wanted to have conversations with me, and then in January 2018, we started a meetup, and people started coming to the meetup and they started coming faithfully and regularly. We have another meetup meeting tomorrow night, in fact, at Living Stones, and it's now structured as estuary, and so very quickly, no, not very quickly, the people who met in our local meetup wanted to have an online expression of what they were enjoying in the meetup, and that was actually the bridges of meaning Discord servers, the second iteration of that attempt, the first attempt didn't really go anywhere, and then the second attempt took off, and before we knew it, we had 2,000, 3,000 people that at some point subscribed to the bridges of meaning Discord server, I talked about it on the channel, I've done question and answers from there, I'll still do question and answers there, but the people from our local meetup started it, and I said that's absolutely fine, I'm happy to support, I'm happy to participate, but I'm not going to run it, and the reason I knew I shouldn't run it was, number one, that would put it in sort of direct conflict with not only my local church, which is my day job, but also my video project, which you are watching right now on this channel, which does take time, the randos conversations, and all the other estuary, and all the other things that have developed since then. About a year or two after that really got going, there was more, especially after I said the word estuary, there was more and more discussion about starting the estuary or estuary inc, and I was pretty clear that, well, bridges of meaning is an estuary, our local meetup is an estuary, John Van Donken Elsnet is getting estuary going, and by starting estuary leaders, we had the west coast tour, which was thwarted by COVID, got cut short in March of 2020, and estuary has sort of been the main project, and I've always looked at bridges of meaning discord service as an estuary. After, though, we started the discord server, I ran into immediately the fact that only a small fraction of the people who watch my videos were ever going to flourish in a discord community. Why? Discord really does best with exactly what it was made for, which is small groups of gamers that might play world of warcraft or league of legends or some of these other games where they want sort of a space where they can collaborate online, they can voice chat, they can video chat, they can text message, they can do all of these things via discord. Discord's very good at that. The longer the bridges of meaning discord server went, the more I began to see that it, like many other kinds of things, has its own version of a Dunbar number, and some discords manage to scale themselves up quite large, but the medium is the message, and one of the things that you learn when you do church work is that lots of different configurations will produce different kinds of outcomes and different kinds of limitations. Churches do that. So churches that are less than 75 people are churches that are more than 200 people, are different from churches that are more than a thousand people, and once a church gets up over 10,000 people, it gets different again. Even though we have one word for all of these things, we call them all churches, and churches like the Roman Catholic Church that has a tremendous hierarchy and a billion people and goes on for, well, depending on how you think about it, 2,000 or 1,000 or 1,800 years, that's a very different thing from, let's say, the Christian Reformed Church or other kinds of churches. It's very different from Jewish synagogue structures. It's very different from Orthodoxy and the way that they've structured themselves, and all of these things are different, and they go in different ways, and so one of the things that we began to notice with the Discord server is that, well, one of the things that happened was we started starting all these subservers. There was the writer subserver, and there were subservers for different geographical areas, and all of that was because of the number of people that were well supported. Another thing that tends to happen when you get something like a Discord server is that certain personalities tend to colonize it, and I'm not talking about Joey here because what happened at Bridges of Meaning was that there was a group of admins, and the group of admins is supposed to sort of share the weight, but along the way, very quickly you realize that there needed to be kind of one big admin, and the group of other admins were sort of a support group, and they worked with that one main admin, and for a long time Joey was that admin, and Joey basically saw that, well, you know, if the Discord server is going to facilitate good conversations, someone's going to need to kick out the bad actors, and so Joey would ban some people, and then there would be exiles from the Bridges of Meaning Discord server who would come to me and complain that they were exiled from it, and they would plead their case, and I would tell them right away, I'm not going to go and plead your case. The administrators of the Bridges of Meaning Discord server are in charge of that community, and they're going to do it. Now I haven't named them, and Jacob complains that I didn't name them because Jacob is imagining a different kind of structure and hierarchy that I have, and this is part of the... when Jacob complains that I'm a Protestant, this is exactly what he's talking about, and if you watch the rest of the video, you can hear a number of Jacob's complaints, and Mark has his own critiques and complaints, and truth be told, I'm completely fine with all of that, because for me all of this is a really good discussion about institutions and formation and how things can really go. Now this little corner isn't just sort of Bridges of Meaning Discord server or estuary, and it's very interesting in a lot of these conversations that Jacob is hosting on his Just Chatting channel, which they're starting to get some traction. I think they're a lot of fun often, is that estuary usually isn't named, but if you talk to John Van Donk, John Van Donk will forefront estuary, estuaries, estuary hubs, and so John Van Donk sort of works on this whole estuary thing and has really has really forefronted that estuary movement. John Van Donk and many sort of his age don't really like Discord. Many times when I talk to people who have paid attention to what's been going on in my little corner, oops, I'm kind of over at the side, so many times people will come to me and apologize, and you'll sometimes hear these on Rando's videos, there are a lot more Rando's videos because only a percentage of them get shared. Paul, I tried Discord and I just couldn't, it just didn't work for me. I totally get that. There were times when I was on Discord a lot and there are times when I'm not on Discord hardly at all, and that really doesn't have anything to do with the people I meet on Discord because those of you who've been around this community, if you look at the people on this thumbnail, you know, Hezzy is one of the new folks, but Lance is a regular on the Bridges of Meaning Discord in the open, in the, basically the open studio channel, which is something that I started because I kind of wanted it. Jess is one of the original Rando's. Luke is one of the original Rando's. Sherry is one of the original Rando's. Ironroot lived in the basement of the Discord server for like a year, and then of course there was the Awakening from the Meaning Crisis Discord server, which no one will argue belongs to John Vervecky, even though they took the name of his most popular series, and he comes on there fairly regularly to do a question and answer session, and Mark will complain about Bridges, about the Awakening from the Meaning Crisis Discord server about as much as anyone because of its non-administration that was happening, and what's kind of funny is a little later in this video, Mark will complain about the fact that the the Bridges of Meaning admins are both too negligent and also too secretive for his taste because they were, we've been talking about successive servers and some of the people, Job, you know, basically said on of course hardly anyone here, and again, if you do as many Rando's conversations as I do, you very quickly have an appreciation for the fact that the number of people who watch my channel is far broader than Estuary, than Bridges of Meaning, than this little corner. This afternoon I did a podcast with a pastor from Minneapolis who has not participated in any of this. My other Rando's conversation, both of my Rando's conversations today, have, you know, didn't, don't know about most of what's going on. I had lunch today with a colleague of mine who has probably watched three or four of my videos or listened to them in podcast form and doesn't have much of any awareness for any of this, yet people look at 23,000 subscribers as a really big number, which, you know, all of us know it's not a real big number when it comes to YouTube. Jordan Peterson adds probably that many new subscribers every day. They look at that big number and say, wow, Paul has clout. When, the truth is, when I do a live Q&A on Friday mornings, we get to maybe 75, 80 people. Even, even Digital Gnosis, whose channel has about 6,000 subscribers, when he does a live stream, he'll, he'll, he'll often be well up over 100. YouTube analytics are really strange things, and the more you pay attention to them, the more you realize they don't tell you what they think they tell you. And so there's a lot going on in this little corner, and this little corner is much more a movement and a fairly loosely held linkage of very different types of efforts. In some ways, one of the things that I picked up on in this was, for some people, what they really want and how they saw Bridges of Meaning Discord Server was, this was a place where sort of refugees from the meaning crisis could come and find a community and, well, they might make their way to the Awakening from the Meaning Crisis Discord Server, because Manuel Ironroot was in the basement of Bridges of Meaning for a long time, but then went over to Awakening from the Meaning Crisis and then did the meditation that, with Mark, and Mark and Manuel still do that, that happens on the Awakening from the Meaning Crisis Discord Server, and, and, and Manuel found that super helpful to the point that he also goes to church, and he goes to church right across from the street from his house. And a lot of what happened with, especially the early days, the Bridges of Meaning Discord Server, is that people would come there, and it was sort of a really helpful on-ramp into a variety of other places, probably most of the time, and for most people, finding a way into a church. Some found their way into Roman Catholic churches, some found their way into Orthodox churches, some found their way into Protestant churches, often churches that they had gone to before, and if you, if you look at my conversations with Sally Jo and with Job, you'll find this trajectory for many, many people. Now, one of the things that Lance makes a comment in this video, where he notes the tension between the fact that, on one hand, we're developing an online community, while a deep value of this community is to point people to local offline communities. John Van Dock noted this directly when he said to me, you know, if I understand your channel, when the goal of your channel is to get people to stop watching so much YouTube, and I thought, yeah, that's right. In other words, there's a degree of churn. That also comes up in this conversation where Manuel expresses his some frustration that kind of what he really wants is an organization or institution that will really increase the process of what a lot of people went through in the early days of the Bridges of Meaning Discord server. And now that they've been doing this for four or five years, and they're a little frustrated because they think at this point they would have sort of arrived at, even if it might be an online institution, but something organized with a structure and a hierarchy and clear leadership and all of that to accomplish a goal. And let's say that goal is alleviating people from the meaning crisis. Now, in many ways, that's John Vervecky's area that he's been looking at, but even John, and Mark will sometimes criticize him for this, John, when he talks about an ecology of practices, for the most part, points to other people's practices. He often you'll see Guy Sangstock on his channel talking about circling, Rafe Kelly's on his channel with a project that Rafe is doing. And so what we actually see are sort of a diversity of things. Now, Jonathan Pigeot and I, both as Christians, will admonish people to go to church. A lot of what Bridges of Meaning did was help people sort of get connected to church. One of the things that we began to know is that the longer Bridges of Meaning went, the more it sort of became an on-ramp onto church, and the more people just started going to church. And eventually, there's churn in the Bridges of Meaning Discord server that people would come on for a season and find what they needed and sort of move away from it for something else that they needed. Many other people who watched my channel and maybe dipped a toe into Bridges of Meaning, the interface didn't work for them. They're just not going to be online that many hours in a day. YouTube or the podcast sort of works for them, and they listen to, and I put out about you know, seven to ten videos a week, and they might listen to three or four a month. That's another reality of this. So people access this at all sorts of different levels. People have all sorts of different commitments in their life. Some of the people who listen to my channel are committed Christians and regular churchgoers. Some of the people that listen to my channel are atheists and they never go to church. Some of the people that listen to my channel are moreover on the revaki side. Some of the people that listen to my channel are orthobros or maybe ex-evangelicals who are now in the orthodox church. Some of the people that listen to my channel are hardcore Catholics. Some of the people that listen to my channel are culture warriors. Jacob expresses his desire that whatever this little corner or this little movement is, maybe it can do something to forestall his fear of the coming civil war that will happen in the United States in 2024. Lots of people come to this for lots of different outcomes, and one of the things that Hezzi does really well—I'm probably putting too much of a Dutch throat in there—one of the things that he does really well in this conversation, as others do too, is basically saying, now what exactly do you want? What exactly are you talking about? Push this back a little bit. See, I'm still— What exactly do you need? And the truth is that, let's say, of a thousand people watching my channel, 75 will check out the Discord server. 15 might get serious about estuary. That's, my guess, kind of the numbers. Another 40 or 50 will be curious about estuary, but there are already in a church, and they have a small group, and they have a community around them. Others will never want to go to church, but they've played around with circling, or they're doing some such other thing. Others, again, as Lance points out, there's a deep irony here that we are in some ways facilitating an internet community that is against internet communities, and the more we do this, the deeper the irony gets, and that's okay. Now, of course, Jacob is expressing his frustration for me, and you'll see on some of these videos he puts a little crawl, Paul VanderKlay is fired, and Jacob and I—Jacob is like my Jewish wife. You know, that's maybe the best way I can give a metaphor for it, and he's—you know, when you listen to Matthew Pageau's description of Eve to Adam on the Jordan Peterson podcast, well, that's kind of Jacob to me, and his assaults against Protestantism, against all sorts of things. As Sherry mentioned the other day, I take it as, in many ways, an expression of love, and that's something that I wish we had more of, because in a lot of the fights that we currently have, and the culture war fights that are going on, people are just sort of walking away instead of understanding expressions of love in even very ironic ways. And I think this doesn't—you know, Jacob comes by this honestly because, of course, he reads his Bible, and just listen to the Lord and Moses go at it over, in some ways, their terribly misbehaving child, which is Israel, and listen to how the Lord speaks about the children of Israel in all of their wayward ways. You know, people often read the prophets, the Hebrew prophets, and complain about this God of fire and brimstone, but they should continue to read the prophets and read something like the book of Hosea, because yes, he's a God of fire and brimstone, and yes, he's a God of tender love and mercy, and they're both there, because the opposite of love is not anger, the opposite of love is indifference. So an opposite of love, they're actually—love is in its broad English sense a very large and complex idea. So there's a ton going on here, and I think that's something that's going to be a big issue in the future, and I find the passion and the intelligence and the level of discussion going on about this little corner, the bridges of meaning Discord server, and what we want out of this. I find all of this healthy and stimulating and good. We're having a conversation. If you go back, again, it's funny because in Jacob's little channel, just chatting, very seldom hear estuary, and if there was one of my little projects that's probably the fair haired child, it's more estuary, and bridges of meaning Discord was intended to be an estuary, but as estuary developed, it's quite clear that bridges of meaning just by its Discord format is a different thing, and that's absolutely okay. Discord fits a certain group of people really well, and a certain group of people will really flourish in it, but I would say that easily 90 to 95% of my audience won't flourish in Discord. Maybe StreamYard, Just Chattings, can pick up another 5%. Maybe if I finally get around to writing a book, that'll pick up another 5%. There's people on Twitter who are in my audience that are also sort of in a different space, and now again, my channel is quite small. If you look at Jordan Peterson Land, well, it's far larger, but in some ways, there's a really interesting segment on here where Manuel sort of goes after the political orientation, and I thought that was a good segment of the conversation too, because in many ways, the political and the videos I really want to make right now, the conversation between Jonathan Pigeot and Bernardo Castrop, that was a very interesting conversation. There's a whole series of lectures given in a little church in Washington State surrounding Aaron Wren's negative world. I really want to dig into those conversations and do some commentary on them. I'm really excited about the marriage crisis conversations that we're having, but in many ways, these conversations around my ownership of my little corner, again, in some ways, Jacob complains about that I'm not going at this formally enough in terms of leadership. Mark complains about structure, and again, these are guys I consider friends, and again, to go back to the book of Proverbs, words of critique or even criticism, to paraphrase the book of Proverbs, words of critique and even criticism given by a friend is an expression of love, because if they didn't care, they wouldn't be spending all this time on Jacob's channel going round and round about it. And in some ways, as with any critique or even criticism, it expresses more, it tells you more about the person making it than often about what the person that they're pointing at. We all critique and criticize from the chairs that we're sitting in. Yeah, so hopefully I can get this video downloaded, and I can include it here, because I know if I just put a link, it'll be harder for some of you to find, but it's a, I couldn't be more happy, and I couldn't be more proud of the conversation. Those of you who know me more in my church sphere know that this is something that I've been talking about in the Christian Reformed Church for, since 2012, about confessional conversations. In many ways, when I look at Jacob's Just Chatting channel here, they're having a vehement confessional conversation, and Jacob is saying, I'm trying to start a confessional church and Paul won't be its bishop. Fair enough. In all fairness, I already have a church and a confessional one, and at least at this point, this little corner is still a side gig and a side hustle not my main deal, because my main deal continues to be a little local dying church at the corner of Florin Road and Amherst in Sacramento, and that's something that for as long as the Lord gives it to me, I'll keep shepherding. Now, once the time to lay living stones to rest comes, who knows? I've got basically eight years until retirement, and I, who knows what happens in eight years, but I enjoy this so much. I'd be, I really want to keep doing this even after retirement. Retired pastors are sort of given leave from their local charge and are often able to more freely do some other things. Now, I can really understand Jacob's complaint about Protestantism, and in a Randall's conversation I had today that I don't know if it will be published or not, I might take a clip out of it. I warned him about that because we got into this because this because some of this is obviously rolling around in my mind, and this was an individual who is, grew up Protestant and is trying to find his way back into church and finding that difficult. You, maybe you wouldn't be surprised, but a remarkable number of my Randall's conversations involve people trying to get back into church and not having an easy time of it, and that says a lot about the church, and it says a lot about what I think, how I think churches need to continue to work on their mission, and in the broadest possible sense, I see a diversity of institutions surrounding this channel as, for me, exploration of the mission, and one of the things that I've always, in a very Protestant way, always suggested to people, which in many ways vacuums in leadership often do, people step up and say, Paul isn't doing it right, I'm going to do it because I'm tired of waiting for him, and I say, please go forward, please do it. In many ways, my channel got started because of a vacuum in leadership that I saw from Jordan Peterson. Is it a vacuum in leadership or just the fact that each of us has limited time and energy, and so then we tend to pick the places we're most excited about, feel best equipped to do, and think perhaps has priority, and so I see what Grim Grizz has done, I see what Jacob has done, I see what Mark Navigating Patterns has done, Manuel has his own YouTube channel, Karen Wong has her own YouTube channel, there's the artist group that's out there, there's of course Estuary and all of the Estuary work going on. The truth is, many of the starters of all of these sub-projects often knock on my door and say, I need more support, Paul, I need more support, and okay, I'll do my best to give you support, and sometimes that support is visibility on the channel, sometimes that support is a phone call and a conversation, sometimes that support is me showing up and helping to get an Estuary started, sometimes that support is a Rando's conversation or a phone call, comes in a lot of different ways, and the truth is, I'm trying to support about a dozen projects, Bridges of Meaning being one of them. Now, people noted that for a while I haven't had the link in my show notes. That happened because there was some drama around the German festival, and this has sort of caused Jacob's very Protestant breakout from the Bridges of Meaning Discord server and the starting of his own, and so Joey asked me to take the link down for a little while, which I did, and now because Jacob is kicking up all of this stuff, people noticed it and said, you know, why is the link down? I said, I'm just waiting for somebody from the Bridges of Meaning admins to ask me to put it up again, so you'll find it underneath here. Now, what happens is we used to have a link that was permanent, and then all sorts of bots came on to the Discord, and so because all of those old links were still in my show notes because all of those old links were still in my show notes going way back, and so now I only have a link that is good for seven days, and what tends to happen is it expires, and then somebody asks me for the link, so, and by all means, if you're a Discord-type person, go to the Bridges of Meaning Discord server. You will find wonderful people there with wonderful conversations, and if you're into text chat because that works best for you, go after it, and you'll find a whole realm of things there, and you'll find gateways onto other Discord servers, and you'll find community and people and all of that, but again, they're sort of a Dunbar number because, and that's kind of the nature of Discord. Now, in all of this, there is, I think, default Protestantism is deeply in our culture, and I think deeply in the world secular culture. There's an implicit consumerism. People are free to sort of find the little niche that suits them. There's, and you know, especially in somebody's case like Manuel, who was, he wasn't really finding what he needed on Bridges of Meaning, and Awakening from the Meaning Crisis server helped him quite a bit, and some of you will listen to that and think, ooh, that's, you know, that's more the verveci side, but the truth is he found some things helpful over on that side, which led him to be being baptized and joining a church near his home. And as a pastor, one of the things that you learn over time is all of the programs that I imagine are insufficient to the need at hand because people's needs are more complex than I can know. And as a pastor, you learn to live with that. There have been many times when people have left my church, found another church that worked better for them, and I can look at some of these other churches and point to their deficiencies in theology, point to their deficiencies in practice, point to ways which I think I have better answers or ways of doing things better, but the truth is those other churches helped them more than I could, and I've discovered this again and again and again in ministry, and I discovered this again and again and again in YouTube land. People come to me for a season because it sort of fits them, and then they're over to verveci or Peugeot or Peterson or they make their way to Christian YouTube or something like that. And at least in YouTube land, most of this is happening, and I don't even know about it until maybe they show up in a in a randos chat, and I hear from them, and that's part of the reason that I keep the randos chats as random as possible. Just today, I had two randos chats that were very surprising, just new conversations. And then I had a third conversation. Somebody approached me, the guy has a podcast, I'll be on it. And again, completely, I never would have thought this guy would have crossed my desk, but you know what? He read my sub stack from some of my conversations of what's going on in the Christian Reformed Church, and he wanted to talk about that. So it's extremely broad. And so, yeah, let a thousand flowers bloom and keep up those confessional conversations. Grim Grizz pops into this conversation in his grim grizz way and says, none of you been paying attention to what verveci talks about with self-organizing criticality? You're doing it right now and you're not even knowing you're doing it. And I thought, that's exactly right. And at each point in these conversations, some of Jacob's and Mark's critiques of me, which again, I receive in love. Some of them land hard on me because there's an element of truth in them. And I see my own leadership deficiencies. One of the things about being in a church for decades is that my own leadership deficiencies are pretty obvious to me. Now, in Christianity and in the church, this is why we have the body of Christ and why we have giftedness, because I've not been given all the spiritual gifts. Other people have other gifts. And so as a body, we make up for each other. Now, what I'm advocating is a body of bodies. Now, Jacob also in this video talks about the problem of the priesthood of all. And you can see that I laid it out here, the self-priesthood of all, maybe not believers, but yeah, that again, deep within our culture, deep within the way things go. Movement versus institutions. This little corner is much more of a movement than an institution. Movements don't have that. There was an early days in church planting and myself and my colleague who were kind of spearheading this had a couple of young church planters across the lunch table from us. And one of those church planters said to us, you know, I think of this much more than a movement than an institution. My very wise colleague leans over and says, does your movement have a budget? Does your movement pay your salary? It's a difference between a movement and an institution. We very much need institutions, bodies, efforts. Does bridges have meaning in institution? Sort of. They've got leadership. They've got organization. Their leadership is watching this conversation and they, I'm still included in the bridges of meaning admin discord. And so I don't go onto it very often, but Rick asked me a question. So I popped onto it and Joey's still there and Rick's still there and a bunch of others. And no, Jacob is right. I haven't appointed them. Why? Because I'm Protestant. Because the, in many ways, and I find these ironies deep, the bridges of meaning admins bring up new ones from the body. It's, it's eerily like Christian reformed councils are formed from the congregation. And I'm comfortable with that. Jacob can fire me. And that doesn't bother me because, you know, Jacob, I frustrating Jacob has led him to build things and to try things that I wouldn't have, couldn't have, you know, I sort of really laughed off his Trinity broadcast network vision of a 24 hour channel, but he's convincing me by doing it. And that's one of the best ways to convince a, a recalcitrant leader is to go out there and prove them wrong. I will happily be proven wrong in a thousand productive ways because I know I am not smart enough. I am not clever enough. I, there's not enough me. I don't have enough time. There isn't enough anything for me to actually even accomplish a number of vital important things in the world that should be addressed. My ambition is that I be helpful. And am I a bishop in some ways in the Christian reformed church? One of my colleagues, colleagues calls me that and always with a little chagrin because there are no bishops in the Christian reformed church. But then again, there are in some ways. And do I have status in this little corner of the internet? Of course I do. Um, and, and by virtue of that, a degree of authority, but the irony is of course that, some of these, some of these very productive rebels are in many ways, I celebrate their accomplishment and even their rebellions in some ways because yeah, go out and prove me wrong. Please do go and go and start something that you've been waiting for me to start, but I, but I won't do it. Stubborn me and, and go start it for me because I won't. And you know, I could, I could do the same thing with Jordan Peterson. Oh, why won't Jordan Peterson bless my estuary? Oh, why won't Jordan Peterson join the bridges of meaning discord server? In fact, you know, that there've been many times that I get worried that he might do something like that. And then a little effort would be swamped. You know, a tsunami can destroy an estuary, at least set it back two or three years. And so I'm going to include if, let's see, that hasn't downloaded yet. I have to get that here. I'm going to include that the, the rest of the conversation, because I think it's an outstanding conversation. And I think it's a, it's a confessional conversation. And I think it's, I want to see many, many more type conversations. Now, some of you might listen to five minutes of it and say, I don't want the wrangling. Fair enough. Click away. There, there's in fact more of these conversations than I have time or interest to listen to. And, and fortunately, if you check out Chad's Friday morning nameless channel, he'll clip out of it. Grim Grizz is taking clips out of it. So, and again, this is how an ecosystem works. This is how an estuary works. You have different parts of it doing different things. And so Anselman is in the comment section monitoring Anglican and Protestant orthodoxy, and God bless him for that. And, and other people are regularly coming in and criticizing me for not taking psychedelics and for not having the kind of priorities about spirituality they have. Absolutely. I'm going to put another conversation in that I had someone from, with someone from the Verveke side of things. And he said, you know, your comment section and your YouTube channel is, is particularly good. And I think that's right. I love it when people come on the comment section and tell me when I'm wrong. You know, when, when Anselman admonishes me for my, for, for, for words that, that maybe I shouldn't say, or maybe, you know, for some ways I get wrong, or at least according to him, he's blessing me. He's loving me. And, you know, there are some people in there that are giving comments that, that aren't necessarily helpful. Absolutely. But for the most part, have the conversation, push on each other. If PVK isn't starting it, you start it and see where it goes. You know, this, actually this has been foundational in the Peterson thing right from the start, hasn't it? This is what we've been about. So yeah, I include this. If you have the stomach to listen to it, listen to it. There are nuggets of wisdom in there coming from Hezzi, from Jacob, from Mark, from Manuel, from, from Lance. Lance has a great speech in it. Luke, you know, pops in and we can watch him move a hose in his snowy Minnesota house. Sherry comes in from, from, from Northern British Columbia. It's lovely. It's lovely. And I'm, I'm thrilled to see it. And yeah, the process, it's making sausage, you know, it's, it's, it's, it's churning through ideas. It's Jacob repeating himself too often and yelling and firing me. And I think the whole thing's great. I really do. So here it is if you're interested in it and yeah, leave a comment. Would you be open to discussing yesterday's just chatting? No, why would I want to talk to you about yesterday's just chatting? All right, we can talk about other stuff. I'm joking. So to be honest with you, I don't know. It was like, it was difficult for me to watch a little, I guess. First off, like, I think, I mean, I guess it's good that everyone takes it relatively in good spirits, but I don't know. It just felt like it was like pretty like aggressive at PVK, which I understand you're saying like, listen, flipping tables, Jesus, we got to get angry, the leader. But I feel some sort of sentiment toward of where he's coming from, which is, you know, he doesn't know yet. And I guess I'm going to ask you like, he's coming and saying, he doesn't know what he's, what he's supposed to be doing yet in this sort of area. And he's sort of feeling around the dark. And I've mentioned this before that I think us seeing, and by us, I mean, I include Jews as well, but seeing Paul as in a certain authority, us seeing him sort of process, Verveke, Jordan Peterson, Jonathan Mejoo, together with the Bible is sort of, we see this authority taking this and sort of, you know, transmitting it sort of to us or giving it sort of a stamp of approval from religious perspective of like, this works together. And I think in a certain sense, that's in a certain case, sort of the meaning we get to feel around. We're seeing like, okay, he's taking this, he's taking this and seems to be coherent. Now, I think that's like, it's still very much in its like early stage. And I would think that this is like, the just chatting is a development of the bridges of meaning discord, because like this is happening, which I think is like a little more interactive. However, I don't know, like all the question of like a hierarchy and people in charge and in charge of what, like right now, I don't know, it's like, it really, I was thinking about it sort of like a dream catcher, meaning catcher, you have people fumbling their way over here. And they're like, okay, what is this? I have questions, you guys have questions. So isn't this sort of at this stage, this mode? Like, yes, it needs to go somewhere. But like, maybe it's even too soon to ask where it needs to go. So, Kesi, for you, this is a question of only a few years, apparently. Whereas I went one year, okay, I went to college to study political science. And my graduate degrees were supposed to be a master's of public administration and a Juris Doctor, which is a law degree here in the United States. And my whole project, really, since childhood, has been making order in the chaos that I saw, right, I am a refugee from the revolution in Iran, in the United States. And I grew up here with an absolute love for being able to live in a country where things are so well regulated. Let me tell you a story about when we were kids. When we were in the car, my sister and I would see here in the United States would see a police car and we would get scared. Because guess what? Part of my formative experience as a child was when the police came, arrested my father, and we thought he would never get back. He was convicted of being a Zionist spy in Iran and served six months in jail. Okay? So, when we were here in the United States, my sister and I, when we saw police cars, it frightened us. And I remember my father saying, no, these cops are here to help us, right? And don't worry about the police. They're the good guys. And I remember when I was in college standing on the front lawn of a black man who was living in Beverly Hills. And he told me when he was a child, because he had come from much more humble beginnings than where he was living at the time. We were on his front lawn as I was leaving and the police passed by and waved to him and he waved back. And he told me the idea that he is there in Beverly Hills in a very, very expensive house. And the police are waving to him, know his name, know who he is, right? That was a very different thing for him. And so, for me, hierarchy and government and actually living in an environment that is not filled with the chaos that existed in Iran or exists even in certain places here in Los Angeles and certainly exists in a lot of places in Israel, right? Is incredibly important to me. And what I saw- I'm just writing down some notes as you speak, so don't- What? I said I'm just writing down some notes as you speak. Okay. And so, when- Father Eric, you can always come on to StreamYard and come into the chat. You're an admin on this channel. Not sure we want to have a public chat, but obviously, you're always welcome, Father Eric. No, serious. And so, for me, this is not a project of a few years. This is a lifetime project. And I got involved in the Jordan Peterson whole thing, partially because he understands the necessity of hierarchy and he was talking about how our society is falling apart. So, for me, again, Grim, you are an admin on this channel. You are always welcome. Can we just put the link, though, if people want to join? Sure, we can. I just- I want high- Well, I guess this is part of the conversation, which is, while I'm talking, you could post the link. But I guess, one is, I agree with you that the hierarchy is extremely important, but there's a time and place for that. And secondly, you were mentioning about chaos coming in. I just wrote this little note over here. But it's sort of like, again, like the Jubilee and Chavez, where you have this- you could have chaos come in and have it within a certain structure of order. And having a channel like this, at this stage, at least, is allowing a person's individual chaos, sort of when he was seeing this meaningful- like in his meaning crisis, come into this space, this little corner, which allows him to have a framework for that chaos. Now, there's a lot of chaos still, as we see here. There's Jews, there's Christians, there's Protestants, there's all different sects they're discussing, whether it's the Trinity or all the way down. So you still see that chaos happening. But it's all happening within sort of this loving structure, which I think people are relatively happy with. I understand right now that there was like a lull and there was Joey and there's hierarchies and there's stuff, but like, okay, so there was drama. I wasn't involved in this drama, but there's drama. And there's a lull. Now, you mentioned that you were throwing out all these little seeds, which is great. Now, and perhaps those seeds are going on for already like five years or so, but as you mentioned, or this is a process that you're going for a while. However, one of these seeds to get via like this vehicle has stuck seemingly. And there was some sort of like revival in this group, I guess, that now people are having this conversation. Now, I see some conversations about like, it's too much thinky talky and like it needs to be more practical. Now, I love- Paul just did this series about like marriage, which I think is like phenomenal, which I think is like, that's like very, there's a word in Hebrew called tachles. It's very on the ground, like facts on the ground. And I think more, there should be more breakups like that. However, isn't it still too soon to even define this in a sense where like you need a hierarchy and you're going to explain to me why I'm wrong and why are you thinking you need the hierarchy? I guess I'm just saying that right now, if people feel that already here, there's a system that they won't necessarily feel comfortable with. Are we sort of losing those people that are still searching for meaning? And arguably you could say like, well, listen, Chazi, like we can't wait forever or, you know, we got to move on. This needs to progress. But again, I mean, I'm talking to you. No, no, no. You're misunderstanding. So this is part of what this corner has started recognizing. Do you share a link? I did. Yes. And it's pinned up to the top of the thing. That it's the fact that we don't know all of the things that we don't know. And we don't recognize all of the things that are holding us up in ways that we have we're just not aware of. So it's not that there isn't a hierarchy and I'm trying to create a hierarchy. There is a hierarchy. There's obviously a hierarchy. And Paul knows better than most that there is a hierarchy. He just wants to pretend like he's not at the top of that hierarchy. And so the problem is that, okay, the problem is that Chazi is in fact a genius. And the big man is here himself. You need to turn off your YouTube. So there is a hierarchy. Of course, there's a hierarchy. And Paul realizes there's a hierarchy. Paul knows there's a hierarchy. Paul just doesn't want to be in control of that hierarchy. Okay, what's like a jig before before we go any further, just because I think it's very we're fortunate that Pastor Paul is here. I would hate to have a repeat where he feels the need to bust out if it gets too intense over here. So I believe in 10 minutes anyway, so any leaving will not be on there. Okay, so but Paul, if you're here, if you don't mind, I know that you discussed this yesterday, but I think it's important. And Jacob, I'm going to say something. I don't remember her name. But yesterday on the stream, there was some woman. Kara. Okay. It seemed like she was like in this conversation, he'd be like, well, guess what, sister, it was the wrong time. But she was still very much looking to have like, the classic, like, let's let's flow altogether conversation. And it was like, not now, sister, like now we're talking about that was the first time I've ever met her. And she was not contributing to the conversation. And she was but Jacob, but she was she was her participation by just by just observing this and enjoying this for her could have been a life changing. Now, okay, let's not get too crazy. Maybe this says, Look, yes, I realized the importance of the individual. Yes, the individual is really important. But guess what, I have bigger fish to fry. Okay, great. So one second before we jump to the bigger fish to fry, okay, because that's I wanted to talk about this. Because again, perhaps I'm not understanding. I'm with you that there's bigger fish to fry. And I think all of us see that, you know, that there's something coming. And you know, we want to be prepared. However, is the time if it is a time to fry those bigger fish, like today, yeah, or to be that like, that happens down the line. And now, one more second, and it's all yours. Like there was you were talking about 24 hours, we're on this site right now, people are talking, 20 people are watching people engaging. I look at this as like, success. We won. It's happening. It's moving. Now you could also say great, has he someone needs to keep on pushing and if I'm no, no, no, no, no, 20 people watching is small. Because Paul's channel gets hundreds of people, Paul should be able if Paul was having just chatting streams, if Paul was leading this conversation, like he should be, then there would be 1000s of people who would be watching instead of hundreds. And but doesn't before it could turn into not this little corner, but this medium sized corner, this large corner, or maybe it's no longer a corner. Right. So but I guess, has a Paul is one of the small stars in this corner of the internet. Okay. Yeah. You know, we had a great we had like almost a four hour conversation on BOM today and Manuel and Mark participated, Cassidy was there. Luke was there, just P was there. And we talked about this just chatting. And one of the things I had a chance and I shared with Manuel like that last portion of the conversation, like I'm very sympathetic, Jacob, and that's why I shared with them to to to kind of what you guys are seeing. But the way it was coming across was very aggressive. And and when you lost me, like, like, the last hour, like you lost me, like, and I could I had a car trouble, I couldn't jump in. And I so we flushed this out, I think having a chance to unpack this with with Mark and Manuel, which is one the messaging needs to be better was I one of the things they mentioned, and it's something I agree with, which is at the leadership level, this little corner is an online community community that is rejecting the reality that we're an online community. Everyone realizes real life is better. But there are not estuaries built. Where are people going to go? And even I would just say this, even if you build the estuaries, if we had 40 estuaries built, that's still not covering enough space. Events are amazing. But how many are those? Can you get to a year, maybe one in your location? We are an online Paul has an online funnel. And there are real things going on here. And when I was listening to Manuel, Mark, or I think what you just say, we we're not going to scale based on building estuaries, but building out something that has leadership in the online community and realizing real life happens here. Trust me, it does. So I thought that was a really good nugget that I got out of Manuel and Mark this morning. Right. The thing that I want to highlight is that there's there's people that get drawn in, right, and there's buckets of people that get drawn in with different problems. Right. And what I think would be a value, which would be like a good service that we could provide, and that needs leadership and structure is that we capture those people, right, and provide them the space that they need to grow. And like those spaces aren't the same for everybody. Right. So we need to like specialize and have have them flow into spaces. And we need to identify what are these groups, what are their needs and how can we provide for them. And that's what I think leadership needs to be taken from. And like, obviously, Paul can do everything right. And he shouldn't. But but we need to work on that. And, and we need to gather around that project. And I don't want to say you have to do it like this, you have to do it like that. But we have to figure out like, what can we do? And what are the steps that we can provide people? How can we provide them? Like, that work needs to happen. And we have enough knowledge to do that. Like, like, I know that we are. And I want to build a bridge because I could tell a lot of people out here in our this little corner were kind of recoiled at the end of that, at the end of that video, right. And one of the things which I agree, like Chad and I are trying to we he talks about it, we quietly are screaming, instead of and I think this is a conversation instead of a hierarchy with bopes, popes and bishops. In AA, we have a primary purpose, think mission statement, you have a thing that you point towards. But then we build these traditions around it, that are the things that keep the crazies from taking over, it does provide some structure yet allows a lot of chaos to happen in those meeting rooms, but it keeps us from fracturing. And so I this deep sense that you have for order, like I want to confirm that Jacob, but I think but I think the conversation so I just wanted to bridge a little bit of a gap because you guys are like the hearts in the right place. But the messaging was off. And no, no, no, look, there, there is a fire here and some things are going to have to burn. Jacob, can I just understand and please take feel free to rant away? Is it am I to understand correctly? And thank you for sharing the story about like, about what happened with your father, which obviously is devastating. Do you feel that given that your experience, when you look around you, you have you feel like a sense of urgency that like, okay, so first of all, we obviously have to appreciate that that you're coming from this place for like you guys. Look, there's a reason I made my video that how civil wars start. And there's a reason why I built it around the PBS interview with the professor at UC San Diego. So this is not somebody on the right, this is somebody an academic on the left who works for the CIA, who was on PBS, not on Fox News, talking about 2024 election being a civil war situation in the United States. But do you see and civil war in the United States at the 2024 election? Okay, but first of all, obviously, that would be horrible. Do you feel though, that this just chatting or this corner should be addressing that issue? For the past six years? Well, I want to make sure I understand correctly because up until now, this panel exists for six years, I have been involved in the Jordan Peterson community solely because I want to avert the coming civil war that might happen in 2024. One second. So there's there's no quote unquote, religious background to this, which is like, what's behind the meaning crisis? Like, are you looking at just from a political lens? Okay, I started with a political lens, and I realized that the problem is theological. And that's why I am addressing it theologically. But don't you feel and rightfully so serious thing like, okay, guys, I've been as patient as I could be up until now, you know, just playing around with the theological game, and I'm taking it seriously, but the clock's ticking. We just had the midterms elections are coming. Okay, these two, I am still playing the theological game. My Bible study last night, right was far more important to me than the just chatting stream, despite the fact that the just chatting stream got a lot more views. Are they are they are they separate though? Because like, I'm told they are separate. I want to connect back to the Bible study, basically, because I think that's where we're pulling our meaning from. And I wish Paul had gotten a chance to speak before he had to go. But look, I, I will stick to the theological, if I need to. And if I'm no if there's no nobody better to do the theological, I will stick to the political if I need to. And there's nobody better to do the political, I will do whatever it takes. And whatever I am competent to do. This is not about me. This is about what needs to be done being done. Right? So can I ask Manuel, what do you what do you I'm sorry, if it's on the spot, but like, where do you see that in the same way? Are you seeing this as this, like, from this political vantage point as well that like, this is what we're this this conversation on just chatting, like we're, we're, we're, you know, No, I don't use the political frame. Right? Like, I, I see that there's a meaning crisis, and can get whatever expression and like, I'm not gonna refute Jacob's observation, right? Like, that potential is definitely there. But but for me, it's like, this stuff has been percolating for a while, right? And it's like, at a certain point, like, there needs to be a flag planted, and, and moved forward. And I feel like, like, we've we've passed that point, like, we plant the flag and move. Okay. And like, I don't I don't want to don't mean moving in a political way, but moving in the sense of, okay, we need to get a body. And the body needs to take action in the world. Wait, what's so we know this isn't as individuals, I can wake up in the morning and take action. When you say this body forget who's at the head or who the leaders are, what's the action is bodies taking? And before you answer that, I would argue that currently, you know, this right now is the like, the new iteration of that body, right? So you can be like, Okay, but this just chatting is not effective. It's not doing anything. So what is a lot? It's doing a lot. And see, this is the problem. This is the problem. Again, that Paul has, right? He wants to know what the T los is, the T los is God, the T los is thy kingdom come, that is the T los thy kingdom come, right? I am trying to help create a confessing church. An actual body. And by confessing church, I am referring to the the organization, a very specific organization which existed during World War Two in Germany. Okay, that's what I'm referring to. I am trying to help create cohesion. And the reason I have been supporting Paul, and I was supporting Paul until we had to fire him because he's incompetent, is that this is a body coming together. And this body is not about Paul van der Kley. It is not about Jason Paduretchi either. What is it about? It's about a community. It's about people who have actually come together. That's what it is. So I would I would hear Mark, I hear community. Sorry, go ahead, Manuel. Yeah, well, I would argue that it's about lifting people up, right? So there's a lot of lost souls out there, right? And they stray in, right? Like, that's what Jordan Peterson caught on to, right? Like, and you want to give those souls a place to rest and recover, right? And then from there, go back out in the world, right? So you want to do two things, right? You want to do the onramping, right? And then digesting, right? So there needs to be, facilitation of the digesting. And then, and this is the latest step, you do the offramping again. Well, like, how can we manifest things from what has been gathered here back into reality, right? And, or the locality, that's a better word than reality, right? So and I think all of that needs structures, right? And it's like, okay, like, we have this idea of AA, right? Like, where there's this gathering, and they have these principles, right? Like, so that's the structure that you can use in the locality, right? And maybe you can also use parts of that online, right? And there's, well, the way I see it is, like, what is this theology, right? Like, Peugeot says, the world is attached, right? So it provides people a way to attend to the world in new ways that aren't available to them, right? So we were talking about the political lens, right? Like, almost everybody's in that stupid political lens, at least online, right? And, and they, their relationship with reality gets messed up, because that's not not a good lens for most problems, right? And so what you want to do is you want to give people the tools to, to engage from the right lens and with proper agency, seeing where they can affect things, and where they shouldn't act and let things happen. And, and that's, that's what's important, right? And then Lance was saying, well, yeah, like, there's this turning the tables language, which, which is triggering people, it's like, fair enough, right? But, but knowing where you stand, right, allows you to, to, to resist, right, to hold your ground, and to take action, justified action. Let me just tweak what Manuel said, which I agree with 99%. It's not a stupid political lens. The political is a necessary component of life. It is a necessary small component of life that needs to be confined to its proper location. And part of the problem we are having is that the political has become theological, and the theological has become, I don't even know what to call what it has become. It, it's not that the theological is not there, the theological is there. It has become polluted with a lot of stupidity. It is the water which we swim in necessarily. The theological, you, you cannot operate without the theological. And so, yes, a lot of us, especially me, came into the theological, and I believe Manuel is saying something similar, because we realize that the political is deeply, deeply broken. And the reason it's broken is because the theological has been polluted and is, is not working correctly. And part of the reason for that is that people are not paying attention to the theological like they should, right? And it is very perverse to me that when I put a, a just chatting stream and we end up talking about what I would say is more political, that it, it gains more attention than a more theological discussion. But that also is the way the world works, because most people are not capable of engaging the theological in a productive manner. They can only engage it in a receptive manner. And that's fine. Not everybody needs to be at some post-ecador, some great rabbi, some great Talmud, there is such a thing as Am Haaretz, the people of the land, right? And the vast majority of people are in fact going to be not the priests, but the congregation. And you need priests and you need a congregation, and that's the proper order of things. But part of the problem is this Protestant insistence on the priesthood of the people, that everybody should understand everything, that everybody should be involved in this egalitarianism, which- Who's asking for that though? What? Who's asking that everyone- It's implicit. It's implicit in the Protestant theology. Protestant theology sucks partially because of this egalitarianism. And it goes back to Paul of, Paul of Tarsus, and there is no Jew or gentile, man or woman, free or slave in Christ Jesus. And this perverse insistence on not having hierarchy, which is Marxist, which is something that Protestantism has contributed very falsely to the world in which we live. And thank God we have a woman because the shadow matriarchy has it all. Jacob, so one of the things I want to share is I see the calamity and chaos in the impending situations that are coming. Like you and I, like when you talk, I see that. The question I would have for you, and I know why you came here, the question I would have for you is, is this the body? And I'm talking about PVKs, this little corner. I know what you're trying to accomplish. I don't think this is the body for that thing. That's because you're a Protestant. No, it's not. I'm an Orthodox, by the way. So anyway. No, you're not. That's the problem. So no, no, no, no, no, no, Jacob, you can't tell me you can't. Yes, I can. You can, but you're wrong. And here's the situation, which is this little corner is not going to see and respond and do what you want. There are other places I know where people are forming this and doing this and it's organized and everything else. But Kezzi said something I think is really important. He talked about the dream catcher. This is how I view it. This is the place that is going to catch people as this calamity hits, where they're going to be able to come in, and particularly people without God, are going to be able to come in and start doing some sensemaking and make some space about that to try and figure their way through this. There are other vehicles to do that. I just don't think you're not going to wake the people in this little corner up to this motion and have it be this body. Okay, Lance, the three of you on the bottom, and there's a reason why I put the three of you on the bottom, are all, no, no, no, listen, is all three of you are Eastern Orthodox converts from Protestantism, right? Because all three of you recognize that there's something wrong in the Protestant way of doing things. Jacob, one second. Before we get specific about Protestants, I want to, and I like the tone of this whole conversation is happening, I want to understand something that you and Manuel were saying that I want to better understand what you said. We planted a flag because right now, again, I see we're here. People have a meaning issue. They come here. They're discussing it. It's being processed. So all those, and I think you guys agree, are positive. And now, as far as off-ramping people, even though I think there's still a question of how we on-ramp people, but let's say off-ramping people, that would be, Manuel, you would say that would be like the next flag you put, but to get to off-ramping, we still have to create a body? Is that what you're saying? We won't be able to achieve off-ramping if we don't create a body? Yeah, you should see it as a digestive system, right? But you should also see it as a colonization of a path, right? So you can only proceed incrementally. You can't make the whole path from scratch, right? Perfect. So wouldn't just chatting be that little incremental growth where... Yeah, but I've been chatting for three years now. Well, but I would argue, and I could be wrong, that this kind of conversation, which is like taking a step back and looking at the bridge, I see this as like a matter conversation about that first conversation. And again, I could be wrong. You'd be like, well, Chazi, I've been doing this for two years and like, it's time to move on to the next phase. Yeah, like that's basically where I'm at. Right. Okay, so Manuel, Jacob, the next phase... Look, Chazi, Chazi, Chazi, Chazi. Look, yes, you are new here. Yes, you are in fact new here. And part of the problem is, one of the reasons I left the Bridge of the Meeting server is I don't want to do this over and over and over and over again. Right? I want this to be a process that matures. So yes, it is quite possible that I could shut up and we could go back to, you're not listening. I could shut up and we could go back to doing what we were doing before, or we can actually mature as a community into something that actually has a real hierarchy that matures, that has levels to it, and is able to move forward. And yes, lots of people are not going to like it and they're going to go away from it. Okay. But that is part of what happens when you create something more mature. Well, I think part of the problem before was that there was a hierarchy and that hierarchy abused, might have abused its power, which caused you to lose your shit. No. Yes. That's what happened. That's what happened. That's exactly what happened. That was a difference. Let's just talk about it in a general sense. So now that's different? How is that any different? That was a problem? Those were appointed people who tell me- No, they were not appointed people. That's the problem. Paul did not appoint Dennis. It has nothing to do with Paul. Let's not talk about the past. Come on, Hezzy. No. Yes. We have to talk about the past. Sure. Have at it. I'm just trying to understand from you. I agree with you. You're saying that it's maturing. We need to move on. You know what? I'm with you. I apparently mistakenly thought that the just chatting was, let's say, a next stage. But as Manuel is saying, he's like, no, that's just, this is still what we've been doing. So what does next stage look like to you? And the answer could be like, we don't know, but we know it includes a body and a hierarchy. So the next stage means building that. Am I, am I understanding correctly? You're saying like there's no building the next stage without the infrastructure. Look, you're, you're, you cannot, human beings have a Dunbar number. We have a capacity to deal with only so many people at some, at one time. And so in order to have larger structures, you have to, in fact, create a way that clicks of people can relate to each other. Yeah. You need, you need communicating vessels. Right. Right. Okay. Do you think, you know, I spoke too much, please someone else. I mean, I felt bad. Michael joins. You want to take it away? Well, I'll just say it's, it's difficult to have um, discussions about the theological roots of what's going on. If there's no respect for people who heard to hold to certain theologies. So, I mean, that's like, I mean, I'm, I'm not interested in changing my point of view. I don't want, I'm not particularly interested in attacking anybody else's point of view. I would like to learn and listen. Um, so I mean, if it's, if, if the whole center of this thing is Protestant theology is bad and the worst, and it's the cause of all problems, then I will just use my Protestant privilege to leave and not participate anymore. So what I think, Mike, I think Jacob means, so I, issues with the Protestants movement in general, it's not an ad, how am I going to talk about? Well, I shouldn't speak for Jacob. Okay. Well, I know it's not an ad hominem against me, but I'm just saying there are reasons why, and they're not bad reasons. And I would say implicit trust in institutions and hierarchy is without questioning the roots of those hierarchies is dangerous. And nobody said anything about it. Not, not, not questioning the roots of those hierarchies. You definitely need to question those hierarchies. And look, if, if you are committed to those theological principles, which make it impossible for us to progress as a society, we would put you down if you want to engage, you can engage. But if, if the problem is the egalitarian nature of Protestant theology. No, because that's the only thing that allows voluntary participation because which, you know, in Piaget's, energy spent enforcing rules is a waste of energy that could be used for something productive. So would you two report to Gavin for a, a Minerva art session on this topic? Cause that would be great. And I, hell yeah. That's why that's how you say your name, right? Hesie. The C is not Hesie. Okay. Um, you're young blood, fresh blood, and they're going to vampire your energy if you're not very careful. Um, this, this bitterness that Manuel feels and the frustration that Jacob feels, and I don't know how Luke feels about it. How am I bitter? Like what's that about? Stop, stop doing this at home. They have a sense of urgency. The frustration with two years of like, I've been doing this for two years. I've been doing this for two years is, is what I'm characterizing as that, sir. I'm sorry if that's offensive, but for conversational purposes, I'll move on. Why is it not the first graduating class of this corner is there little seeds are sprouting into new little projects while we let pastor Paul keep bringing in the deconstructing Christians? Because, because bridges of meaning is not going to continue to do what it has been for the new people. And why so, so yeah. So Jacob, I think you think that's new people. So I think you think that's, I think you think that's because there's a lack of structure. I think it's because the persons who were the catalyst for the magic that happened at the beginning of bridges of meaning moved on. No, I don't disagree with you. It is because the people who were the catalysts have moved on. And the way in which we can fix that is by creating a structure, which is able to provide those things that somebody like me provided. So this is the, this is why you create structures which have intergenerational capacity. You take, you build wisdom. And if we are not going to build generation to generation, L'Aidor V'ador, intergenerationally, and this is what I was saying on Grimm's stream earlier today, is the Protestant theology is a very good theology for conquering new territory. It's horrible intergenerational living. It's not competent. Jacob, do you mind, do you mind expanding on that a little for Michael with just like where you're coming from that when you say that? Well, Michael, what do you think when I say that? Well, I don't know what you're saying in that the next generation does not hold to what the previous generation did. I don't think that's always the case. But I mean, but I think that, you know, I believe in a conversionary form of Christianity. I mean, I can say this as somebody who basically was a Christian, like from my birth, but even still, it's like, you know, there's this guy, George Barna, who takes statistics about churches, and there's a lot of different qualities. So we can say like the Catholic Church is the greatest institution in the world because it has a billion members, but it's also declined the fastest of any denomination in America. And when they ask people about many, their attendance is lower, their knowledge of the Bible is lower, their answers to like basic theological questions are lower. So it's like, it's a structure that seems to have success in passing this on. But what it's actually passing on is not of much substance. And I mean, I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to answer that question. I would just say this about new people, right? Like, the dream catcher thing, I love how you said that, Hezzy. But so people did much like you guys have matured and you want to move on and start building things. That's great. I think it's a bit arrogant to think that there aren't amazingly magical people that might find their way now. It's not just the people that came in at one period of time. There are very interesting people. Lance, can you come in? No, but there is. Lance, okay. You know what? What about the new people? What about the new people? Lance, if those people are going to do it, let them do it. That's fine. Nobody's stopping them. I guess, one second, Jacob, I think I want to make sure I understand you, Lance. What you're saying is, and Jacob, I understand you, that at this point, at this day and time, if someone new comes to Bridges of Meeting and let's say sees the shit show over there or whatever, they're not coming because no one's directing them there anymore. There's no place for new people. And Jacob, you're saying, okay, then let them find the new thing we're building. No, no, no. So Lance, there's a reason why Paul is no longer listing the Discord server. I heard that. But that reason's gone. But that reason isn't gone. Oh, let's talk vaguely about stuff nobody can follow. Let's do that. The new people, the new Protestants are welcome over at the Griswold Grimm channel. And the Friday Morning Nameless. And the Friday Morning Nameless. I want to go back to what Michael said. There are very valid criticisms of Catholic structure. Of course there are. Obviously, it's not Judaism. Why into Jesus' name are we talking about Catholic structure at the moment? What? Why are we talking about the structure of Catholicism right now? Because we're having a theological discussion. He's using it as an illustration of how to build structure. The best structure I've ever seen to do this is actually a 12-step program. They have the strongest structure for this type of thing. It handles all of the problems that you guys are talking about. You know, structure. You guys don't know structure. I love you. Wait, wait, wait, wait. But I had an insight the other day and I almost lost it. I'm so glad it's back. You know, thanks to Karen, we've all been exposed to Michael Levin's work with the frog cell abominations. And that's what we are. We are a frog cell abomination. And we were supposed to be skins of the beast system. And we ended up here clumping together as this group of frog skin cells. And we're kind of swimming around like a horse and deciding what to do. I'm actually trying to limit the number of people in the conversation. Go ahead, Captain. But there's still going to be a... Like, Paul is pastoring who he's still pastoring. And that's going to stay the same. And that's Christians deconstructing and no reconstruction. He's watching Christianity crumble and processing that for people. That's his maven role. To expect him to lead any of these... I don't expect Paul... Okay. How many times do I have to do this? Every time. Okay. It's not about Paul anymore. So who's on top of your hierarchy if not Paul? You know, the only candidates I have right now are Michael and Garth and Eamon. Why am I not a candidate? You're not a candidate. You're not a candidate. Well, I do want to say in Paul's defense, and this is something that I'm sure Hezzi could understand, but as a father, it's very important to not act too quickly. And your desire to see things moving and for action to be taken and for the reigns of leadership to be seized is kind of a womanish impulse, I would say. It's the overprotective mother instinct. And I think that Paul knows very well that doing more may result in less. And I think that's a difficult lesson to learn. But I think that's why... That's kind of the answer to why God doesn't just save everybody with miracles all the time. But that just depends on what you're doing. That's just a discussion of implementation, are you actually arguing that there's no cause of action that we can take that's productive? No, we can't. I just don't think we need to institute a hierarchy first because we don't know... Because how much time are we going to invest into a hierarchy and then if everybody hates it and decides not to leave? You have to go on stage. Michael, again, both you and Hezzi, who are saying intelligent things, are very new to this community. Very new. And you're telling us, oh, it takes time. Yeah, you know why you think it takes time? Because you're new to this community. This community is not moving. That, first of all, that's, again, from my perspective, that's totally fair. I could accept that. And I could also appreciate Manuel's point about, like, I've been doing this for two years. I guess... I've been doing this for 20 years. Well, I don't know what this means. What? Like, because I don't know, has there been a meeting crisis for 20 years that you've been feeling a part of? I didn't feel like... Yeah. Okay. So that's fine. You're FFB. You're FFB. How many times do I have to tell you this, Hezzi? That's true. Okay. That's fine. Until he finds being told it's abusive and moves on to other relationships? Jacob, I guess from my perspective, again, the feeling just is... For the Peanut Gallery, FFB is from birth, because Hezzi was born into an Orthodox Jewish life, and he lives in a world where he thinks that's the background everybody got to live in. And some of us didn't. But Jacob, I mean, as having secular siblings, secular friends, secular partners at the time, I live in a world, I see people, I'm aware that people grow up differently. I try to move... So much so that I'm having a conversation with people from a different faith, okay? So I'm comfortable in that area. However, you're right that I'm new for this. I saw something very valuable. So my knee-jerk reaction was like, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa. Now, you could be like, Hezzi, you don't even have a position to even say, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, just watch. And that's fine. And I also understand if I'm coming late into the game, you're saying, at this point, Hezzi, you're coming in at like, this is really falling apart, and we really need a structure to keep this thing together. So let's say I grant you that, and you have to have a hierarchy, and you have to have a structure. And even if you are correct about that some people need to... Some voices need to be elevated, okay? I don't know if you articulate that other voices need to be quieted or not, or... I just think there's a more productive, and I'm thinking about this, way to do that, which is we don't have to talk about them not talking. We could elevate, or you could elevate anyone you want without saying whether it does mean you. Okay, let's articulate what productive means, right? Because what are we producing? What are we producing? Yeah. So productive would be someone that manages to unwrap someone, put them in... Well, let's say we'll call them, have them cradled, and then off wrap them. Right, but that's... The way it's working now is that it's luck of the draw, right? What did you say? I'm sorry? The way that works now, it's luck of the draw, right? It's just, who do you meet? We had this conversation earlier, and I was saying, well, what we need is we need ways to receive people, right? Because depending on who you meet when you answer, you might either resonate with that person or you might not resonate with that person, right? And then move on, right? So there's this aspect where we need to facilitate people to find a place where they can be nurtured, right? So that's all good, but you're saying it's not this anymore? Mark... I think that never was there, and I think that needs to be there. Well, Mark says something really important. Hezzi, what happened was there was always a hierarchy instructor to BOM. It was never explicit and didn't need to be because of who ran it. So Joey leaving has left a huge hole, and it's a hole that I expected Paul to fill by choosing, elevating somebody competent, and he refused to do that, which showed that the top of the hierarchy, right? So we had a hierarchy, Paul, Joey, other people, the people who came on to BOM. And what happened was Joey left, Paul refused to take responsibility for appointing someone else, and BOM is falling apart. So first of all, I think I understand you better right now. So you're saying there was a vacuum left, Paul, which you're saying we didn't ask you to be Joey, we just asked you to... Appoint a Joey, yes. And because, okay, and you said since it didn't happen, and what we want now is to build a body, and you're not, you as in Paul, you're not gonna step up and say like, yes him, no him, then the banner Paul Van der Kley has been fired because you're great, you're good, keep on your videos, but like we're moving on in that sense. So... But he, yeah, I mean, so what if it's falling apart? It's too big. Like, I mean, when I signed up here, and I'm new, I was new, I've been here for like a year or whatever, a little more than a year, and it was way too overwhelming. Everybody's already like, has known each other for years. Like, it's too much to engage with. So I got on Grizz's Discord, and like, you know, there was like five people that would talk to me regularly. So then I could, you know, get a foothold in there. Like, so sometimes stuff just runs its course. Like, why should Paul have to prop up a thing that somebody else made? Because, like... I think you... Boy, howdy, if that didn't sound a whole lot like what John Verreke's been saying about self-organizing criticality. As if the little sand piles of people have piled up to the point it breaks up into several other sand piles. And the important thing to remember when we're broken up into these separate sand piles is that we occasionally achieve synchrony, because that's when the insights come up and spread out through the whole network. So I'm going to head back over to the Broken Clock Tower Discord, available at the bottom of my video description, where you're welcome to come join us for Protestants type stuff. Thank you, Jacob. And Michael, look, what you're saying is incredibly Protestant. I was, when I visited Paul's church, right, I, he, he, I was like, where are the kids? And his answer to me was, yeah, this church is dying. And I said to him, what? And he said, yeah, that's, that's the life cycle of a church. And as somebody who comes from a Jewish theology, where all that matters is L'Hidor from generation to generation. And anything you see that you're, that you're doing, which is not going to carry on to the next generation, and this is Acts five, right, what Gamliel says in Acts five. As far as we're concerned, theologically, anything that is not going to carry on to the next generation is worthless. Yeah, but that's okay. So my father pastored a church for 25 years. And then when he retired, it basically, it was, yeah, it was done. You know, it was, he was taking care of the old people that were there faithfully. But there's a lot of people that were, you know, his age, who raised their children, people move, they go to other places, sometimes have a life cycle. Your, the, the problem with your, your model is that you must conform to the culture to engage with it. But Michael, there is, hold on, Michael, there is no perfect structure for all situations. Okay. Right. The problem is that we are no longer in a situation where Protestant theology is able to organize our society in a livable manner. Michael, I think just to be fair, I mean, like, I hear, I hear Jacob's point with regards to the, you know, that, that hierarchy, that system that operate, you know, that iOS is just no longer relevant. And arguably, and I don't know if Jacob's going to agree with this, but, and this is true to many of the religions, all of them require a certain form of reformation and, and restacking of their hierarchy to allow them to proceed on. Now, Paul is a character again, and because he's an authority, we looked into being like, okay, how are you going to restack? How are you going to reshuffle? And arguably, he's doing a pretty good job. So sort of integrating these new ideas and, and continue with them. But what the guys are here are saying is like, okay, but now we need to start forming a structure that allows us to sort of, you know, this reshuffle needs to happen. My only point is, and I think hearing you now, Jacob explain this is, I think, is a lot more palpable than, than yesterday. However, I guess it's the sense of that, like, and I know it's hard to articulate this, people are going to be left behind. However, articulating that is very harsh. And I understand that from a certain perspective here, you'd be like, well, these are the decisions that executive makes all the time. Right. But here people in this group didn't come in being like, I brought my tie. And someone's saying like, hey, buddy, like, you're like, you could listen, but like, that's where you are. So I just, I guess it sort of needs to happen in a natural way. And you're saying it can't happen on a natural way. Because look, again, like I said, Protestant theology is really good at conquering new territory. It is really, really good at conquering new territory, which is great, but we're no longer in new territory. And to have Protestant theology, it's not going to be a good thing. It's not going to be a good thing. It's going to be a good thing. And to have that culture in new territory and to have Protestants at the forefront of your evangelical effort, right? The fact that Protestant, the Protestant church is growing in Africa and South America is not, I expect that. And hopefully well enough into India and China so that those will be conquered for Christian them as well. But once you do that, you have to shift to a theology which is capable of transmitting from generation to generation and living intergenerationally, which apparently I had no idea Protestant churches plan to die. Right. So hold on, hold on. I want to point make a few larger framing issue points. Okay. I have noticed that people keep going back to you keep telling Paul VanderKlaai blah. Okay. That never happened, guys. That never happened. And it was explicit from the beginning. We're not saying explicitly said, I don't care if Paul changes anything. I'm not asking to do anything, actually. Okay. So the fact that people keep thinking that's what's being said when it's explicitly being excluded from the conversation is very telling to me. Right. I think this happens because we flatten the world. The other thing that's happening and and Kazi you're doing this too, to some extent, right? People are jumping ahead. Okay. We're saying, Hey guys, think we need a structure here. We need to start talking about hierarchy and leadership and authority and rules. Okay. And you guys are pretending like, Oh my goodness, people are coming down and telling us what to do and telling other people that never happened. It hasn't happened yet. Things take time. Okay. But if you don't come out there and say, look, guys, I think we've got a problem. We want to do something that's going to be multi-generational, not some, you know, and look, Van der Kley talks about this, right? You get the big, big Protestant church, right? The big mega church. And then it folds. And that's like, we're not saying, well, that's, that's not good. Right. But we are saying that's not sufficient. Okay. And so how do we make something sufficient that won't be a big mega church default? Because that's a good question. Well, let me, let me finish Jacob. Right. And that's all we're saying is that we want to open up the discussion from what we think worked with BOM yesterday, which is gone and dead and isn't coming back ever because it won't even admit it has a structure or a leadership or any hierarchy or anything. So that's done. Okay. It's going to take a while to die. Things take a while to die. Like everybody thinks, Oh, it's dead. And then it's not instant. Crypto took a long time to crash, right? Amazon took a long time to lose a trillion dollars of market share. These things take a long time, but what we'd like to do is open up the discussion for the people who are open to the fact that you're not going to make anything last. You can make things and they'll look good and you'll get a lot of people, but none of them will last without this discussion and this acknowledgement around having a body, having a structure, having rules, having authority and the roles that leadership and authority and all of these other elements play. You're never going to get there in the modern society because we squished it down and everyone's just assuming what all this stuff means. And I'm saying all this stuff doesn't mean what you think it means. And therefore we should have a discussion about that so that we can build what we had in the past that worked for thousands of years again, because we need it back. Sorry. So I just want to flesh out two things that Mark said. There's a reason why people keep on saying you can't tell Paul to change because when we point out the problems, the obvious answer is for Paul to change. Now I cannot make Paul change. Right? I cannot make Paul change. What does that look like? What is, if you don't mind me asking, what does it look like? I guess Paul changing. And before you answer that, I would just say, because he's telling you, okay, guys, I hear what you're saying hierarchy. I don't know what I'm doing in this space yet. Now Mark, you could be like, well, too bad. You have to know. You took the responsibility. Let me finish the other point. We'll get back. Go ahead. Sorry. The second thing, whenever anybody points to the need for rules or hierarchy, the response is, is no, because people are jumping to, I don't like the rules or the hierarchy that you're proposing even before one has been proposed. Right? And we have to stop them. We have to recognize the necessity for rules and hierarchy. And then we can discuss what those rules and hierarchy look like. Okay. Now to go back to Chazee, and I guess Chazee had to leave, but he's been disconnected, but, and he's back. What does Paul leading look like? Paul, it would require Paul to recognize that he actually does have a church. And Paul right now, when I talk to him about stuff like this, he's like, no, no, no, no, that's what I do with my church. This is something different. Okay. And he believes that he's doing something different. Now I figured because he has experience with church, he was running this, it seemed very well, I didn't realize how he, Joey was, right? So over the past two months, if anything, I have been like, oh my God, if only we could have Joey again. Right. But it's the same thing. We cannot depend on individual rock stars. We cannot depend on individual rock stars. We need a situation where if God forbid, Paul were to have a heart attack tomorrow, it would continue. And that's not what we are set up as and we need to set it up. Go ahead. Michael, do you appreciate what they're saying? Does this compare to the last few days, whatever, does this sound like they can make sense to you where their concerns coming from? Because arguably I would say they're making a fairly solid case. I mean, I would say I'm here because of the way that Paul did things. And though you may criticize it, we're all here. Yeah. And the look what I'm doing, anybody can do what I'm doing. Like that's the only reason why I have a YouTube channel. I thought about trying, starting a YouTube channel a long time ago, but in the area that I was thinking about, it was only the slick, well-produced content that, oh, I'm going to have to invest all this stuff. So he's giving an easy on-ramp. I mean, I don't personally see, as far as I'm concerned, this was a thing that's good for me. I like doing it. I like making videos. I like talking to people. I have a plan that I talked to Mark about the other night. It's going to be a real life thing. It's not going to be on YouTube. I mean, there will be online components for sure. But so if this... Let me ask you a question. Why are you in this conversation? Well, because I would like to have more... Honestly, because I would like to have more good nature discussions about theology and things like that. I think that... But do you see what you're doing to the conversation? The objection is manifesting something. It's manifesting a protesting spirit. We kind of are here to combat that protesting spirit because I think that's what we find toxic. But you're manifesting a spirit. And my question to you is why are you manifesting that spirit? What's the purpose? What do you mean he's manifesting that spirit, though? Well, he's rejecting what we are trying to construct. So he's protesting... I'm not rejecting. I'm just saying construct it or don't construct it. I don't know. I just don't... No, no, you're not. We're in the process. If you're not going to help, why are you here? That's his question. I gave. You're not going to help. Why are you here? Hey, I gave. I gave. Hold on. Well, one thing. There are three candidates I have for position of Paul Vanderpley. They are Eamonn Wilson, Catherine's husband, Michael Sartori, and Garth Natwick. Is that because of the beard, though? No. The beard is... the beard kind of does it. You have to... look, the fact is that if we are going to have somebody leading us out of Egypt, it is going to have to be a Protestant. I don't know about that. I guess... I guess... Does he want the job is the question. I said what's the purpose of those things. He doesn't want to have an involvement. If you want the job, you can't have the job. That's part of the problem. I don't think... I definitely don't. You don't want the job. And nor do I have time for that. Manuel, just to be fair, you're saying, arguably, Michael's saying, I'm not coming out against this. I'm just asking to understand... or I'll speak for myself. I agree with you that what you guys have very valid points. My only, I guess, reservation would be how one goes about it, right? Because you could go about it sort of chopping heads. That reservation isn't valid until there's something proposed. Agreed. However, and Jacob, this is coming out with love, what I know... the things I understood that were proposed are like, there's some people that are not going to be and there's something... What I heard... so I'm saying that's what I hear. That's not proposed. That's a law. That's just... look, it's more truth than you're willing to handle. It's the morror. I'm handling it. My question is, is that a conversation? And this is also true. The... Right now, what we have is all morror and no matzah. Well, one second, Jacob, there's conversations that people have in closed doors. The question is, is it beneficial to discuss that in front of everyone? Yes. Well, that's the whole point. The whole problem with BOM is that they've had for a while a bunch of backdoor plans going on and they're pretending like there's no structure and there's no plans and that's a lie. It's a flat out lie. I validated more of it this morning. There's a bunch of talks that have been going on this whole time. The community knows nothing about it. We're crushing light on here. And that caused a bunch of problems like Joey leaving, for example, in my opinion. I don't know if that's true, although I have information that maybe not everyone's privy to. There were problems that were caused, for sure, and not just with Joey, with a bunch of people. And they don't even know necessarily that those decisions were made behind closed doors without the community's knowledge. And so I'm not going to repeat that mistake for sure. So I don't believe in that whole idea. I believe that people can cooperate better in a body, in a structure, with rules when they're involved in the process of creating them. And which is that what everyone's saying is that they want transparency. And then they're complaining about the things that non-transparency causes. And now you're saying, well, maybe we shouldn't be doing this transparently. And I'm like, well, no, I don't think so. I think the evidence points to the correct- I'm talking, I'm talking in a convenience place. I'm talking as, let's say, a parent. And Jacob was saying, there's the superstars and there's the ama'ar, the people of the land. So the people of the land, and I know this sounds very condescending. Obviously you could be transparent, but even that, that revelation could happen at levels. So there could be a discussion like this, where people are trying to build the next stuff. And like, Jacob, you have your rules, and then you have like, these are my guidelines. And it's sort of presented to people in front of them. But I don't know, I guess I'm not, and maybe I'm wrong. My tactic would be not necessarily to expose everything all the way immediately, because it's just too bright or too intimidating. That's fair. But I'd rather that everybody understood things that happen. Like the spirit of BLM has changed. Okay. And I don't think it's ever coming back. I don't think it can be correct. I don't think it can be corrected as long as people aren't admitting that there's a hierarchy in the structure there. And they want to think that it's some floaty thing that's going to last floaty and perfect forever. I don't think that that's right. And so I think it's worth calling out. Okay. And I think sort of, again, part of the mistake is everyone's jumping to the end of a story that hasn't been written and saying, we don't like that story. Give it some time, right? Like, I think it's a good idea to just say it first and then object to the damn thing. Let me give an architectural metaphor, right? There are load-bearing walls, which you don't recognize are load-bearing walls, because you need the wall there anyway, right? And those are the best load-bearing walls. And then there are load-bearing walls that are there. And you want them to go away, right? Because they're in your way, right? And hierarchy within human society, when it's dressed up nicely, that appears like it's not there. This is what Luke, for example, was saying. He's like, oh, you know, the bishop doesn't actually need to wear special clothes in order to be the bishop. And it's like, you just joined an Eastern Orthodox church, where, you know, and there's a lot of people who are like, I'm seeing structure. And so the structure must be the problem. The problem is that the structure has been revealed. And we're talking about the structure because there's a problem with the structure. And yes, hopefully we will be able to create some form of structure where it will no longer be in our way. We will no longer need to talk about it. The best refs in any game are those. If you're talking about the refs, there's a problem with the refs. Michael, what do you think? Yeah. Well, I mean, I think that's fine. I think that's fine. I mean, I guess just maybe we just need to start with what are the what's the most basic rule or the most fundamental thing where we can have the most agreement. I did think, I mean, I did come up with a solution yesterday. You know, I put it out there real quick. If picking the name is the hard part, I think, I think a name is not that important. I think if it's weird, that's then people will say, what is that? That's what I said on Grizzly Street. It's like picking a name for a band. But no, in order in order to for people to identify things there, a name is actually if we could come up with a name that people will like. And just like our TLC is kind of happening. And if it happens, it happens. I don't care what the name is. But the reason why we need a name is because if you're going to have a structure and I was actually talking on Grizzly's channel, people go subscribe and watch over there as well. What I was talking to Grizzly's channel is I keep on hearing and Paul said this and it's again his bad theology. He said this on his channel is when you name something, that's when it's going to go away. It's like, no, no, no. When the Christians were first called Christian in Antioch, that didn't mean that Christianity was going to go away. We meant it was a real thing that can be attacked. And once you have a name, you're on the battlefield and there will be people who will attack you. But if you have a solid foundation, right? Planting your flag like Manuel keeps on calling it so that other people can rally towards it is how you start crystallizing that structure. And we are in, and I keep on saying this, we are in a super saturated solution. People are looking for structure. And if we can figure out the structure, it will crystallize. Go ahead. So you're saying in this current flag post, where everyone for the last X years have been getting together, at this point, it's tearing at the seams because it no longer could contain this amount of people or whatever this structure and it needs to evolve? Well, okay. So what I have seen many, many times over the past 20 years, this is not my first rodeo, is I see bubbles form and they get big enough and they burst. And I keep on asking myself, why don't these grow into the structures like we see, which are important structures, right? And there are important structures in our society. And I see no problem with the actual, with the actual bubbles, these seeds could be growing to make great things happen. There are saboteurs out there. And this is a whole other level that is going to confuse this discussion. But we need to create a structure that is strong enough that once the saboteurs come at us and we will have people attacking us, once we actually plant, but I was hoping and I thought, and before what happened in Germany happened, I thought we were actually strong enough to take an attack and deal with it. And we weren't, we dealt with it horribly. And that's part of the reason we are falling apart is we don't have as strong of a structure as I thought we did, because whether Paul likes to admit it or not in his denomination, he knows he's a bishop. He is a bishop in the CRC. There's no question about that. And he recognizes that. He denies that he's a leader of the church that BOM is. And of course BOM is a church. Anybody who doesn't realize that is just deluding themselves, Caleb. Yeah, I don't like this assumption that there's some natural evolutionary progression. Like, I'm an evolution believer, but it doesn't work that way. And I think that's a good point. Like, I'm an evolution believer, but it doesn't work that way. Right. There's no telos in evolution. It clearly requires assistance. Well, it requires more than assistance. Right. Like, look, this is like the Russoian attitude, right? Like, society doesn't create something that oppresses us. We created society, right? That's the bottom up portion. And we create it from the top down emanation of our virtues and values. So we have to aim at virtues and values and we'll create a more virtuous society. The reason why we don't have a very virtuous society right now is because we are not aimed at virtues and values. We keep looking at emergence and saying everything will be fine. Right. That's what's happening. And Paul is doing the same thing. And Vervecki is doing the same thing. It's interesting. No one's defending Vervecki here. I'm attacking him way more than I'm attacking Paul. And Peterson's doing the same thing. And you'd think everybody would be all over that. No one cares. Interesting. Right. And then Pichot, somebody says, is doing the same thing, although he's the best of all of them because he got the website and he's got this little symbolic world community and they're wonderful. I interact with them. They're great people. It's a wonderful little community. It's very insular. But on Awakening from the Meaning Crisis, we had bad actors attack. We had that. We had all the splintering. We're not talking in hypotheticals. We're telling you, you guys can learn a lot from the things that have already happened, but you're not looking at history and you're not looking around and you're not even looking at things that have happened recently to people who have also been in your community, who are putting up alarm bells and saying, you know what, we went through this, guys. We already know where this story ends. And it ends with you not being honest with yourselves. You're not being honest with yourselves. You're doing a lot of lies. Exactly. Exactly. And that's what we're saying. You're not being honest with yourselves about what happened on BOM, what's happening on BOM, and where things are going. People have plans. They are implementing those plans without telling anybody. They're wonderful people. And maybe those plans will work out. And I hope they do. I really do. I'm not saying to change anything on BOM. I don't care about BOM. I'm sorry. There's no project there. If Paul wants to have this cake and eat it too, fine, Paul. I'll take your word for it. There's no project there. Fine. I'm not going to help because there's no project. So done. What are we going to do? And this is Jacob's project. What are we going to do? If you don't like the criticism, go away. No, I'm serious. If you don't like the criticism, go away. Go away. Just on that, if you don't like the criticism, let me explain to you more precisely what I mean. That's different. Hold on. If you don't understand the criticism, I'm willing to talk to you. If you disagree with the criticism, I'm willing to listen to you if you have something to say. If you don't like the criticism, go away. Manuel, you wanted to say something? Well, there's this element that I tried to focus on. We want to have a constructive conversation. And there's a time to be Protestant because we need to strain test things. Like, oh, well, should you really be doing that? I don't think so. But there's also this this thing where you want to be generative. And the problem I have with these conversations is that all the time, all the energy is diverted to arguing. And we need to be constructive. We need other points of views that can be constructed. It's important. I talked about these buckets. There's people with different experiences, different participation, and they need to be facilitated. I can't see all of it. I need other people to provide their relevant contribution. That's important. And we need to have that conversation. We don't need the conversation about, oh, things could go wrong. It's like, no, let's do the things. And if things go wrong, we fix them. That's the way you do things. Okay. What, I guess then, because I was thinking about this before I did this just chatting, which is I agree with you completely. Why are we wasting time with these conversations when we could be actually trying to progress, basically? So doesn't that need, though, and I've heard this before, not liking that it's topics, liking that it's just a flowy conversation, don't you then need more structure? You would have to have... That's what I'm calling for. That's what I see leadership as at this moment. Okay. As this moment is to gather all the things from the corners and put them together and say, how can we make something that lasts? Okay. So, and in the leadership position, whoever quote unquote gets appointed, and ideally you said Paul would have appointed someone, there would be someone collecting these stuff and creating a hierarchy of like, we're going to be discussing these topics. We're going to be bringing these people in to discuss these topics. Well, potentially, but it doesn't have to be that way. I understand. I understand. But see, I think it's dangerous to talk like that, because leadership in organizations is not typically one person at the time. It just doesn't happen very often. Not one person. I am right. And I'm happy. But it's important because people keep thinking, oh, you want Paul to be a dictator. No, first of all, I don't want to change Paul at all. I just don't care about Paul in that way. Sorry. I care about Paul in lots of other important ways. I don't consider that an important way. He's not going to lead. He said he's not going to lead. He said many times he doesn't want to make the changes to his life sacrifices to lead. Fair enough. That's fine. And to address Phlebas's point, the corner cults are happening in BOM. You just don't know it. And that is a danger because this is what happened on Awakening to the Meaning Crisis. We had a bunch of people who wanted to do different projects. And Manuel and I would go and facilitate them the best of our ability when they would let us. And often they didn't want help. They all failed, by the way. I don't think that's a coincidence. But whatever. There are ways in which people can contribute if they want to contribute and they're willing to sacrifice having things done their way because that's a big problem with people who want to contribute. There are ways that they can contribute. And even as leader of certain individual projects within this little corner or this larger project or whatever we end up wanting to make the ultimate it. There are ways for people to cooperate and then structures can be built around them. You don't have to define the structure and the leadership and the authority first. These things can emerge, but we need to know who actually is willing to submit on board with the basic concept, even though we don't have a specific concept. We just know we want to build something that lasts. I think that's a good starting point. You want to build something that's going to outlast everybody here and possibly any children of people that get involved in the project? Because that's what we would like to do. And we don't want it necessarily, I don't want it to be religious at all. So don't get asked to be. We could argue about that later. So I'm open to either way. Is it going to end up looking like a church? Well, yeah. Churches look like corporations and corporations look like churches. That's not a coincidence. There are higher order structures that work and ones that don't and they look very similar. Probably not a coincidence if you believe evolution is an actual observation of the world, which I do. So there are ways in which instead of talking about this, it's like some wacky guy at the top. We can just talk about if you're willing to submit that maybe you're a muppet like the rest of us and you don't know what you're doing, but you want to do something and you're willing to spend time, energy, attention and submit your ego to the fact that if you do those things, maybe we can all work together and maybe we can manifest something better and longer term. Then please come and join us. How's that for a starting point? So I think that sounds fantastic. And I would argue that even from this point on then, assuming people over here all are willing to submit, put ego aside, and you're saying it's dangerous to say this, but then I ask you then, okay, then live right now, then what's the next step? What do we want to discuss? What wisdom, quote unquote, can I share with you from my bucket that I could give to you my will? Yeah. So I think my proposal has been all along that, and I'm going to put this in marketing terms just because, okay, just because it'll be easier to understand. I think the product, and I heard this at Thunder Bay, the product that everybody wants, that everybody thinks they want, that Verbeke talks about, that Vanu Klay talks about, that Peterson talks about, is roughly speaking, wisdom. And so our aim in this, we'll call it the larger space, so the big project, the big project, the Peterson project, if you will, or the project that people want to replicate that they see in Peterson is wisdom. How do we get more wisdom? And Verbeke talks specifically about wisdom in an explicit fashion. We don't need to make everybody wiser necessarily, but we need more wise people. Fair enough. I'm totally on board with one of Verbeke's brilliant, brilliant insights that is dead on, more correct than you can imagine, because your limited imagination is no idea how big an idea that is. And mine doesn't either. I'm not making a claim. I'm just saying this is huge. So if we all want to foster wisdom type communities, or if we want to have an aim of wisdom, and we say, well, look, there's one aim of wisdom, right? Where, look, we want to get more good information to the likes of Paul Van der Kley. Well, then, you know, you've got the Beholder project from Grim Grizz, and he should do that project. I still support that project. It's a great idea, right? And I don't know why he hasn't already launched it. It seems easy enough to launch, Manuel, and I have encouraged people to not join his project necessarily, because, you know, but been a long time, Grim, should have gotten working by now, right? So we have a similar project going on with people who want to contribute, because they want to contribute. We're like, here, why don't you guys do this? Start a clips channel and, you know, do this. And they have started on that. I don't think it's going to be successful, but maybe it will. I'm hoping that it will, right? So that's one way in which we're kind of facilitating that, right? And I think, you know, Jacob's got this dream, which is sort of like the big umbrella for the moment, just because he's got the big umbrella for whatever reason. And I think this is a useful place to discuss those sorts of ideas. And to Michael's point, I heard Michael's idea, and I thought, well, that's probably the best, freshest idea I've heard in education ever. I think it's a fantastic idea. I think you do that tomorrow. I think whatever it takes to make that happen. Well, he wants to do a trade school based on biblical teaching. Oh, right. Yes. It's genius. It's freaking genius. Yes, do that. You know, and how can I help, by the way, right? Like, absolutely. Like, these are the sorts of things that I'm like, well, we even have a lot of good ideas, but we don't have the proper advertisement for them. For people to, you advertise something so people can get involved. And that involvement isn't just consuming product. That involvement is facilitating product creation, right? Like, if nobody knows that you're hiring, you can't hire people, right? And I know it's a crude analogy, and it's a banal analogy, which is important because that's the way it works. If nobody knows that Michael's working on this wonderful idea of his, or that he wants to make it a reality, then you can't help him with it. But we should be helping him with that. And I'm happy to help him. Mara, I don't know if you agree. Right? As much as we've been talking against superstars, and I do, you know, it shouldn't be about superstars. Unfortunately, I think, and the only way I've been able, there's a reason why my channel just named my name, is ultimately, I think, at this fundamental level, we do need that flagpole. Somebody needs to be holding up the flagpole, and we might end up changing the flags. But somebody needs to be holding up the flagpole. And I will reiterate, my three candidates are Michael, Garth, and Eamon. Michael Well, and Jacob, I don't even want to limit it like that. I want to say, look, if Michael's got a project, right, we can facilitate from the sort of BOM ethos, because I was a big believer in BOM before I got completely corrupt. It's right. Like I was a big believer in Joey's original vision. Like I think he was right. Like, we can act as a nexus point, as a rallying point, as that flagpole for people to spin off onto projects that suit them, provided they're willing to work on the projects. Right? And a lot of people assume, and this is one of the problems that happened on Awakening Server, right? A lot of people assumed that because people were there, that they were good faith actors who wanted to cooperate and submit. Okay? And we had people who didn't want to do that and who deliberately sabotaged projects left, right, and center. And in some cases, they laughed and sent people in to destroy projects remotely. Like this happened. Okay? And we didn't have the structure because we didn't have the leadership, because Reveke, to this day, refuses to lead that, even though he's creating a space for cults all over the place. That's a problem. But we can create a generative space where we're like, look, if you want to be generative and you want to work on something and you don't want to hang out and just protest every little possible thing that you can see in the world, because you're a wicked, smart individual and you know better than everybody else, then find something that suits you project-wise, an aim that you care about, and go put your time, energy, and attention into that aim with these other people. And they'll build the little structures that need to be built. I'm fine with that. We don't even need that formal of a structure here at this level to facilitate all of that. We don't need that. But you know what? Things like structure and leadership and authority and rules are important. And if you're going to build something, you need to pretend like they're important and put time, energy, and attention into them with the group, preferably. It doesn't have to be us, although I'm happy to give you my thoughts if anybody cares what implementations you've seen that have worked, Mark. Look, I got a ton of experience in Fortune 500 companies and in startup. And I've seen a bunch of stuff. And I've built a bunch of companies. I know what fails really well. It only succeeds quite so well. Would you guys then think it would be productive to, and just using this channel as an example, that these channels should, just chatting should be more with a purpose as in, let's, again, and I see you're nodding your head, Manuel, but for example, I turn on the server today, and I, a streamer, and I just start talking about parenting, or I just start talking about whatever the topic is. And then, and I guess this is where, Jacob, you would say like, we have to hear certain voices, right? Because let's say there's a great conversation happening about parenting, and there's a flow. And then we see like four or seven people jump on, and they're yammering off, or not talking, or ruining, and you're like, listen, I love you, dude, but you got to go, right? So I guess the person in my eyes that would have to be like, you got to go, it needs to be someone, let's say, and I don't know who this person is, someone- I think you need to invert it, right? You need to let people in one by one. Like, you don't kick people out, you just don't let them in until you want them in. And you may have to kick people out, and that's okay, because it's your stream. And I think the role of something like this is to say, hey, I see a thing, and I want to talk about it with other people, because the distributed cognition that Raviky talks about is super important. And that, look, that's Paul's project. Paul's project is, you know, like consciousness progress, and right, he's just talking about distributed cognition. And that role is important. And it's like, you know what, I see this problem in parenting, and I want other parents to discuss this problem with. And it's like, yeah, well, that's good. And then maybe together we go, you know what, we could start the parenting network, right? And it's all about the wisdom of parenting. So we're still under the wisdom umbrella, right? And then it's like, oh, you know, and maybe that takes a while to develop, six months, two years, I don't know, three weeks, I have no idea. And it's going to be different every time, right? I'm not trying to enforce ruleset on that, right? This can be the generative stage for those other things that will be built to be generative. Okay, so I think this is really important. We right now have been dealing with a lot of dialogos, and dialogos is good for what it does, which is help produce wisdom. It does not, dialogos is not how you distribute wisdom, right? And there's a lot of people who want to reinvent the wheel over and over again. And let's have more dialogos. And it's like, okay, I've had lots of dialogos. And I enjoy dialogos. But at some point, there's wisdom here. And I want to be involved in dissemination of dialogos. Not of dialogos of wisdom, right? And these are two very different things. Right. Conversation is not the answer. And it's not going to solve the problem because you have to Steven's excellent point. You have to implement, you have to do things in the world. And that is dangerous. And it requires a sacrifice. And it can hurt you. And it will. I guess, and this might sound naive, but I'm speaking to Jacob and I'm speaking to all you. In our tradition, there's a lot of embodied wisdom via the 613 commandments that we walk around doing. So I personally have a system which is constantly taking these things. Now, I would assume that in Christianity also some of you guys have some of these things already embodied in how you guys act around the world. They call it catechesis. Thank you. Okay, catechesis. Okay, so I don't think it makes sense for me to go be like, guys, these are things I say to remind, like, you know, when I put on my phylacteries, there's a whole wisdom over there, but that's not relevant, obviously, to everyone. So now, it's also what's, that's why the dialogos is important, because what from, let's say the theological, you then trying to package, you know, the dialogos is important, because what from, let's say the theological, you then trying to package sort of into wisdom, if that makes sense, and then have someone, sorry, go ahead, Manuel. Yeah, so this is a point I tried to raise early, right? Like, so what Paul is doing is he's scouring the internet, and then he's trying to frame what he's seeing, right? And so frames afford types of relationship, right? So when we're having a conversation, right, like, I think it's important to keep in mind, what affordances do we create with what we're talking about, right? And so there's productive ways to talk about things, right? That can lead to action. And there's unproductive ways to talk about things, right? And, like, I think that that's one of the things that I'd like to see in a structure is like, get people to resonate on these frequencies, right? Because, like, in some sense, you could better look at them at spirits, right? And you can say, well, I have this structure in my mind that allows me to attune to the right spirit, right? And it's like amazing, and you probably worked really hard for that, right? But a lot of people aren't there, and even if they would work really hard, like, it would take years, right? So they need the intermediary step, and they also need to taste that possibility, right? Like, they need to gain eyes to see that that is an option for them, because I think a lot of people don't even have the eyes to see that that is a thing that can happen in the world. And so what I do, for example, on my YouTube channel, is I have conversations with people, and I try to highlight the relationship to ideals. And that highlighting of relationships to ideals is not to make them have those ideals, right? But to point that, right, to generate awareness of certain ways of being, right? And I have no illusions about that people are going to integrate that stuff, right? But the exposure over time is the thing that will allow integration to happen. Since I'm plugging anyway, it's agapic orientation. You should definitely check it out. I mean, to a certain extent, what I feel, at least, that in some of these, let's say, theological conversations that happen, that are less focused upon, like, what are we doing on this little corner of the internet, when I'm hearing different perspectives of how people are understanding these scriptures and its wisdom, so, you know, those are tools I'm learning from, right? I understand from that, and I could use that with how the framing and how I look at things. So I find those conversations obviously very beneficial. I agree that there needs to be a more practical implant. That's not how I want to say that. You're saying on your channel, people come in and you're highlighting, you know, these ideals for them, and that even if they're not embodying them necessarily, you understand that they're being exposed to those things. And like, you know, what they're gaining. Well, no, I think you necessarily embody ideals, right? And like making them explicit changes your relationship to them, right? And having a sense of your trajectory or someone else's trajectory, how they change the way that they perceive them, right? So because there's these developmental stages that, like, you cannot have certain relationships if you haven't gone through certain developments, right? So and then those developments often manifest in a paradox, right? Like you have two aspects that come together and then they don't work, and then you shift your perspective, and now you can integrate both into a bigger perspective, right? And now they're no longer in conflict because you transcend that something, right? And that's like a revelation, right? And being aware of that, that is an option, or you can get there and like, then seeing how people get there and the things in their life that lead up to them getting there and like, that, I think there's a lot of value in that, right? Because now you can find hope, right? And you can even find confidence, like, oh, I'm at this stage, right? And like, there's something beyond it, right? And that requires a leap of faith often, right? Because in some sense, why are you in conflict? Because you're holding on to this perspective, right? Like you're clamping onto it and you need to let go in order to encompass the bigger view. You guys can keep on talking. I need to go do stuff. I will... I also got to head out actually. ... later. I mean, yeah, okay. So maybe we can... I'm just going to say on my end, thank you guys very much for taking the time to just like, break it down. I think it was very productive. I also think, again, I don't know what people are hearing, but for me, this was just like a lot more of... I don't know, I just think you guys really framed this nicely and really explained more specifically what it is we want, which I would find it hard to believe that anyone else, any good faith actor here doesn't want that as well. I just don't think they know necessarily how to articulate that or what they're supposed to be expecting. So I leave with that there should be more conversations from here on out that are more pointed, I guess, or more directed. That doesn't mean they have to have a specific topic. It just means people should try to be orienting them towards, I guess, practical wisdom application. Does that make sense? I don't know that if that's what's... Look, we keep this... Yeah, we don't... Well, for the next time. Okay. Guys, much appreciated. Thank you so much. Keep on keeping up. Yeah. Okay. Did you guys want to say something before we end? Have a great day, everybody. Have a lovely day. Bye, everybody.