https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=fl_OkPjX98E

 Alright, here we are again. Big day yesterday. Oh good, good. Well, let's open with prayer. Lord, we thank you for today, and we thank you that we can meet again and we can continue to talk about this very challenging chapter, very challenging ideas. We pray, Lord, that you would help us to trust. I think that's the big thing. And give us your wisdom. So this we ask in the name of Jesus. Amen. Alright, Romans 9. Last week we started with the introduction, and maybe touch on that briefly again. So the whole book of Romans is, part of the reason people love the book of Romans is Paul sort of steps back and tries to give a big picture of how the story of Israel and the whole world connect. And oh no, they're giving me new options. I don't want new options. There we go. So how the story of Israel and how the story of the whole world connects. And so we went through, we called it law number one, and law number two. Law number one is immediate, and law number two is mediated. We talked about, you know, burning a little kid in a stove. The kid who burns the hand on the stove learns the immediate law. The mother who tells the child, don't touch the stove, is a mediated law. This gets into, you know, what I talk sometimes about is God number one and God number two. Because the ancient world basically had implicit within it what some people called the meta-divine realm. That the gods were these agents who, you know, worked in this arena called reality, but the arena was impartial, but it was never quite impartial because it had rules that they would follow and so you had all these different Greek ways of trying to figure that out, like the fates. And the Hebraic, the Hebrews had this revolutionary idea that there's no rule outside of God, that God is sovereign. So there's a lot of religious ideas of impersonal sovereignty, which again is sort of like an impersonal rule of immediate laws in the world. And the Hebrews basically had God is both, as Paul says in the book of Acts, in him we live and move and have our being. There is no realm that God himself is subject to. But God is also an agent and he acts within the realm. And so this is where in the history of modernity, this is what I think is a big tension that has sort of brought us to where we are. So now with the Greeks, of course, you have this meta-divine realm, which was sort of the arena, and then you had gods within the arena, Zeus or Marduk. You had these gods and these gods would act in the arena. And people down below basically had to work with these gods to try to make their way to get what they wanted in the world. And that was basically polytheistic paganism. And so Paul in these first chapters talks about the Greek world, second chapter talks about the Hebrew world, says all have fallen short. So part of what Paul is doing through chapters one through eight of the book of Romans, in some ways, is putting the Greeks and the Jews on a level playing field and saying this is sort of the collective world in which we all live. Now obviously his vision is a vision from the story of Israel in the Old Testament. And chapter eight is this amazing crescendo of a new world, of heaven and earth finally reconciled, of God restoring his creation to his original intent. And then in chapter nine, Paul begins to wrestle with the difficult question of, well, why don't the Jews see Jesus as their king? Because one might imagine that this story would crescendo with, come on in Luke, you're welcome to join the class, with all of Israel united under Jesus. Now if Jesus had been a figure like Alexander the Great, who mobilized the Jews into an army that would conquer Syria and Egypt and Greece and Rome and India, that would have been basically the template that everyone else would have imagined God conquering the world. God would conquer the world in the same way that Caesar conquered the world, but Jesus didn't do that at all. Now the remarkable thing again is that Jesus would conquer the Roman Empire, but the conquest that Jesus performs is a very different conquest. And over time and the way of victory that Jesus works is a very different way of victory. Jesus conquers with love and basically voluntary submission. People voluntarily submit to Jesus out of love rather than involuntarily submitting to Jesus out of fear or perhaps voluntarily submitting to Jesus out of avarice. And so what we see with Jesus is, and it's quite remarkable that anybody saw this as early as they did, was that Jesus begins to conquer even Gentiles and Gentiles begin to recognize Jesus as King. But Paul's question is, well what about the original people of God? What about the Jews? Shouldn't they, more than anyone else, recognize Jesus as King? And to make matters even worse, part of what happens in early church history is obviously in the very early church, the period of Paul in the first century and John and the Apostles, the Apostolic Age, the church is sort of this Jewish thing that Gentiles are joining. Well as Gentile, as there's tension between the Jews about Jesus, we see this played out in the book of Acts, and as Gentiles just keep coming in, very quickly, just by virtue of the numeric difference between Jews and non-Jews in the world, very quickly the numbers of Gentiles that come into the church just swabs the number of Jews that are in the church. And with the ongoing tension between these questions of what really is a follower of Jesus, shouldn't a follower of Jesus also be a strict follower of Moses and undergo circumcision and follow the dietary restrictions and the ceremonial things? This tension really begins to put conflict, you see the beginnings of it in the book of Acts and the New Testament, really begins to put some Jews and this new church which is Jew and Gentile in conflict with each other. And as the numbers of Gentiles grow, that conflict will sort of harden. And so you will have, and then finally with the destruction of Jerusalem, basically the the pharisaical path of honoring the Torah, Torah in a sense replaces temple and synagogue completely subsumes, say temple worship when there's no longer a temple again, you have sort of pharisaic Judaism, rabbinic Judaism and Christianity sort of begin to move in two different directions. And now this obviously during Paul's life hadn't really come into the differences, you'll find some church fathers, for example, in the very early century say very nasty things about Jews. And this can sort of set up some of the anti-Semitism that will come up in the history. But very early on Paul sees, Paul's vision of how it should have gone was when he would into the synagogues dotted throughout the Roman world and say, Jesus is risen from the dead, Jesus is God's own son, and then even, you know, basically Jesus is God, Jesus is worshiped as God, Jesus is your King. He was hoping, I'm sure that the synagogues all at was one would say, we welcome King Jesus. And that didn't happen. And so what are you, what is Paul to do with this as a Jew? Because these are his people. And we saw that last week in what he wrote. I am telling the truth in Christ, I am not lying, my conscience bears witness to me in the Holy Spirit that my grief is great and there is constant distress in my heart. For I wish myself to be accursed from Christ for the sake of my brothers, my fellow countrymen according to the flesh, who are Israelites to whom belong the adoption and the glory and the covenants and the giving of the law and the temple service and the promises. In other words, Paul looks at this whole story of Israel as God's move towards her. The law is, now Paul has talked a lot in this book about tensions with respect to the law, but here again he says, you know, the giving of the law, this was God's grace to us. The covenants, God's grace to us. The temple, God's grace to us. The promises, God's grace to us. To whom belong the patriarchs, God's grace to us. And to whom is Christ according to human descent, who is God overall blessed forever. Amen. He looks at this whole story and says, this is God's grace to us. Why doesn't this grace result in, for Paul, the anticipated harvest of the Jews into the kingdom of Christ? That's his question. So now he's going to continue. But it is not as if the word of God had failed. So one of the questions would be, well, there's this tension between, well, there's a failure. Why did the word of God fail? Did Jesus fail? And this is a, you know, what you see in Paul here, you already see in the gospels. For example, when Jesus, the triumphal entry, rides up and sees Jerusalem and weeps over her. So this sorrow that Paul has is the same sorrow that Jesus had. Now this gets super complex because part of what we difficult, part of the difficulty we have with this are when I say counterfactuals, do you know what I mean? Counterfactual arguments are what if arguments. So here's a what if argument. What if Jesus began his public ministry and all Israel united around him? Well, then the story would have been very different. What would that have looked like? Now I think more would have united around Jesus if, this is a counterfactual, because the fact is what exactly happened. The counter is a different narrative. So if Jesus had taken up the sword, many would have rallied around Jesus. That was the map they had. Jesus didn't take up the sword. Okay, let's run the, if Jesus took up the sword argument, what would have happened? Well, Jesus' reign would have been similar to something, let's say like Alexander the Great. And Jesus knows this because Jesus says, whoever lives by the sword, dies by the sword. Jesus basically looks at the situation and says, you can get there with, you can get, you can go far with the sword. But this isn't actually what God is looking for completely. He is not looking to raise up a kingdom of tyranny and fear. He is looking to raise up a kingdom of love. And you know, you see this with all of the nuance of parenting. Parenting involves discipline. Good parents discipline children. But the goal of the discipline is never keeping the children under your boot out of fear or avarice. Now there's lots of TV shows about this because you have the domineering father, let's say runs an empire and has lots of money and he has all of these kids and these kids want the empire. And again, Jesus talks about this in the parable of the prodigal son. Because in a sense, when you look at the parable of the prodigal son and you look at the younger son who says to his father, I want my inheritance now, this is in a sense the kingdom of the sword. Because the goal is not love of the father or communion with the father. The goal is having the power the father has, having the wealth the father has. In other words, people are then instrumental in order to getting basically seizing the world and seizing the kingdom. And Jesus knows this. So Jesus turns away from the sword. Another way would be, say, Jesus using miraculous power to constantly dazzle people. But Jesus understood that in some ways, the miraculous power is sort of like the sword too. Because maybe you're not playing on people's fears, but maybe you're playing on people's greed, their avarice. And so Jesus turns from that path too. And Jesus instead follows this other path, which actually involves the people, many of the people that should have received Jesus, turning against him. In other words, this is part of God's plan. Now there's difficulty with this. What's the difficulty with this? Right. What about them? They're the promised people. Now part of what happens in the Jesus story, and you see this in Peter's sermon in Acts 2, is okay. You crucified Jesus. Well you didn't actually crucify him, the Romans did. But you had a hand in turning him over. And what's actually beautiful about the way it actually happened, which was, well, who's to blame for Jesus' death? And when you begin to look around the room, you don't find any innocent parties. The disciples flee, the people who should have received Jesus, at least some of them, want him dead, and the Romans, representing the rest of the world, do the deed. So in a sense, Romans 1 and 2 and 3 is set up by the story of Jesus. And so when you get to the crescendo of Romans 3, where Paul declares, all have sinned and fallen short of the glory of God, it all does put us on a level playing field. Whether you're a Jew or a Greek, God has something to say to you about whether it's what you've done in the world in ignorance, or what you've willfully done in the world. Now at the same time, this Jesus, not only has in some ways the whole world turned against him, but from the cross he prays, Father forgive them for they don't know what they're doing. In other words, he also understands their ignorance. And we all understand that ignorance is different from, say, willful rebellion. So what happens with Peter in Acts chapter 2, for example, is Peter says to his fellow Jews, hey, God sent his son. Do you know what we did with him? And in Acts chapter 2, the crowd is struck with fear. And then Peter presents the good news. This is what we did. But God is gracious and merciful and ready to receive even those who have turned against and rebelled against him. Here is the invitation. And many come. That's what happens in the book of Acts. So now we set up this narrative where we have made ourselves enemies of God, but God still leaves the door open to us of reconciliation with him. So now you can see in a sense, okay, well, what happened with the Jews? Well, in some ways, they had a part to play and they played it. And in some ways, this must have been somehow in the sovereignty of God. And you can see this even in Paul's life. Because someone, let's say, Jesus, here's an interesting little tidbit. So Jesus was born around 4 BC, crucifixion maybe around 30 AD. Paul, and we look at, let's say, the stoning of Stephen. Now, we don't know these dates for sure. This might have been, let's say, seven to ten years after the crucifixion and resurrection. So let's say 40 AD, Paul in 40 AD is a young man. We don't know how old he is, but at least in his 20s or 30s. So he's, the youngest Paul is might be as young as, let's say, John, but Paul is likely a little bit older. And what that means is, Paul lived in the same time as Jesus' public ministry. Now you think about that. And that must have been really weird for Paul. Now, where was Paul? We have no idea. Was he in Judea? We don't know. Was he somewhere else in the Roman Empire? We don't know. But Paul was alive when these events that Paul sees as the center of history were acting and he wasn't there. So he comes a little bit later onto the scene and of course gets involved with Stephen's execution, Stephen stoning, and then goes on this rampage against the church. And okay, if we're going to play in counterfactuals. Why didn't Paul meet Jesus? Why wasn't Paul a disciple of Jesus? And now on one hand, the way we talk now, we can say historical accidents. He was in a different place at a different time. I mean, part of the incarnation means Jesus was in one place at one time in a real story with real people and Paul wasn't there. And now you might look at Paul's own timeline and says, well, it's not a big surprise that Paul was against all this as many of the other Jews were too. You know, because let's face it, if someone walked into Living Stones today and said, oh, well, I've met this guy and I think this guy received the revelation of God and is the true Messiah and yada yada yada. Someone came into Living Stones today and started talking like that. Would we believe them? No. We would reject them. So something happens here. And so one of the questions, the questions of the role of God's people in the narrative of Jesus' life and death, resurrection and ascension is also sort of in Paul's story. And then on the road to Damascus, Jesus personally intervenes in Paul's life. And Paul tells this story a number of times, slightly different ways sometimes. But what's clear is that God chose Paul. And what's interesting is, we call him Saul too, because that's the Hebrew word. God chose him. And all of the things that happened in his life before, let's say, the road to Damascus, that's the word used and this is a part of God's preparation for Paul. That's right. The education, the Roman citizen, you know, his, I mean, all of the, even the persecution, Paul would not have been Paul if he hadn't had that chapter in his life. And now what's really interesting, of course, the book of Acts written by Luke, who's a personal friend of Paul, does nothing in the story of the stoning of Stephen, does nothing to sort of hide Paul from this. Luke, that's our introduction to him. So we have this vision of a sovereign God that works even through our rebellion to achieve his outcomes. Okay. So what can we say? And now what Paul does, and he's been doing this consistently throughout the book of, see, now this should work here. Okay, now it's working properly. Consistently throughout the book of Romans, Paul is making the argument that God is sovereign and he works through even our rebellion to achieve a glory that is beyond. Okay. It is not as though God's word had failed. So that's the question. Well, is it God's fault that Israel rebels? No, it's not God's fault that Israel rebels. But the, here's a question. Is it God's fault that Paul persecuted the church? Now we would say no, Paul was acting to do this. It's his choice. Okay. But what if God had, and this is where these counterfactuals get really complex, because we can all sort of imagine, well, if God had done the road to Damascus, let's say, well, let's just use the story of Stephen, because in the story of Stephen, sort of like the baptism of Jesus, Stephen is being stoned and in a sense the heavens open and Stephen looks up to the heavens and basically gives the same prayer as Jesus, Father forgive them for they don't know what they're doing. Basically it's sort of a reenactment of the crucifixion, the stoning of Stephen. And you might say, well, Jesus, you know, if you open the sky to Stephen at that point, Paul's just right over there. Would it have been too much to maybe open his eyes at that point? Well, and this is where the sovereignty of God is super mysterious, because we can look at this and pass judgment and say, it would be better for you to touch a soldier there. God didn't do that. Why? Well, part of the problem is we can't answer these questions for ourselves. You want to watch, I bet you Edie has spent hours in little rooms with people that run through scenario in their own minds. If only I hadn't, if only she would have, I mean, these counterfactuals just try us, because we try to imagine these alternative strains in history. Now, on one hand, that's all part of our choice, because psychologically, when we're making a decision, we're sort of imagining the future. Well, let's see. If I commit adultery, maybe I'll find my soul mate, but maybe I'll wreck my marriage and drive a truck through the emotional life of my children. Oh, there's a decision. The thing that you find is that history is super complex, because you'll find people who let's say cheated on their spouse and went on, in other words, this is the kind of math we are not capable of doing. Culturally, what we tend to like to do is break down the world into all of these cause and effects, cause and effect, cause and effect, cause and effect. Well, maybe if my father wasn't an alcoholic, then I would have had a better family life. Yeah, probably. But there's also the case, you know, I talked to a friend of mine is, you know, a big 12 stepper in AA, and he says a very interesting story. He says, now, he doesn't believe alcoholism is good, because he saw the damage in his own life. But he also has this story where he says, but at the same time, if it hadn't been, if I hadn't been an alcoholic, I wouldn't have come into the 12 step program. And I don't know that I would have met Jesus. So, we can't run these counterfactuals. And we can certainly play with them, and they're sort of a function of our decision making when we're making choice. But actually, the more we know about choice, the more complex we see that it is even within ourselves. So now Paul is starting to run this. It is not as though God's word had failed. In other words, he is saying, it's not that God's plan for Israel has failed. It's pretty clear in the prophecy that Jesus would suffer and would die, and all the things they rejected him for is there. Yeah, but it's really a lot easier to see from this direction. I know a lot of people put a lot of stock in the prophecies. But in all fairness, just like with all of these things, it's always easier to see in reverse. Exactly. And he will rule with an iron fist, well, with an iron rod. So some people would say, well, that prophecy clearly is that Jesus has to wield the sword. But then you have the question, well, when will he wield the sword? Will that come with his second coming? And there's whole other conversations come from this. Yes. Oh, Barabbas, Barabbas. Right. Right. That's right. That that kind of Messiah, Paul, he's going to be a messiah. He's going to be a messiah. He's going to be a messiah. That's right. That that kind of Messiah, Paul probably would have recognized and gotten behind. That's exactly right. So, so you can see, again, these counterfactuals. Well, if Jesus had wielded the sword, well, if Jesus had been a miracle worker teacher, you know, if Jesus had done those things. It's only in hindsight that we can look back and say what Jesus opened up for us was a vision for a different way of conquering. And we call it conquering, but we're using that highly metaphorically. We might also say wooing or inviting or, I mean, I want to be careful with this word in some ways, seducing, because seduce sort of has a manipulative element. Wooing is probably better. Inviting, because you also had all of this story in the Old Testament of, you know, the bridegroom and the bride and the father and the son. You have all of these metaphors that the prophets are using. And now Jesus comes and says, here is an entirely new way to conquer. And now the church will be the church and Constantine and, I mean, all of our conversations today still sort of whirl around these issues, because even in parenting, when you parent, well, you do use discipline. And the New Testament talks favorably about discipline. But again, the goal is not, let's say, a, I haven't watched the TV series Succession, but I think it's basically like many of those TV series where the father is old and dying and the children are competing against each other to take control of his empire. And Jesus sees that this is what this way of ruling in the world sets up. Yes. That's the template that everybody has for how it should work. And Jesus says, no, I am not going to do it this way. Now the question is, well, Jesus, does your way succeed? And on one hand, we see evidence that it does. But the eschatological question is, will it? And the eschatological future is open in that sense. We don't know. At least it's open for us. We don't know. So now it's not through God's, though God's word had failed. For not all who are descended from Israel are Israel. Now this verse here is key. And Paul is very much building on this long conversation that is in the Old Testament about true and false Israel. And this is a long, long conversation in the Old Testament because they all recognize that, well, okay, Israel is God's chosen people, but not all Israelites are alike. And I hear that all the time from Jews today. Here are the good Jews and here are the bad Jews. Christians play the same game. Here are the good Christians. Here are the bad Christians. I mean, it's pretty much endemic for human populations. But Paul begins this chapter leveraging this tradition in the Hebrew prophets of true Israel and rebellious Israel. And the idea was again and again that, so you have Israel and you read something like the book of Chronicles. The whole purpose of the book of Chronicles is to basically show what Paul says here that God's word hadn't failed, but Israel had failed God's word. Now the Christians will come along and say even this was part of God's plan. And I don't think that idea is antithetical to the Jewish way of thinking either because again God is sovereign. So for not all who are descended from Israel are Israel. Okay. Now let's think about what that means. Nor because they are his descendants are they all Abraham's children. So he's making a similar argument here that okay, just because they are children of Abraham doesn't mean they are children of the promise. And so what we're going to see here is sort of concentric circles where there's a honing down. On the contrary, it is through Isaac that your offspring will be reckoned. So what's the point that he's making here? Right. And what's really interesting here is that there's sort of the custom and we can think of custom as sort of cultural Darwinianism. Think about think about Premagenator. Now Premagenator is a fancy name for the primacy of the firstborn and the firstborn son. Now all of what we've learned about birth order. Now this whole discussion of birth order is very new. It all has to do with psychology. You sit down in a room with a whole bunch of kids and some smart psychologist will probably look around and even if they're all adults and so you can't really see age differences very obviously you just watch them behave and they'll say firstborns right over there. Well how do you know who's the firstborn? Well what are the characteristics of a firstborn Edie? Confident leaders. I mean they've done these studies of extraordinarily successful people and the percentage of them that are firstborns? High percentage. It's like well what's with that? Well custom of Premagenator says well why always does the kingdom get handed down to the eldest prince? Now someone might look at that and say that's arbitrary. Well actually it probably isn't because probably generation after generation after generation people don't even know they're paying attention to this but customs develop because implicitly we're sort of feeling it's intuitive for us that maybe that one should be king. Now there's always exceptions and history is full of the exceptions but that's kind of where customs revolve. So you have Abraham and the firstborn son of Abraham is Ishmael and God chooses Isaac. Then you have Isaac and the firstborn son of Isaac is...but now remember Issa and Jacob are also twins so it even gets closer. Custom would say Ishmael should be the heir. Custom would say Esau should be the heir. But in each case God chooses contrary to custom. And in fact this whole line of argument goes all the way back to the book of Exodus where God says Israel is my firstborn. Now anybody sort of looking at the nations and understanding that culture would say that's kind of a bad choice for firstborn. Babylon should be your firstborn. Egypt should be your firstborn. In fact Babylon and Egypt thought that they were the firstborn of the gods. And the Lord comes and says Israel's my firstborn. And then someone would say wait a minute we even read your own book. Israel should the line should have gone through him. Esau the line should have gone through him but no it went through Jacob. In other words it is not the children by physical descent who are God's children but it is the children of the promise who are regarded as Abraham's offspring. Now Jesus basically says exactly this in the gospels doesn't he? Do you remember where? Jesus basically makes this point in verse 8 in the gospels. So Jesus is preaching and Jesus is preaching against rebellious Israel and he says to them And don't imagine you can use the argument that we are children of Abraham because God can raise up for himself children of Abraham from these stones. So in other words Paul is basically leveraging what Jesus has said that God can take and make his chosen instruments from whomever he pleases. And again you see this replete in the story so remember there are 12 spies who go into Canaan and there's a majority and a minority report right? Who's in the minority report? Caleb and Joshua. Now Caleb is an interesting guy. Why? You know anything about Caleb? Remember when the Exodus happens the children of Israel, now when I say children of Israel I mean biologically Jacob's descendants leave but also guess what else happens then? A bunch of other slaves and that makes perfect sense it's like we're busting out of here I'm coming too and they go so it's this mixed multitude that goes out into the desert and This becomes kind of an issue sometimes but it isn't always that the children of Israel are good and the rest of the rabble are bad no because you get to this point and Joshua is a child of Israel biologically Caleb is a Kenite he's not he's part of that other group and so right from the beginning you have this tradition where God says you know I don't disregard biology and inheritance but it's not the whole story because I can use who I choose and see I argue you even see that with Abram because on what basis Does God that's very interesting because when God looks around for Noah it says Noah was basically the best guy doesn't say God looked around for a new Noah and so pick the best guy and then say that in fact what we know that Abram is a strange candidate to be the father of nations because well that's I mean everybody everybody was but the one you know if you're looking I want to start let's say you're going to colonize Mars and so we want to send men and women to Mars to colonize Mars what's going to be high on the priority list that's American young why young and fertile Abram and Sarah they're neither young and they're definitely not fertile and God says I choose them well why on the basis of their youth and fertility it's actually quite the opposite he chooses them on the basis of their age and infertility in order to do something amazing and now keep this in mind because now what we're talking about here is God's election God's choice God chooses Abraham against what would be conventional wisdom and custom Elon Musk would not choose Abram and Sarah to go to Mars to be fruitful and multiply they would they would not they would not make the cut too old definitely not fertile okay so what we see here is there's even a pattern the pattern in God's election is it's a little counterfactual right from the start and we see that right from the start now that doesn't mean God doesn't use custom that God doesn't use dynamics and psychology for birth order that God doesn't use education and preparation no God used that for Moses God used that for Paul God uses all of those things but what it says is God cannot be contained by any of these things that's really what it says it says that God is free he's not limited which goes all the way back to the point that we were making earlier with respect to this Hebrew conceptualization of God there is no rules above God that God must obey because he somehow has to follow the rules of a universe greater than himself God is the author and God will use all of the normal patterns in the world but he's not limited to them and in fact when he wants to make a point he'll make a point Abraham Isaac Jacob and and even if you look at Jacob and Esau even what we know about them well I don't know how about how about integrity as being a you know a quality that we'd like to breed into our people Jacob is lacking integrity now Isaac's no winner either but neither is Rebecca because Rebecca's I mean the whole family system is a mess and Jacob's family is gonna be a mess you know ten sons gang up to sell Joseph into slavery that's not a successful family but the point is God uses all of this rebellion in order to achieve his goal and achieve his glory for this is how the promise was stated at the appointed time I will return and Sarah will have a son here's the promise and they laughed this is just silliness not only that but Rebecca's children were conceived at the same time by our father Jacob Isaac in other words they're twins yet before the twins were born or had anything done good or bad in order that God's purpose in election might stand not by works again this is it's it's such a subtle argument because what we often do with this argument is again set up these set up this whole network of we set things against them each other that shouldn't be set against each other okay it's not by works so let's say you should abuse and neglect your children no you shouldn't abuse and neglect your children oh so then if if I do everything right then my children will will my children will become exactly how I think they should be no not that either it doesn't work that doesn't mean you shouldn't be a good parent it doesn't mean that neglect and abuse is bad it just means all of your systems and especially your ability to wield even the systems that you see are all limited and in the final analysis God is sovereign and will have his way that's what this means now we've so not by works but by him who calls she was told the older will serve the younger just that is as it is written Jacob I loved but Esau I hated now this verse has caused so much drama in the church over the last 500 years interestingly enough not as much before then which says a lot about so basically what we call the doctrine of election in many respects was simply assumed church doctrine until we fought about it in the present age and I think I think the reason that it be it has attached it's to itself so much drama in the modern period is because in the modern period we have I think key to the modern period is this vision that humanity can look down on all the mechanisms cause and effect can look down at all the mechanisms in the world and reshape the world to what we think is good and right and modernity is going away because the truth is the more we learn about psychology the more we learn about physics the more we learn about just about everything the more we begin to recognize we don't know so much you know sort of modernity reaches its peak at the end of the 19th century because everybody says oh look we've discovered psychology well now we can control human beings this is laughable you know we've at the end of the 19th century beginning of the 20th century you know before the first world war and especially sort of after the first world war well now we know what causes war so we're going to make laws against war oh and then we have the second world war which was far bigger than the first oh so this idea of making laws well well maybe we'll put everyone in a room and all of the nations will rationally discuss their differences and so then we'll not have conflict anymore oh that's i'm all for all of us getting together and talking but if you think it's going to end war i'm dubious and and so part of the drama and the difficulty about chapter nine was this vision that arose in the modern period basically an inflation of our own self-imagined capacity to to control the world with good outcomes and what's you know what's lamentably hilarious is the 20th century because at the end of the 19th century everybody imagines now we know now we have science now we have psychology now we can make the world a wonderful place and then we have the 20th century and kind of the same thing happened at the end of the cold war okay now we no longer have the soviets to defy us now everything will be just as some groups have imagined it you know the end of the 20th century should have been but then of course new things happen and new things arise and the point is that that's what history is like and we make plans and god laughs so jacob i love that he saw i hate it well what do you what what what does that verse mean that verse doesn't mean that god looked at esau and said oh i hate you because if you read the story of genesis so jacob comes back from laban and he's terrified that esau's still bitter and well god intervenes but he saw also comes up to jacob and says god has blessed me you know is that what god's hatred looks like wouldn't look that way to the patriarchs or that's right don't take that right so it's you know people read that verse and well the verse is clearly hyperbolic in the way that biblical language often is what it means is that exactly what we said above here that god in his plan chose jacob now i think the real rub with modernity is that god would dare to have a plan and that we would dare to talk about god's plan and we would now the difficulty we have is that on one hand i think we should dare to talk about god's plan but always with a great deal of humility because we say no the big christians make assertions about the big outcomes that the outcome of the story of the world will be good and that in the end evil will be laid to rest and god will reign there's the plan now does that mean i know which stocks to buy no does i does that mean i know who's going to be elected to office no does that mean a whole number of things about good bad right and wrong in this world what i should learn is humility because that's exactly what this whole story shows which is you know and all the way down to jacob and joseph and manasseh and ephraim joseph brings manasseh and ephraim for jacob to bless well manasseh is the older ephraim is the younger so you know jacob is now blind you know and gonna put his hands and he switches them and and so you know yeah and jacob says no this is the way it is say oh okay now the new custom now the younger no the point is the sovereignty of god paul looks at himself and says i was i am the most unlikely apostle i wasn't there with peter james and john i persecuted the church yet he has called me to bless the gentiles with the message of jesus and this is the story throughout sometimes we find god using people that you say god so clearly prepared this person all the way along praise god and then he uses someone that you would say i have no idea how god would use that person to do that and the story is full of both of them and and the old testament story too moses in some ways perfectly brought up to achieve this outcome even against his own will and then you look at someone like samson he'll talk about a mess you know always falling prey to these you know these other women and taking their bad advice and doing foolish things and god uses him too so we'll uh we'll get back into this because this is a this chapter people have fought over but i don't think it's so mysterious to understand i think the problem we have with it is we want to systematize god and god just keeps laughing at that just like the two-year-old that wants to manipulate mom god won't be manipulated by a two-year-old some moms are but not this god all right let's pray Lord your sovereignty frightens us because we realize the limitations of our will but lord your your your sovereignty should also encourage us because we see the power that you have to even take the ways that we do wrong the ways that we do wrong and turn them into blessings and so lord again and again in the scriptures we see you choose unlikely people to work you choose abraham you choose isaac you choose jacob you choose joseph and juda and you choose david you choose moses um you chose uh these disciples you you even chose judas to do something which was part of the plan and so lord we we take the patterns that we see and and in all reasonableness and there's necessity sometimes we sort of have to plan them out and we map them out and we think but lord you are god and we are not and help us lord not to trust in our ability to know all the plans but help us instead lord to trust in your goodness and so lord may may that finally be our our bulwark and our fortress is your character not ours and your ways and not ours so hear our prayer and give us your peace amen