https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=lQOTFHBqtKM

 Hi, this is Paul. I wanted to do a video commenting on the unbelievable broadcast between Glenn Scrivner and Matt D'Alejante. Morality, can atheism deliver a better world? I thought the conversation was very good. I very much anticipated hearing it, and it didn't disappoint, and so I recommend listening to it. As always, when you listen to something like this, think about the question, how are we using the term God in the conversation and in our lives? What do we mean by God? How do we imagine God acts? What role does God play in morality? What do we mean by morality, and how do we know what the better is? So let's jump in about 30 minutes when really the conversation sort of gets going. There we go. I would agree that if there were a God, we'll stick with a Christian God so that we don't have to drag everybody else into it today, but if there were a God, that would be a sufficient explanation for why some of these devout religious tendencies seem to be beneficial to the practitioner. Okay, so the idea is that we're trying to fill in the world, to understand how the world works, and that there's a... I can't... If you finish up Vervecky's Awakening from the Meaning Crisis series, and I'm reading this book right now, Transubstantiation, Theology, History, and Christian Unity. A copy of this was sent to me by the author, Brett Salkeld, and it's a tremendous book. It's really clear in terms of walking through SCOTUS, Ockham, the history of the Fourth Lateran Council, and the entire idea of the relationship between God and the world. Can we rightly call God a being, or is God being itself, but in a way that isn't pantheistic? Is God the ground of all being, yet separate from the existence we live? In fact, when I listen to a conversation like I'm listening here, to a degree, God number two has so taken over the conversation that Christians and atheists tend to battle on the ground of God number two, and you can hear that in Dillehunti's arguments against the existence of God. You also hear, again, I think Vervecky's Awakening from the Meaning Crisis, there's so much helpful information in that, in terms of sort of laying the landscape of, you know, where do Matt Dillehunti's assumptions about truth come from, this kind of correspondence between this and that, but of course Heidegger rushes in and says, no, there's actually an arena here that, upon which all of these relationships of correspondence are dependent. So, but again, we can't help but talk in shortcuts. We have to talk in shortcuts, and so in other words, what Dillehunti is sort of looking towards is this argument of the God of the Gaps, that we used to be able to explain things in the world. We could explain the order that we find. We could explain the seeming design, the miraculous functionality of the seemingly never-ending complexity of the world. We could explain all of that by a designer. Now, this stands in direct competition with a Darwinian view of the world that says, well, it all sort of emerged through processes, but there is no telos, there is no design, there is no intentionality. It all simply happened, and they'll actually get into questions of Darwin in this conversation as well. Again, I thought this was a, there's a lot in this conversation that's worth talking about. In the same way that if there were a God, that would explain some of the things that creationists point to with regard to design. My concerns on these are separate. Yes, of course that would be sufficient, but is it actually true? Because we've done this over and over again, where we make an inference to an explanation based on whatever limited knowledge and information we have right now, and then we find out later we got it wrong. And every time we found out later that we got it wrong, it was scientific exploration and discovery that found out it was wrong, and at no point have we ever found out we were wrong about a God. Now, I really, really intrigued by this argument, and I've heard variation, Sam Harris presents a variation of it. It's sort of the, it's sort of a take on the subtraction story. It's sort of like running the subtraction story in reverse, where we used to account for the world by pointing to a designer that yielded, that yielded again the immensely functional complexity that we marvel at even as we go deeper, but then science comes along and explains it in a way that replaces God. Now again, built into that scenario is a certain imagination of God. It would sort of be like arguing that it's really incredible how an airplane's wing creates lift. Now we know there isn't a God because now we understand about the differentiation of high and low air pressure and how a wing works, and so that doesn't really make the existence of the Wright brothers fictitious or non-fictitious because obviously the arena, the natural order as we call it, has this potential to allow these dynamics, and just pointing to the dynamics themselves can't really address whether or not there is intentionality in the dynamics within the social, within the natural order. Now, most of the skepticism with respect to the goodness of a designer is based on the fact that these dynamics tend to lead towards our hurt often, that tectonic shifts lead towards tsunamis and earthquakes, and volcanoes can destroy villages, and you know mosquitoes can spread, can spread viruses and malaria and that this causes suffering, and so this doesn't necessarily address the question of well, of whether or not there's design beneath the potential, but it very much addresses, it doesn't address the question of suffering which comes down the road, but you know it's very interesting how we sort of have this subtraction story, the Charles Taylor subtraction story in reverse, that oh here's something that we can now explain before there was a god, and now we, well now we can explain it because we see the natural processes. What we don't in any way explain is why the natural processes can in fact lead to, why there's so much potential in the system that through whatever process you want to imagine, let's call it emergence, which our rule says is the big, you know, it's the big hand waving thing, that emergence can yield. Obviously, it's, let's say if you say well there's this, I have this glass full of highly, with a water full of sugar in solution, and I put a string down and the crystals develop in and of themselves, they develop on their own, that doesn't explain the chemistry, the existence of the chemistry, the potential in the water for the rock candy to develop. What do you make of that? Well, you know, is secular humanism new? In one sense, yes quite new, in another sense, I think it's a repackaging of Christianity, light. And if you look at Glenn's talk to Tom Holland, that's Tom Holland's big argument that essentially humanism is Christianity light, and I think that's, and we're going to get into that a little bit more in this in this video. I do think Nietzsche's critique holds that secular humanism tends to be Christianity where God is swapped out for the good. Okay, now I want to come back to that because I want to first touch a little bit more on God. Now, I want to bring in my conversation that I just had with Voth because I think he nicely laid out the the Jordan Peterson argument. Now, Jordan Peterson's God, the ontology of Jordan Peterson's God, Jordan Peterson leaves as an open-ended question. We can't, um, Jordan Peterson basically, it, I haven't talked about Jordan for a while, Jordan basically asserts that that's a private question for him, and so he doesn't need to answer it, but, so ontology aside, he doesn't want to close that door, yes or no, that's why I call him an open agnostic, but, but basically his argument is that when we use the word God, we're looking at something like what I would call as an intersubjective community orientation device, and I thought Voth set this up quite nicely in the little conversation that we had. Like, at this point, it's pretty cliche to say that, you know, something started by hearing, I just asked him how he had found my video channel, Jordan Peterson, but, um, and to be honest, like, I distilled his shtick out really quick and moved on from him because he doesn't, he's pretty repetitive, but I think what got me is he was, he was on the Joe Rogan podcast and he explained God to me in a way for the first time that I could ever, ever understand it, because, like, I'm sort of a hobby psychologist, like, I have, like, a lot of psychology books that I've read and, and actually a lot of economics books, but I consider economics like a subset of psychology, like the people who add too many numbers to it end up getting lost, but that's beside the point. What I'm trying to get at is he, the psychological significance of God is what he was going for, and that really worked for me because it was like, he was on Joe Rogan and he said, God is a collection of all the things that worked. He more or less explained it in an evolutionary process. So he says, you know, if you got a village and the guy who did the things that worked the best that everyone tries to emulate as the hero, and then when you have, you know, everyone from within the various cities, you know, all the things that correlated between the heroes gets distilled into the legend, and, and when all the legends have all their stuff distilled down into one, eventually you get to the God. And I was like, that makes freaking sense. You know, that actually makes sense to me. You know, it's, it's the, the ideal of the ideal of the ideal. It's, it's the highest point to which you aim at. And that spoke to me because that's always the way I've looked at the world. You know, one of the biggest differentiating factors between like someone who is extremely like left-wing socialist type, and then someone who's like, you know, over here, it's, it's hierarchy versus equality, you know, that sort of intersection. And, and, and I, not intentionally, it's just the way I am, I tend to see people as winners and losers. And so when I see someone who's, who's failing, you know, I might try to, to, to tell them, you know, or help them or advise them and whatnot. But, you know, I still in my mind categorize them as loser and, and, you know, they need to figure out a way to help themselves. And, you know, people who are winners, theoretically, they're doing something right. You should try to emulate them. And so it's like, you know, what's the absolute top of the hierarchy is, is built from an ideal. And so when he explained it that way, it made sense to me. Now, now what's interesting about, about Dilla-Hunty is that he's notes many, many times that he's a secular humanist. The atheism for Dilla-Hunty is sort of a thin fact. And what he wants to promote is essentially whatever is behind secularism or, you know, secular humanism, wherever it came from, you know, that's incidental. But now, since we have this tool that we call science, which is usually something that they, they don't peer into terribly. For all that they, for, for all that, for all the load they place on it, that they tend to not examine what it can and cannot yield. And this of course gets very much into the question of morality, because can science give us morality? And what we tend to find is that there is actually a pretty good section in this conversation about that too. But I would, I would argue that, okay, so let's, if we want to leave the ontology of God off the table, the way God functions sociologically, the way God functions psychologically, and I think again, this is again part of the big payload of Jordan Peterson, what, what, how he really managed to change people dramatically and really moved a lot of people from sort of this, oh yeah, atheism, oh yeah, atheism, to well, maybe this, this God business is functional, again, as sort of an intersubjective community orientation device. It's sort of the top of the hierarchy. And so over time, this is how we actually learn what we should do. Now we're treading into morality, what we should do for, what, to give us outcomes that we desire, to give us, you know, less disease instead of more disease, to give us more food instead of less food, to give us more peace and less war, to give us more prosperity. I mean, all of these things, if, if we're, if we're not looking too deep into Telos, that, that, well, this God and communities that use this intersubjective community orientation device that we are calling God, communities that use this, you know, tend to thrive over communities that don't. This is where we get into the question of God as an adaptation, that, that, that God as an idea, as an intersubjective community orientation device tends to afford an advantage of communities that engage in this process over communities that don't. Now, again, I think I'm going to post this after the video that I've already recorded, but not yet posted on, on Brett Weinstein and his talk with Jim Rutt, I think that's the guy's name, his talk with, with Sam, Sam Harris, that if, if religion is in fact an adaptation and the adaptation offers an advantage and the idea of God, now again, I said we have polytheism and monotheism, okay, that the idea of God somehow offers the community an advantage, adaptive advantage, then you have the question of, well, why, if that is true historically, why now is it, why now must we leave it behind? That's a difficult thing to demonstrate. Now, I think Matt Dillahunty and Sam Harris would say, well, now we have science, and I would argue, well, that's a little difficult because I'd say this scientific process is in fact all the way along in this development, and if again you go back to the Tom Holland video where he's talking about the Roman emperors sort of trying out gods, in many ways that's sort of a scientific process, but it's a vast one where they're, because you don't have enough time to, for one generation, so you look back and you use the accumulated wisdom of generations, but then you, you have to make the choice in real time, and so you, you try it out, and I find people actually continue to do this in all kinds of ways. People will, often when someone visits church for the first time, and as a pastor, I almost always sort of imagine, number one, something fell through in their life, and their, and all of their usual resources have failed them, and so now they're going to try something spiritual to maybe help. Number two, they're, they're weighing, they need a new religion, they need a new, they need a new spiritual angle, and so maybe I'm going to try this other church, or maybe I'm going to try this other religion, or maybe I'm going to try this other god. Now all of the imagined pride of, of, of the atheist when people get in trouble seems to go by the wayside. People get religious very quickly because they are looking to, to make their lives better in the ways that they can appreciate, and again, so, and, and understanding God as this intersubjective community orientation device really holds true in that. Now, now the imagined ontology of God number two, again, as we listen to Matt Dillahunty, he really leans on the God number two aspect of this in the world. You know, as I said, you know, is there design in the world, or is there, is there, is the world designed to have dramatic potential which we can unlock using reason? I was just listening to the modernitas section of Tom Holland's dominion, and, and you very quickly see that, that reason, you know, when, when the church, especially during the, the pre-colonial period, so these, these Jesuit missionaries go out to, to China, and basically the Chinese emperor is looking to find out how to predict the eclipse, and where the, where the late medieval, early modern period, and, and right now they're starting to, you know, they're getting better at math, and they're beginning to get better at prediction, and the Copernican model is beginning to take over, and so this Jesuit priest goes to China, and basically he kicks the butt of all the previous emperor advisors in terms of being able to predict the eclipse, and suddenly, well, now the emperor, they have the, they have the interest of the emperor of China, and so, wow, so there must be something to these people. They are, they seemingly can better discern the, they can better discern the patterns of the world. I also just watched Jonathan Peugeot's, I thought it was an excellent video on Alexander the Great, and why would these Christians really look up to Alexander the Great? Well, obviously Alexander the Great, even though he was a pagan, by virtue of the dramatic success that he had in the world, could figure out something about the world, and that's very, really very analogous to science, because they're noticing the patterns, they're able to represent the patterns in their mind's eye, they're able to act with rationality in this predictable context, but again, it doesn't explain, even though you're able to work within a predictable context, it doesn't explain why the context is so predictable, it doesn't explain why the patterns are so built in, and this is again, in some ways, as opposed to certain other religious and historical systems that said basically the world is just chaos. You have to ask the question, to what can we attribute the patterns, and to what can we attribute our capacity to recognize the patterns as such, and engage with them productively towards the ends to which we desire, okay? So, what does it mean to explain something by natural causes or forces, and is human design, for example, excluded by explaining how wings give lift? Oh, now we know that wings give lift, therefore we know that the Wright brothers are only a story. No, the Wright brothers figured it out, it's just that the Wright brothers are within our sphere of knowledge, unlike inventors of the wheel, and inventors of predictable ways of doing fire. We don't imagine that the wheel is now demythologized because we can figure out that people figured out how to make it. That argument doesn't really hold. Now, what's interesting is that, again, in the, let's see, where are we? Oh yeah, so another point that I wanted to make, and we'll get into this again when we go back to the unbelievable video, one of the issues that I've been thinking about a lot, partly my conversations with Jeff Quackenbush, you know, really, you know, pushed me on some of these issues is the question of source and stream, or really source within the stream, and Dilla Huntie makes some fair points when he says, wow, you Christians, you know, everything good that comes along, you comes down the stream, you credit Christianity for, and everything bad that comes down the stream, you credit something else, and fair enough. The difficulty that we have is, well, it's helpful to remember, number one, we're playing a little tribal rivalry game because we want to score points for Christianity in the process, and then we should ask some deeper probing questions, why do we want to do this? And I, and, you know, if it's after a person or a movement, is that person or movement the cause? And when we're talking about things like humanism, it's a huge development that goes over very long periods of time. Can we just, how can we justify the attribution? Does the attribution matter? If so, why or why not? Now, again, as Christians, as tribal Christians, we want to say things like, ah, Jesus is the son of God because he introduced this idea that won. Now, is it because the idea won that we like him, or is it because just about everybody today simply has embraced the ideas? Some of the most dramatic things about the work that Tom Holland has been doing is that, and I think Renee Girard is in this category too, they're able to in many ways attribute these ideas that we in the humanist West, whether secular or Christian, embrace as self-evident, the self-evidently good. And again, what's struck me in this conversation with Matt Dillahunty is how deeply Christian Matt's ideas are about people to a degree. And again, the argument coming from Tom Holland and Glenn Scrivener and Douglas Murray is the concern that when the hand says to the arm, I have no part of you, what happens to the hand after that? So we have these questions really about participation and corruption. If you lose the narrative, which has yielded this phenomenon, let's call secular humanism, if you lose the narrative behind it, does that narrative yield a life-giving force to the impetus? And if we lose that narrative, does then the impetus go away? So let's jump back into the conversation. But to the extent that's true, couldn't we just say that Christianity is the homorobic code swapped out or upgraded or changed or that all of this is derivative? See, and I think both Dillahunty and Sam Harris, listening to the conversation that Sam Harris had with Brett Weinstein, and this is a version sort of of Brett's position. Brett's a little more tentative than Sam on whether we can just junk the Christian stuff because, well, now we've got the fruit of it, why can't we just embrace the fruit and carry on? And I think Tom Holland, Douglas Murray, Glenn Scrivener all want to say, a little nervous about doing that because it's sort of like taking the fruit out of the garden and saying, well, we're no longer going to tend the garden, we're just going to take the fruit and the fruit will be good enough. And here, Matt Dillahunty, I think, is saying, okay, well, whether we got this from Christianity, I don't care because, and this is almost the identical argument that Sam Harris makes, I think it's a powerful argument that, well, if we can arrive at, so we have a common morality that both Christians and secular humanists can embrace, and, okay, let's say it came to us via Christianity, fine, let's assume that, but if we no longer need Christianity to justify the moral questions, and in fact, perhaps we can justify the moral questions better without the woo, without the Christianity, without the appeal to a God, without any attempt to pursue a supernatural, and again, there's a lot of this in John Vervecki's program, well, then we're better off because then it's grounded on something more stable. Now, there's two elements to that, however, because maybe the more stable, you imagine it more stable because in your philosophical system, you can ground it, you can sort of, you know, there is a, you can construct a tower of rationality and science that yields this thing, and so therefore, for you, that's a better system because you can do the work all the way up and say, here it is, and therefore, perhaps we can work it higher. Now, the question will be, of course, higher, how will, what will the guiding stars be that help you understand which way is up? The other question, however, which is, kind of stalks this conversation, which I don't know if I'll get to it so much in this video, but maybe in a future video, but I always imagine future videos I don't do, so maybe I should do a question and answer sometime with y'all to keep me honest to things that I think about and never follow through with. That's the question of, you know, really people at the high, that the first, that we can derive ourselves this scientific project that yields the same secular humanism without appeals to the supernatural or Christianity, and therefore, it's a better system. Or is something a better system if it's in fact scalable that people of low IQ, people of different education, people of minimal education, people who don't read books, people who in fact are walking around with, let's say, the basic package of human susceptibility to magical thinking can actually embrace and pursue? This is especially true if we're imagining that, well, we have a democracy here, and in many ways the way democracies function is that it's the common ideas of the people, not the elites, of the people that tends to get displayed in the legislature and tends to get codified as, well, this is what's good, this is what's right. So is it in fact some moral system that extremely intelligent and articulate people who read the kinds of books that, not a whole lot of them selling, you know, will that get filtered then down through the movies and, you know, it's a real question in terms of which type of system is better. Is the scalable system better that is replete with mythology and story that actually moves massive numbers of people because massive numbers of people are far more equipped to deal with a story-based system? Or is it that system which only those, and Jordan Peterson is quite articulate when he makes the point that very few people can really think scientifically, very few people are going to delve into, you know, even when you look at, say, John Vervecky's project, 51-hour videos, and we're spanning philosophy and history and cognitive science and, you know, after going through all 50 hours, it's very clear that the 50 hours is just the tip of the iceberg because if you want to understand Kant or Hegel or Aristotle or Plato or Heidegger or, you know, any of these giants or Nietzsche or Jung, you know, and then from, once you begin to study them, you begin to see the people around them and you begin to say, oh my goodness, how on earth could I embrace that when you discover that a meme or a fable or a story colonizes people far more quickly than these ideas? Now these ideas do trickle down but, yeah, but they also keep changing in terms of the high climbers of the culture. So, okay, back to this video. At some point we're talking about human beings and how they choose to try to answer the questions and live lives cooperatively. Whether you're going back to animism and some tribal struggle, then this becomes a more codified sort of language and when people aren't paying attention to it and the village elder is no longer a sufficient authority, we appeal to one outside of there, I mean, this would also be a sufficient explanation for the history of religion. So, to say that secular humanism is a newly packaged, light modified version of Christianity really isn't relevant if Christianity is a modified version of other things that all tie back to the human being. Which is a big if and I don't think it is at all. I think what you get when you... One of the things I've been thinking a lot about too that I want to get into at some point is in terms of how Christians love to argue, so much of Christian argumentation has sort of been built on the natural supernatural divide, okay, and revelation. And I, you know, you're not going to find me denying revelation but I think it's helpful to talk a little bit more carefully about what revelation is and hopefully I'll get into that more. But Christians very much want to highlight the antithesis and that's fair. There are antitheses and that's a function of reality and they should be highlighted but there are also continuities that are helpful to recognize as well. You look at human civilizations, what you get when you look at the Hammurabi Code, when you look at the Enumer Alish, when you look at any number of the ancient Near Eastern texts, when you look at any number of Greco-Roman understanding of the world or Persian understanding of the world or Muslim understanding of the world, is basically that in the realm of the flesh, in the realm of biological reality, it is survival of the fittest, you know, and therefore sacrifice of the weakest. And I think what you get absolutely uniquely in Christianity is the reverse of that. Now this is a powerful point that Glenn makes that now survival of the fittest doesn't necessarily survive the strongest and Dilla Huntie will make that point but then we get into the the we get into the relevance realization, John Bervecki's relevance realization. Now what's so odd about Christianity is that Jesus' take seems so anti-Darwinian and what's so there are a number of aspects of Jesus' ministry that that seem in many ways so anti-Darwinian. Number one, Jesus even by his biographers in the Gospels doesn't seem to doesn't seem to win the crowd beyond sort of the the appetites of the crowd for a miracle show, getting their diseases healed and getting some free bread. The people that cheer Jesus coming into Jerusalem on Palm Sunday seem to have abandoned him by Thursday night. And this says a lot about human beings and I've made this point before that, well let's imagine the greatest Christian preacher of all time must be Jesus. Why wasn't there this mass why wasn't there this mass revival that sort of swept Galilee and then Judea to the degree that even the Romans or the religious officials that were envious of him couldn't stop. John the Baptist was a tremendously powerful preacher, not sufficiently powerful enough to save him from Herod, but tremendously powerful preacher whose tribe would be in existence for another couple of centuries after John the Baptist lived. It's a matter of historical record. Now of secular historical record let me say. Now Jesus seems to do you know and I'll I'll I remember having a conversation with someone who was post-Christian and I made the observation to him that you know there are a lot of reasons to not live like Jesus because what it got him was dead by 33. None of us look upon that as being successful and and Jesus adopts this this idea of turning the other cheek of giving the cloak away of loving your enemy and and whereas this idea continues to to be attractive to us for some strange reason it's it's very counter Darwinian in some ways yet it endures and yet we don't like to practice it for the most obvious reasons and and Jesus seems to instantiate this idea up the hierarchy and this gets back to to Tom Holland's amazingly insight that this this guy who claimed to in some way be the source of all being in the universe gets killed as a slave and four writers manage to make him so outrageously attractive that people from nearly every culture throughout human history find him at least interesting enough to not put him down and sufficiently interesting that no small number of people throughout the world begin to agree with his connection with the source of all being. That's an astounding literary accomplishment and that four authors did it and didn't go on to be William Shakespeare and have dozens of other popular things that go on through time and the thing that they all four have together writing within just years or decades of each other in the first century is that they're writing about Jesus. That is a historical fact that shouldn't be dismissed too quickly so fair enough that stuff comes down to us but Jesus is a big deal not easily just pushed aside now you could say you push him aside but there's a few billion people living today and more as you go into the realm of the dead that say no big deal. You have in Christ the the fittest who is sacrificed for the survival of the weakest and what you get birthed out of the Christian movement is a unique preference for the poor the marginalized the weak the outsider to draw them in such that obviously in every society there's tippa tats and there's let's cooperate and let's do all that kind of stuff but who is we in that sentence let and we cooperate to compete that like that brent weidstein put that one in my head that's a that's an amazing insight. Let us cooperate well who's the us you know it could be just you and me and not Justin or it could be just me and Justin and not you right. Who are the people on planet earth who are actually saying it's actually all of us even our enemies are those who we include in the circle of humanity and who we grant equal human dignity to and who we say they must never be marginalized no matter how weak they are no matter how ineffectual they are no matter how maladapted to survival they are they are ours and we will you know we will grant them a universal human dignity that's a thoroughly Christian idea and it's it's not you know it's obviously it's found on the first page of the bible so it's it's there in Judaism but it's it is a uniquely Christian idea that I think secular humanism has taken on but I don't think you derive that secular humanism anywhere else but in Christianity and Judaism now that's called the Judeo-Christian worldview sure and I want to kvetch about this a little bit because I think the roots of it are in fact right there in Genesis 1 but and and I think you see signs of it in the inclusion of the rabble in the Exodus you see signs of it that that people men can become Jews via circumcision and women via the ceremonial bath that will become Christian baptism but but it is in fact Jesus that presses this point home now if you keep listening to this video what you hear again and again is the category of human being and what I want to argue is that this category of human being in fact comes to us via Christianity and it's not that ancients didn't understand the difference between a human being and a dog or a human being and an ox or a human being and a lion it's it's this regard for one another that takes off in Christianity that that Glenn has just and I think this is the strongest point he presses De La Honte with and he keeps coming back to it and I think finally De La Honte can't answer Glenn's charge that this is this gets this comes into human history via Jesus and you know a number of years ago I read Hampton Sides really interesting book Blood and Thunder and it's the story of Kit Carson and the conquest of the American West and and very early on in the book one of the things that gets recognized is that well they're the Navajo here and and the Navajo well the word Navajo is a is a word of the Pueblo Indians no okay Pueblo who are the Pueblo Indians the Anas the the Anasazi we're going to get into these names because so the what we use what the names we usually get for these tribes are in fact from their enemies because the word Navajo is a Pueblo Indian origin meaning people of the great plain field planted fields well maybe the first appeared in Spanish documents in 1628 the Navajo didn't call themselves that the have a call called themselves the Dene the Dene which simply means the people and now if you start poking around in anthropology and in these it's sort of like the the Tom Holland people didn't know they had a religion until Christians came along and said that they had one and and then they began to recognize it that that sort of happens with this idea of people because it seems almost all the world over almost all the way throughout time there's people there's us and then there's them there's the in group and then the out group and the in group is people and the out group is barbarian or enemy and or gentile and you know this was this was fully within the the religion of the Jewish people all the way to the book of acts when at the beginning of the book of acts the disciples asked Jesus now will you start to restore the kingdom to Israel and it seems like all of the stuff that Jesus was doing subtly through the gospels of of you know not carrying on the very understandable subtle cultural war against Roman occupation that this gets full blown then into the into the controversy that will erupt in the very early church between the Judaizers and the new Christians that are coming into the faith via Paul and this gets played out in the book of Galatians and and over and over in the new testament and in fact you know they're going to talk a bit about slavery in this but but never do they bring up the fact that in in many ways these issues are dealt with in very subtle early ways in the new testament and the new testament itself is has the record of the struggle of these ideas whether or not the people can be as we find finally in the book of revelation people from every tongue and language and they're not circumcised and and then the question becomes well how do we know someone is a Christian just just this week I'm preaching from from the baptism of Jesus and John the Baptist says to the Pharisees and Sadducees who are kind of looking there watching the watching the goings-on in judgment and John says don't consider yourself exempt from the judgment of the Lord because you are the you have Abrahams you're the children of Abraham God can raise children of Abraham out of the stones and what in fact what happens in Christianity is in fact that your identity can be changed via a religious conversion and via the entrance into a new community and whereas before it was Jews had their religion and and Persians had their religion and everybody had their religion and their gods and via polytheism there could be a certain amount of of religious a certain amount of of religious lubrication going on so that people could live next to each other fundamentally it was us against them and us is our family or our tribe and they are the others and they are the enemy in fact this this goes further there is another site that I looked up about names and and in fact you know that the point of the names which is very 20th century via Europe of self-determination those ideas have roots too well well so what should we call these people that were in North America if we dare call it North America when the Europeans came over the conundrum names doesn't end here some of the traditional or real names are not actually derived from the people themselves just as we saw from Navajo Navajo doesn't come from the Pueblans the the name the one before the name Anasazi when I went and went to the cliff dwellers and those cliff dweller ruins in in southwest Colorado and it was you know I always wanted to see those some of myself and my wife and one of our sons who was still living at home at that time we went down to southern Colorado when he saw the cliff dwellers at first what we saw the Anasazi and then we began to notice that all the signs were in the process of changing why because the ancestors of the Anasazi said you know that's not really our name for ourselves because before it was sort of like well Anasazi that means ancient people but a little bit more digging resulted in well that's a Navajo word and it means enemy ancestors and and some say that's not exactly what it means it means something much more brutal and in fact this comes up all over the place in North America because North America was not one big happy nation of one people and then the Europeans the categorization of of of one color of people and another color of people in fact there was multiple peoples and they were all having wars between each other and there's us and then there's them and so Mohawk is an arrogance that name meaning flesh eaters Sue is a French corruption of a Anishinaabe word for enemy in fact many of these names mean enemy simply simply Apache is a Spanish corruption of a Zuni word for enemy while Navajo is from a Spanish term of the Tiwa word if we want to be fully authentic in every instance we will have to inquire into the language of each people to find the name that they call themselves and they probably is just people or Dine as in the Navajo it may not be surprising to find that the deepest real names oh how do we know what's real is often the word for people or for the homelander for some differentiating characteristic of the people as seen through their own eyes and so what happens here let's credit the Abrahamic god with everything and when I look at it my my issue is if there if there is an Abrahamic god okay now again pay attention to in the imaginary that that that this this way of talking is relevant okay we got this god this this actor this being out here that's doing stuff very much god number two that's an important question which I guess we're going to somewhat sideline because at the end of the day this notion that human beings who care about human beings are not going to come up with multiple again human beings what's a human being the Navajo didn't see it that way the Anasazi or the the the ancient Pueblo and we don't know what to call them the people all of the different the peoples didn't see it that way now suddenly we're talking about human beings as one thing this is all from Christianity different ways of and and in fact I'd argue that the what we learned from the Indian names or the gosh what we learned from the names that I just talked about is that in fact the default position of people is us and them and and regarding all of humanity as human beings that came from someone and in fact it is an achievement that was bought through hundreds and through centuries and centuries of struggle with this Christians and non-Christians Calvinists and arminians Catholics and Protestants Christians and and Muslims on and on and on and on all these categories that that this humanism is in fact an achievement structuring a society and that some of those which may be consistent with your view and understanding of Christianity which I would argue is perhaps different than some other people's view and understanding Christianity I don't I think that's particularly contentious at this point doesn't mean that this is Christianity light and modified and updated or that it's all derived from Christianity as the original source because that presumes that there's something other than human beings that are the original source for but you're using the category of human beings and that has a source and again what you see in here is just sort of the self-evident assumptions of there's such a thing as human beings and not us and them in terms of how we act and how we regard someone someone else and that behavior has its genesis in someone because in many many places in world history that behavior gets you killed or it gets your crops eaten by someone else for those ideas the fact that but but for him for Dilla hunty it's just self-evident they became popular within Christianity you know that you have somebody talking about blessed or the meek did that ultimately lead some people to the united nations universal code of human ethics type stuff and secular humanism sure because we're all together on a planet and these ideas get you we're all together on a planet again the conceptualization of it i think it's really hard to say it doesn't come from the one who on the cross said to forgive those who were crucifying him because they didn't know what they were doing even though they were roman passed around and my my take on it has always been take the best ideas wherever you find them get rid of the rest how do you know what the best is because you're the one judging it but now we're getting into morality because morality is the question of well what is best well what is best for what now i wanted to get into this is the slide that i skipped you know one of the one of the real treasures i gleaned from jordan peterson was was piaget's equilibrated state how do we know what is better or or what is worse from something made an egyptian whose name was hager so this is a big catastrophe for abraham especially in those times and perhaps now as much although perhaps people aren't as conscious of it as they once were i mean for abraham without a biological son there was no there was no there was no vision forward into the future now here's an element of the bible that we too quickly overlook that in fact what the bible affords us is a view into the values of ancient people and again for abraham the value for abraham was well how was death beaten death is beaten through children so i live on through my ancestors so there's a really strong value and that's a really strong value about us and them because what you want to do is have all of the food and you want your tribe to multiply because basically military strength was directly related to population health and food security and so what you find in a lot of the bible is a war in the iron age over food security and so abraham what abraham wants to do is abraham wants to be the father of nations that's what everybody wants to do right then and and again in fact you find this strange anti-darwinian perspective in the bible all the way from abraham because at the end of the tower of babel you have another catastrophe and so god's going to take a new tact in terms of how to how to redeem the world and he's going to do it through nation building and the one qualification you're looking for for someone to be father of nation is that the original pale wood pair would be fertile and that's exactly the aspect that we see in abraham and sarah is that they can't have children well there's a storyline developing somewhere in terms of what might this god very much god number two what might this god be doing and be after and and how might it in fact be antithetical no one i mean we don't really know what sort of time span over which these archaic people fought but the medieval people we already said could think 300 years into the future without without batting an eye and these people who were who were concerned about their descendants were obviously thinking about existence in a way that wasn't just focused on their immediate existence right they were thinking about well their children and their grandchildren maybe their great-grandchildren maybe the whole society that it stemmed out from them and that's that's smart you know one of the things i learned from piaget least in part was that his idea of the equilibrated state which he thought about as partly part of the biological basis of the idea of moral progress it's something like that it was very very smart piaget and we said that the proper equilibrated state is one where imagine you have a family you have five people in it and you're doing what you want and you know now morality again is about what you do and it's what you do towards the good but what is in fact the good and how can we know the good well well here's we're always looking for ways that we can know the good because the difficulty is we don't know the ends of the things that we do and i one of my favorite jordan peterson passages from his 2017 maps of meaning course was they asked the question what is the automobile well the automobile is a way to get from a to b without horse poop on the streets it's also a way to completely change cities in the world and it's also a way to have tens of thousands of people die every year trying to get from a to b and it's also a way of churning every gallon of gasoline into 21 pounds of co2 it's it's in fact many many things and we don't know what we do when we do something and we find this all the time in human history and so what we're always trying to do is no outcomes and no ends and so we're always looking for ways to try to conceptualize the good and and in fact when when matt dilahunty or sam harris talks about well-being that's another attempt but it's a pretty thin one because what we tend to find is that and and this this i hear again and again in these videos is that we can simply assume that we know but well it's obvious we can just tell it well is it obvious is it obvious to us now that you know the minhattan project was a good idea is it obvious to us now to to have related to certain nations at certain times in certain ways we were the ones that started the iranian nuclear program atoms for peace all around the world the united states does that seem like a good idea now you go through history and you find this again and again we find it in our own little lives and so in fact one of the ways to conceptualize of of of religion is that it is a it is a sustained effort on the part of humanity to try to traverse time in terms of learning through time about what is the good well back to piaget in your family what's good for you but you're doing it in such a way so that the other four members of your family agree with what you do and that it also facilitates them doing what they want and what they should be doing and so it's a really tricky arrangement because it isn't just for you it's for you in a way that's for them and you could also see that that would be something that would be a multiplier right because if you have everyone working voluntarily towards the same common goal then you get a multiplying effect of that and then you might think well it's not just you and you're going to have to conceptualize that goal and you're going to have to deliver that goal in a way that not only the most intelligent people of your community can understand not only the way that the most educated people of your community can understand but that in fact all of the other people who don't have time to sit and read books can understand and in fact it's very it fits very well into their self-conceptualization which probably means it's a story because that's that's our fundamental self-conceptualization of how we live in this world. And your family it's you and your family today and next week and next month the next year and 10 years from now so you have to take the time span into account and then it should be you and your family in a way that works well in society and then it should work well. See now we're branching out beyond the family but society my society there's an identity thing and we're gonna we're gonna span beyond identities here. Now and next week and next year and into the future it should be iteratable right that's like sustainability it's something like the idea of sustainability and that's that's I would say that's a reasonable way of conceptualizing the holy city it's it's something like that if you're if you're trying to make it concrete it's like how should you live your life well let's say you live your life in a manner that justifies its limitation and tragedy that's a good start but then let's say that it does that in a way that also reduces the limitations and suffering of the people that you interact with and that okay limits their suffering what kind of suffering well because some of the suffering you think is good and some of the suffering that you think is bad and in fact sometimes you want your enemies to suffer because you want them to change their ways and sometimes you want to encourage and so in fact suffering itself isn't itself even that good of oh that isn't isn't isn't a universal tell now and into the future well maybe there's a way to do that I mean a good negotiation does that right because if you're negotiating with someone like your wife for example what you want is for her to agree with the negotiation and one of the things that piaget said which I think was brilliant brilliant he said if you take an equilibrated system a family let's say and a disequilibrated system so that would be one where let's say the father is a tyrant and everyone is operating under his whip and you put them in a head-to-head competition the equilibrated system will outcompete the disequilibrated system because the enforcement cost is such that it will slow the system down and what this demonstrates is that volunteerism this you have to in a sense colonize the moral imagination of not just a few people at the top but in fact an entire community so that they in in fact can all share this idea together and I think part of what we see with matt delahunty in terms of he seems to be sharing these ideas that the week and that that's all that's what we should do well he's been colonized you know because you'll get resistances from the people inside the system they'll work the system will be working at counter purposes to itself plus there's enforcement costs and so a tyranny cannot beat an ill-equilibrated system and I was really excited to encounter that idea because when I encountered it I was also trying to figure out if there was some quantitative difference between the system say of the soviet union and maus china and the systems of the west apart from just you know arbitrary world interpretation as the post-modern nihilists might have it if there was something fundamental at stake in the terrible cold war that we fought if it was just a matter of opinion you know in the piagetian take was that well roughly speaking is that the west was an equilibrated system not perfectly equilibrated but reasonably equilibrated in that people were essentially even if they were slaves to some degree they were at least voluntary slaves instead of involuntary slaves and that that was better the system was actually technically better and not just as a matter of interpretation so that's a lovely thing to know and I think it's a really really solid really really solid idea I haven't been able to you know put crowbars under that idea and lift it up I think it's a good one so and and what's interesting in this is that actually later in this conversation with de la honte one aspect of it of this conversation is it right but the aspect of it that that doesn't seem to get enough attention is can you move the world with it and if people are naturally religious if if you're and I think this is part of the reason that the new atheists have are a short-lived movement is people are naturally religious you're bucking human evolution by by going counter to religion and and what I made this point in the the article I wrote on on the Dave Rubin John Lennox conversation that you're kind of bucking you're kind of bucking human history with this and that's why I think Scott Alexander and Slate star codex said basically that we've seen the end of the new atheists because their system can't stand you know whether or not they imagine that their system is superior in terms of the art the philosophical argumentation that they try to bear in terms of how human beings work for the most part what we've seen is that when people throw off the the traditional better structured better thought through inherited religions that they have and they start ad hocing it it gets worse and society in fact has less cohesion than than what they had before one of the things that that strikes me is is how is how well ancient and medieval societies were able to cohere I was I was watching the Ken Burns the Ken Burns documentary on the Civil War and Shelby Foote who's one of the more colorful commentators in there makes makes the point that you had union and rebel shoulders shoulder soldiers standing shoulder to shoulder there's a little tongue twister in the face of these mini balls that were going to mow them down now on one hand you can say well that's a stupid way to fight but on the other hand you recognize look at the look at the courage I just watched the movie little women last night it's a lovely movie but but you know even in through that movie which is a thin lens when you read the kinds of letters that come out of the Civil War and and the I mean in many ways we are we are lesser ancestors of greater people now we look back and we say oh they were horrible people they had you know we can find all sorts of ideas that we despise in their heads yeah but what they were able to do in terms of let's you know think about these union soldiers that that that went down to fight for this cause well again that was incredibly complicated because they were fighting for their state not you know maybe for the union but but but the courage that they were able to able to show get back to the video that I'm supposed to be talking about and so from you know the Bible I can pull out some really good ideas and I can get rid of its support for slavery but again you're doing all of this sifting and part of and again I think Brett Weinstein said it so well the Bible isn't the Bible just because there are a few nuggets in there the Bible is the Bible because of this of this long-term process that it went through and to simply discard it you're taking a risk and you're taking a risk with a lot of us for your genocide or misogyny or any of those things I don't have to hang on to the baggage or claim that I'm doing it because in a sense that you're getting rid of everything including God obviously in the process of doing that and it is your argument Glenn that there's a danger in doing that you can't simply have the ethics without some of the supporting foundations particularly that you think which is Nietzsche's critique as well yeah absolutely but you you get rid of the God of Christianity and you must get rid of the ethics of Christianity as well because it is founded on the God who took flesh who became the weak one in order to rise up again and and and bring us weak ones into his family and and he uniquely gives to the entire human race a dignity which you can kind of secularize that term and call it universal declaration of human rights but that's basically the Imago Dei that's basically the image of God from Genesis chapter one see and I'd argue that Imago Dei is the seed but that gets born out in Christ and Paul and the New Testament um you know in a way that I mean that's the whole issue of the conflict with the judiizers that the New Testament writings are just simply shot through with so so on one hand you seem to be saying you can't remove God and still maintain these things and yet you're you're claiming that secular humanism has done exactly that. Secularism has done exactly that or hasn't done it has done exactly that that when I when I advocate for secular humanist principles when I when I do that that I'm basically taking the principles that you see in Christianity and just removing God from it so clearly you can do that you can do that but on what grounds now well I don't know if it's on what grounds but I'd argue about sustainability because what I would argue is that okay so you've got you've got one camp says that here we have we have this system that is derived from our philosophy and from all of this thinking that we do because we've read a tremendous amount of books and we've had all the best and and we've got this system and what you've got is a bunch of stories yeah but which which side is going to move the world I wanted to Dilla Huntie's going to make a point about kind of a different take on you know God sacrificing his son and through all of that stuff I just wanted to say Rene Girard but but then they jump into this which I think is is one of the one of the critical elements of this video Old Testament but that that's got to be interesting at least because I mean we can't do a compare and contrast there's no a b testing about this okay there's only which I think kind of undermines what you were just saying and I'm sorry I don't mean to interrupt but I'm in agreement with you you're viewing it as nobody else has done this and you don't think anybody else could and my thing is we have no way to find that out because we live in a world where this is the way things happened and that's exactly right you can't rewind history and say well if Jesus had decided that once he had that big crowd in Galilee he had said all right well let's get some pointed sticks and let's take over a few towns here and let's kill some Gentiles and let's uh let's make this place safe for for our holy book and our holy people and unsafe for other people and well you know but one of the nice things about history is that in terms of people and ideas there are plenty of people that tried that idea with the Romans and in fact in 68 AD 271 AD well that that pretty much failed and and one of the beautiful things we have about history is that in fact history is itself a lesson about winners and losers and we can argue this from a Darwinian perspective in fact this is the whole conceptualization that Brett Weinstein has about a Darwinian view of religion as an as an adaptation within human history and that's sort of something what Jordan Peterson is talking about in terms of the equilibrated state one which is voluntary and the other which is is forced a tyranny that's forced upon its people that free societies will in the end win out because people want to be free and so the real quest is in fact to colonize the ideas and win the war of ideas but that winning the war of ideas is not just people who seem to have the best ideas amongst their little ivory tower of all the academics but the people have their best ideas that actually flow in the streets okay because because people are adapted to these ideas and so to argue that you couldn't actually write a list of moral precepts from scratch that are superior to Christianity but then but then aren't you saying um okay at least with the Christian side we've got that there is one group of people that has guaranteed universal equality for all human beings and has ended the slave trade okay it might have taken far longer than you would have wanted it to have taken but there is one group of people who've done that we don't know if anyone has or could do that let's give it a go anyway let's let's walk away from this thing that has given us all these benefits of the universities and the hospitals and the schools and the scientific method and the emancipation of the slaves and all this sort of stuff um let's let's walk away from that that that's quite a leap of faith and am i also getting the sense glenn that i mean i want to come back to this this human at the center of this and the fact that matt says hey humans are humans and yet since it's natural that we're going to prefer ourselves and that's where the morality comes from our own best interest again we're going to prefer ourselves as humans well you've already imbibed and conceptualized one human family now what may be coming down the road is that well through you know through taking these my cell phone's way over there on the desk it's not in my holder um that once we take this technology and we wired into our heads and and once we jordan peterson talked a lot about this and that really caught my attention once we basically say that you know all of the people with iqs less than a hundred they're dead weight and well now maybe we won't kill them maybe we'll find some really comfy chairs and some really engaging vr and a really powerful chemical we'll call it soma and we'll put them in a chair and we'll just let them drift off and they'll be they'll be very happy and then they'll go quietly and in fact if you if you try to take them out of their comfy chair take the soma away or take the vr away then they'll be angry with you so that's what they want that's what they choose and so maybe then we can have a b c's d's brave new world or maybe we can have gold silver bronze plato's republic and you know eventually what we're going to have to do is we're going to better mankind in the ways that we imagine they should be bettered a little bit later in this they're going to getting into naziism and i don't think i'm going to go that far because i've got to go home and eat dinner but a little bit later in this they're going to get into the the nazi question and one of the interesting things about what happened in the second world war was that in the west as well as in germany ideas of eugenics and again i'd encourage you to read plenty of literature in the early 20th century ideas of eugenics were this was science this was how we're going to better the race we're going to sterilize the feeble-minded and not allow them to reproduce and you know this is how in fact we um we compete against other nations now don't for a minute imagine that these ideas aren't going to come back maybe they will maybe 200 years from now we'll be people be sitting around and saying i'm not going to watch vander idea his iq was too low so let's ban his videos what is a human being what is what qualifies for life and you're saying no somehow christianity has actually grounded an intrinsic dignity to the human that matt's godless ethics isn't necessarily going to support it might go in that direction for them for a moment but there's no ultimate foundation to it is that why yeah absolutely i mean we are always going to look after ourselves but who is we and who are ourselves in that conversation and we are always wanting to narrow the circle around us and our mates and exclude the other tribe and exclude the other kinds of people so you know in in the news here in the uk just recently they they brought in a a non-invasive prenatal test for down syndrome and it had the reliable effect that everybody knew it was going to have as people knew that they were going to have children with down syndrome they aborted them at ever higher rates and yet the uh the headlines said um uh children with down syndrome down 30 and it sounded like people had like found a cure for down syndrome or something like that they hadn't found a cure for down syndrome they just drawn the circle around humanity and kept those with that condition on the outside and wanted to eliminate them and that to me is a very chilling way of proceeding with a kind of a a humanism because that's that's always the danger like who is us who who are those who we are going to grant with the right to life and who are those we are going to say they do not qualify and it's always tempting for the for the humans to say okay it's the strong who will make the decision and it's the weak who must take behind most um what is it you know what is it that's going to stand up for all humans regardless of capacity regardless of attributes regardless of achievements who is it who's going to stand up for all humans and actually be true humanists and grant them human rights too this is the problem is so first of all whether or not that abortion scenario that you're talking about is humanism or not is subject for a whole other debate but you're you say well nobody could do this and then when we talk about here's a list of precepts where we don't include a god in it then your answer is now you're just borrowing from christianity it's christianity light you just remove the god and then the the other objection that you're going to launch the second morality is what's going to be the foundation beyond this we at least we have a foundation it's god well what if people don't accept your foundation that is exactly the same objection that you are leveraging you're launching at secular humanism that whatever problems secular humanism may have with regard to foundations of ethics no religious foundation has any way of solving that because ultimately if and until some god comes in and says i am in fact the god of the universe and i am the moral authority and people are forced to recognize that this is the case then the only thing that to me is an amazing argument because the bible addresses that argument again and again and again and again again because the argument in the bible is okay just sign it let's let's whether or not you imagine it happens look at the scenario god comes down on sinai says here's the law what do the people say shut them up we don't want to hear it you can't tell people what to do or part of us this is back to augustin and the forbidden fruit i wanted to i wanted to steal those pears i want i didn't i wasn't even hungry i just wanted to do it this is how we are and that's part of the point of the bible especially in the old testament this is how we are and so morality gets into us indirectly usually through stories through experiences through through things that that people can scale one of the things that i've noticed in my life as a pastor is that i know a lot of smart people and one of the things that i've heard about intelligence is intelligence doesn't necessarily help people do the right thing intelligence helps people to tell stories to justify what they're doing helps them to do tell better stories and what i've seen many times in my life as a pastor is that so often i have noticed some of the people who have the lower iqs are the simplest i have seen them in terms of christian morality outperform me outperform many of those who were theologians and could write great books why i've seen this you know because they say jesus tells me to be a servant i'm gonna do it it's a low iq person often and and they stick with it whereas the smart people have all sorts of rationalizations not to and if you imagine that well somehow there's going to be a system okay so there's no god so sam harris says to do this and he's got the best arguments how long is that really gonna last really how long is that gonna last i mean it's not winning the field now and if you stand that against this book of stories that he says are are clearly substandard his butt is getting kicked by the book of stories happening is glenn saying god is the foundation of morality and i'm saying humans are and nobody is going to be neither of those systems is going to work for people who don't accept that that's a foundation did people have to all recognize this foundation in order for it to be the foundation see and what i would argue is that more people recognize the kind of foundation that is built into stories and and i've seen there's always this debate um you know what how should christians so much christian sunday school material for a while and this you see this perpetually we're going to teach children values and so they teach children values tell the truth you know don't steal all of these things what they've discovered is that these programs don't really work very well teach them stories and in fact you see this in ancient culture listen to jonathan peugeot's channel we we work symbolically in a way that is deep within us and and a lot of this higher level cognitive function well you have the master and its emissary it's um it's at the mercy of the limbic system that the smarter the rider the better the justification and the pr doesn't necessarily mean the better the person no people don't need to recognize that two plus two equals four for it to be the case that two plus two equals four and for you to go to your grave proclaiming that two plus two equals four even if the whole world said it was otherwise then two plus two would still equal four people don't need to recognize a moral truth to be a moral truth for it to be moral um and we don't work that directly we really don't so that's i gotta go home for dinner so um i i hope to come back to this video i thought it was a great conversation and i thought both engaged in a in a good spirit um i i really have to do more reading up on nazis because you know i've read i've read timothy snider and i've really appreciated his books and now some people say wow timothy snider doesn't get the nazis right my take on the nazis and that in fact the nazis followed through with the ideas that were common in the west remember germany was one of the most christian nations christian shouldn't you know shrink from that fact that all of our christian machinery failed dramatically in resisting hitler christian should not shrink from that but yet i suspect if timothy snider is right in terms of his take on what nazis were well they pretty much said well maybe we're not you know maybe jews aren't animals but there's a hierarchy of human beings there's a master race there are people that were born to be masters and people that were born to serve and we should set them off in different places of the world and in some ways you know i i believe that consistently because again if you've never read brave new world you don't understand the thought at the beginning of the 20th century there it is in many ways in brave new world you can find similar ideas in plato's republic and people you're plato's republic plato's republic well read plato's republic and look look at that vision of the world it's highly rational because the truth is you know let's have all the smart people marry they'll have smart children have dumb people marry they'll have dumb children you know in general intelligence is you know is passed on in terms of heredity a lot of things are passed on in terms of heredity these things i find no agreements with but what about morality and how does that work can atheism deliver in a better world what i think glenn is basically arguing is that he fears for the sustainability because i don't think we even have a very good understanding of what makes people moral i don't think it's scolding i don't think it's rationality it's something far deeper and and usually has a great deal to do with well the story of jesus and his crucifixion roman centurion looks up in that story and says surely this man was the son of god what really but here's again back to tom holland's argument about jesus why could these four authors accomplish that literary feat because they're all writing about the same person