https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=DY3GLT2rVo0

 Good morning. This is Paul VanderKlay and this is our Friday question and answer. And Rick is doing his day job now, so I'm doing this by myself. This is the last Q&A for December. I am not going to do one next week, given that it's Christmas Eve, nor am I doing one the week after, given that it's New Year's Eve, just because Christmas Eve and New Year's Eve have a lot of other obligations, so we won't be doing this. We'll see how much content I put out those weeks as well. So this is something that we do many weeks on Friday. I don't have a lot of questions this week, which is kind of exciting. Maybe if I burn through the questions at a reasonable rate, we'll play around a little bit with our, with my new toy, which is the impromptu live stream room and the green room. And the way that works is I go into the impromptu live stream room, which has a maximum of six people, so that's five plus me, unless an admin decides to come in, like Catherine. The goal of that room is that people will understand that it's being live streamed, which that hasn't sunk in yet. And then the green room is for people who want to get into the conversation, but there's no room, so they can park in the green room, and then people can use the Q&I real-time text chat to sort of negotiate who's in, who's out, and they can pop in and pop out. And that pursues some of my goal for the Discord, which would be to facilitate the kind of things of questions and answers and feedback that I've gotten in some of the other impromptu live streams. We've really recorded three other sessions, and I'm very pleased with the results of those sessions in terms of feedback from my videos, pursuing the conversation, and doing so usually with video, because with video you have a chance to see each other, and even though that's a significant reduction from being in person, it's better than just voice. Now I got an invitation by a competitor to Clubhouse. I haven't done anything in Clubhouse. I don't have it on my phone. It just came to Android. I don't have an iPhone. It offered me like $500 to promote Wisdom on my podcast, and then to schedule a time to have people show up and see me there on the podcast. So it's like, $500 is cool. I don't know if I have time in my life for another platform, though, so we'll see if I do anything with it. Although another part of me is always curious about these new platforms, and I want to play with them, but I am continuing to explore the potential of Discord for sort of these impromptu, ad hoc, chaotic, yet hopefully fruitful interactions where we can continue to pursue the conversation. So in the spirit of that, Grim was the second one in the room, and he said he had a quick question. So there you go, Grim. What's your question, Grim? My question is, I should read it, because it was carefully worded at the time. Did you write it in the questions, or is this...? Yes, yes. It's, will you teach monkeys missionary skills for the Deadwood Dandy's Defense Against the Dark Arts class? I'd be open to it if I had much of an idea about what you're talking about. Well, like, your church planting, pastoral care, and mission work is your origin archetype story. Those are your skills. And we're in a virtual space, but like all those skills are still relevant, and all those lessons are relevant. So like little once a month sessions for my monkey army would be really helpful in those areas. Whatever syllabus you felt like going into would be fine for the class. I will think about it. I will think about it. I, you know, one of the things, I mean, some people have commented, oh, you always talk about Grim Grizz, and I don't think I talk about Grim Grizz enough for Grim Grizz' appetite, but he's really on to something, and he's playing around with it. He's more chaotic than a lot of people have stomach for, but there's even in just this very well worded question, it's not really a question, it's much more of an invitation. There's, you're really on to a lot of stuff here, Grim. And I could tell that when we had our first conversation, which I thought was outstanding, has far too few views, and your channel has far too few subs. So I don't know, part of this, Grim, is that most, and this is where I think you're reaping, you know, the most theme is important. I don't know a lot of what I do. Our eyes are in our head, and they point out, and we can't see ourselves. And so what we have started doing is seeing ourselves in these black mirrors, but these black mirrors distort. And with that distortion coupled with the kinds of distortion we naturally have in terms of our biases, we really don't see ourselves very well at all. And so part of what I trust in watching you, Pacow, Chad, and a bunch of the other Reapers out there do is give me a better sense of where I'm helpful and where my blind sides are. This morning I didn't have a chance to get through it, but Emily, who was one of the real early randos on my channel, has a long conversation with Chris Pacow, which is just an amazing conversation on many levels, and I tried to do a little reaping, but I had some software bugs. So I, to teach from myself, I often find is difficult, and it's better done usually with someone else who is observing me, because you can stop me and say, you did this, and I saw something there, and that helps me know what's important. So there's my answer to your question, Grim. I appreciate it. We're prototyping social memory complex distributed cognition, and you are brave enough to experiment with it, so thank you. Thank you for your experimenting too. All right, so to the list, to the list, my friends. Kaleppa, The Manatee, Heidegger, with Verveki's recent conversation with Jordan Hall revealing his likely openness to the idea, can you please start a Bible study between you and Verveki pretty please? I'd be happy to do a Bible study with John Verveki. I think that would be a fascinating, I think that would be a fascinating thing to do. If I would do that, I would want to try to integrate some, yeah, even rope in Peugeot, I would want to try to integrate some of the pattern disruptive technologies that we're employing, like with YouTube, and chat, and Discord, but I was, so because of this question, I had some time last night. I was watching, I only got about halfway through the conversation, and I was in the conversation with Jordan Hall and John Verveki. It was very interesting, especially in the first part of the conversation, how they were riffing on the book of Exodus. And part of what Peterson has gifted us with is the renewed sense, it's both pre-modern and post-modern, and this was also strong in the Emily, Chris Pacow interview, and the conversation interview, that the Bible acts like a shamanic pattern disrupter for us. And the person in the Bible, at least for Christians, not unsurprisingly, who does this best is Jesus. Back when I was a kid, I used to watch Get Smart on TV, I mostly caught it in syndication, and of course the baddies and Get Smart were chaos, but Jesus brought a lot of chaos into the first century Judean culture war, and he was resented for his own misdeeds, and he was reprimanded and killed for it. Now, there's this, my wife and I have been watching, we're making our way through the canon of Survivor, and we're on season seven in Pearl Island, and there's a character in there named John, who is sort of a Loki character, and he, you know, he had, you know, they, once, often in each episode, they have people come in, and he had pre-arranged with a friend to make up a story that his grandmother died, so that he could gain an advantage in the game. There are chaos creatures like that, that's chaotic evil. Jesus can be trusted, although he was interpreted as evil, but obviously it was good, so yeah. So yeah, I'm happy to do anything with John. That's, as the response to the conversation that we did Monday with Paul Anleitner, the, this has been a pretty fruitful avenue in this little corner of the internet. Russ Lewis, this is a place where Russ Lewis, this is a pleasure because Russ Lewis is a guy that I've known for a long time on CRC Voices. He's a member of Rod, Rod Hugin's church, The Village, in Tucson, Arizona, and if you live in Tucson, Arizona, and you're looking for a good church, I would very much recommend The Village, and Russ Lewis is a leader there. I know that putting a link in here would make Joey crazy, but in fact, I did get a chance to watch it, and I'll just, and so I do have some context for this question. Listening to old Unbelievable Podcast, this one with Tom Holland and NT Wright, Holland's example of a slave girl dying for a belief made me think. The belief here is largely, maybe not exclusively propositional in Vervecky's four P's. I'm not sure of that. It is possible that early Christians, that early Christianity was tilted towards that one of the four because the propositional was most necessary for enduring persecution. Maybe others would have been emphasized in other environments. The propositional, that P has gotten difficult treatment in this corner of the internet because there was overreach and modernity with it. Modernity wanted to imagine that propositional was the only P. That is truth. That is knowledge propositional, and Vervecky is right that it isn't, and so the other three P's obviously come alongside. I think in an effort to not overreach, which is usually the response to an attempted correction, I think we have to acknowledge that the propositional is powerful and it has its rightful place, and it isn't going away. I think that the proposition of the three P's is a very important point. A lot of the conversation in the Chris Pacow, Emily Verdine conversation was about psychedelics, and I agree that the church is going to have to be a part of the conversation in the society coming to terms with these substances. One of the interesting questions about psychedelics, dreams, prophecies, many of these shadowy realms that we are not going to eliminate nor should we, yet we do need to evaluate is in fact the propositional. So let me think about modernist biblical scholarship. One tell of modernist biblical scholarship is the banishment of the propositional from the shadowy realms, and one item of pre- modernist scholarship is the refusal or at least the openness of the propositional from shadowy realms. We have this, for example, whenever we have a proposition of the three P's, we have the proposition of the three P's, and the proposition of the three P's whenever you find something in the gospels, people will try to date the gospel based on what the expected fulfillment of said prophecy would be. Surely it must be after that because there can be no propositional within the shadowy realms, and I would disagree. But that's a sort of reassignment of this. Now the slave girl, so Paul and Peter both say some things in their writings that deeply offend many would be revolutionaries. They say things like wives submit to your husbands, submit to each other, that's Ephesians 4, so they submit to each other, and then wives submit to your husbands, husbands love your wives, slaves submit to your masters as to the Lord, and we hear that and we say, well slavery is wrong, so therefore, well therefore what? They should rise up. Well maybe you shouldn't rise up if it's going to cost you your life. That's all way too flat. The slave girl had very propositional imagination with respect to the life of the age to come, and an inheritance that she would gain by not by slitting her master's throat in his sleep, but by hunting her master's soul with her love, and I don't mean romantic love. This is the key to understanding Christ, that he colonized and conquered the Roman Empire from below, and that he was able to do so at the cost of his blood, and not at the price of the blood of Roman soldiers, but at the cost of his blood, and this has been a secret of Christianity, and it's been a secret that Christianity has employed generation after generation to win the world. Now, part of what's difficult for modern people who think that all knowledge is propositional is that if you flatten out the landscape to the merely propositional, what you lose is potential. All you can see is sort of simplistic causal relationships, the likes of which usually tempt us to say enemies cannot be loved, enemies must be killed, and that's the key to understanding that. Everyone expected Jesus to hate the Romans and to purge God's promised land, purge the Romans from God's promised land, and he refused to do so, and his refusal cost him his life, ironically at the hands of the Romans themselves. It's a tremendous, it's a tremendous irony of history that the children of the Bishop of Rome would blame the death of Christ on the Jews when it was Roman soldiers who killed him. So, the propositional is always with us, and it will always be with us, but the slave girl's appropriation of the promise of eternal life and participation in the age to come is not just propositional, although there certainly is propositional there, it's certainly participatory, it's certainly procedural, and it's certainly perspectival. It's all of them. Faith always is all of them, and I think that's part of the struggle to understand what the New Testament is about. The New Testament and what Christians mean by faith is because faith is the integration of all four P's, because faith is deeply connected with action, and as I said in my conversation this last Monday, narrative is a tremendously powerful compression engine, but action is even more powerful than narrative. Narrative, in fact, leverages action. Even imagined action. So, all four P's are present in action, and yeah, the slave girl will need them all in order to embody Christ, even in a situation which is evil, which slavery is, but Christ wins by going into an evil context with love and destroying it from the inside by breaking the power of Satan's tools. And I think this is one of the huge lessons from René Girard about what are the tools of Satan, and if you look at the temptations of Christ, right away he rejects the tools of Satan. He says, I'm not going to conquer the world your way. Everybody sees that your way works. Yes, you can make your enemies dead. It's very easy to take a life, but can you give life? And again, with Vervecki's really amazing presentation of Agape, I think he illustrated how on a very regular basis, Lewis made this point again and again, Agape gives life. You may be a biological parent of a child, but unless you love that child, you starve that child of life. And I think the other side of that, and there's an amazing, I was trying to reap it this morning, there's an amazing point that Chris Piquel makes to Emily, where he says, you know, it's the of that and there's an amazing, I was trying to reap it this morning, there's an amazing point that Chris Pacal makes to Emily where he says, he's sort of riffing on Peterson in some ways, he says, you know, becoming a man is sort of optional in our culture. In order to become a man, you need to suffer and you need to suffer greatly. And I think this is born out in a lot of the manhood rites of passage in cultures all over the world. You know, the kinds of things like we're going to, we're going to circumcise you at the age of 13 without anesthesia, with some dull blade, you know, sharpened on, you know, some primitive stone and you'd better not flinch, you better not flinch for a number of reasons. In many ways, women, if they give birth to a child, pass through that test. I remember I was watching the new Battlestar Galactica that was popular a few years ago, not the old one that I watched right after Star Wars, I enjoyed that one as a kid, but the new Battlestar Galactica and I remember that, of course, spoiler alert here, some of the crew on the the Cylons can now replicate humans in the new Battlestar Galactica and one of the crew members has a child and the ship's doctor makes the comment, you'd think the Cylons would have fixed this crazy aspect of human reproduction where human women give birth at the risk of their lives. Now, if you read the Genesis story, when did childbirth become so painful? When did childbirth become such an ordeal that throughout history childbirth has cost women their lives? Childbirth cost my great-grandmother her life. My grandfather lost his mother when he was six years old because she died in childbirth. It was very common, it was at the beginning or early in the 20th century. What does that Genesis curse to women mean? What it means is that women who give birth face death and that turns them from children into adults. Now, by virtue of commitment, a man who not only implants seed in a woman, but is faithful to that woman and binds himself to that woman for life, also risks another kind of death in her childbirth and then in parenting, parents throughout their life, if they're doing it well, die to themselves as they raise their children. That agapic love that Vervecki illustrated so poignantly in Awaking from the Meaning Crisis, if I were to add to that, I would note that this agapic love is transactional in the sense that the child lives only at the cost and risk of the parent's life. The parent invests money, which the parent only has a limited amount of. The parent invests time, which all of us only have a limited amount of. The parent invests attention, which each of us only have a limited amount of. And we invest that in our children and our children have life because little bits of us die along the way. And then Chris Pacow gave an illustration on going through the eye of a needle that I will rip off at some point likely because he says it's easy for a human being to go to a through the eye of a needle if you liquefy them. And then he noted that he noted that the caterpillar in the cocoon is liquefied before it turns into a butterfly. So you have all of these, all of this symbolic resonance where things line up. And all of that is again, it's action. It's all the four P's brought together in this amazing compression. I mean, if you want to ask what is the purpose of materiality in an anti-gnostic sense, it's that because without materiality, you don't get there. And think about, so there's this wild verse where the apostle Paul says that the angels epithumia is almost someone's a little noisy in the room. You've got an admin there that can mute someone. Okay, I think I got him. Sorry, Roger, your server muted. Now I can't get out of that. Okay. Sorry to this. These are how this these are the kinds of things that Rick does to keep things going well. Okay, so I don't lose my train of thought. Let's see. No one's setting lose my train of thought. I did lose my train of thought. Okay, the liquefaction. I'm sorry, I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. Okay, so I don't lose my train of thought. Let's see. No one's setting lose my train of thought. I did lose my train of thought. Okay, the liquefaction and the compression of four P's into a point and the Gnostics and the epithumia epithumia in Paul's corpus is almost always a negative thing because epithumia through Mia is just desire. Epi is an intensifier. So it's an over desire. Greek verbs are very Greek prepositions are very spatial. So it's an over desire. And apostle Paul basically makes the comment that the angels over desire as they as they watch and in some ways sort of long for and are fascinated by the kinds of transformations that human beings go through as God turns us into real boys in the belly of the whale in the underworld as we die in order to become like Christ and Christ talks about this, take up your cross and follow me for whoever wishes to save his life will lose it and whoever loses his life for my sake will find it. And Lewis, C.S. Lewis points out that almost everything powerful in the gospel is if you have the eyes to see apparent all throughout creation, Jesus uses the illustration only once as Lewis points out the grain of wheat must the grain must fall into the ground to die in order to come to life. The woman must at the risk of her, the woman must put her life at risk. The girl must put her life at risk to become a woman. The boy must risk his life to become a man. He must endure suffering. He must endure pain. That is the only path by which we are transformed. And you see this all the way back in Genesis, the language, the parallel between, see the man and the woman are not cursed. It's important to recognize in Genesis her womb is cursed and the ground is cursed because in that cultural frame the womb is the place of fruitful struggle and life-threatening productivity for the woman just as the field is for the man. So all of the, and this is to me why materiality, because there's a power in materiality in, there's a power in the narrative capacity of materiality that angels have epithumia over. And it's in that transformation that Christ does in us through his it's all in the gospels. You are in baptism, you drown with Christ in the waters of baptism. And Romans 6, you die in baptism and you're raised with him. And so this is the gospel. This is what all of this stuff points to. And so that slave girl, yes, it's propositional. It's also participatory. It's also procedural. What is the procedure of death? The procedure of agapic filled death is loving unto death. And when in our culture, when we have lost the capacity for marriage, every marriage is, every marriage is a love until death. And that's true chronologically, but it's also true, it's also true experientially and existentially. That's what marriage is. It's a love until death. And it's out of that love until death that children come and children learn. Now they'll have their own crises. They'll have their own challenges. I think part of the reason tribes knew this was, well, life in the field for the man and life in the life with the midwife for the woman was always fraught with danger. So that's us Lewis's question. Father Big Mac, our resident priest, do you distinguish between, do you distinguish between true and false churches? If yes, then how? Obviously, for anyone who is, knows any Reformed catechesis, John Calvin has three marks of the true church, preaching of the word, administration of the sacraments and church discipline. Now, the way I think we hear this question has a lot to do with modernity and propositions. I want to find a church with right doctrine. Well, you should have right doctrine. Right doctrine is important, but so is right procedure. And so is right participation. And so is right. I always forget the fourth P, participation, procedural, propositional. It's at the tip of my tongue. Anyway, in the age of decay, all churches have sin and fail. And I loved, I loved what Chad, the alcoholic has said. I don't, I don't always remember if these things got on air. But I think, I think it was in one of the impromptu rooms. He talks about the fact that part of him is happy he's an alcoholic, because if he wasn't an alcoholic, he would have never met Christ. And I think this lines up with the death question, because what happens in AA when you have to declare yourself powerless over alcohol and you have to reach out to a higher power who can rescue you, is that you have to, in some ways, embrace your own death. And so for Chad, AA is in some ways, and I've known many alcoholics like this, AA was in some ways his church. And I, I, some of you who have been around the channel long, a while, and so those of you have wandered over into CRC Voices probably met Pete Vanderbeek up in Edmonton, Alberta, and he's for a long time has promoted the wisdom AA that the church should continue to learn from it. And I think that's, I think that's right. The church should learn from it. And part of what do we mean by hitting bottom in AA? Basically, we mean death, that they have come prior to their physical death, they have seen death, and they have chosen life. And choosing life means walking a path of death, because they thought alcohol would bring them life. And so they, they grabbed after alcohol, and they discovered that it only worked for them. And so they, they grabbed after alcohol, and they discovered that it only brought death. And so that they embraced their death, and they picked up their cross, an instrument of humiliating, mocking, political oppression, and they discovered that it brought them life. And so what, if you follow through the 12 steps, it's all a path of mortification. What's mortification? That's Latin. Vanderklay speaking Latin now too. It's a path of mortification. And so if you're, if you're working the program, well, at some point, you'll probably be a sponsor. What does that mean? That means that sort of like having a child, now suddenly you have probably the only thing more demanding than a child is an addict. You have an addict attached to you that is going to call you at any weird hour, and they've gotten themselves into a pit, and you're supposed to help them out. Kind of, because you know you can't really help them out. So, so in order to participate in the program, you're always dying to self and living to Christ, which again is right out of the New Testament. We die to self, we live to Christ. That's, that's this, that's this continual process in the Christian life. And so true churches facilitate that. Now we, let's, let's be fair to John Calvin and be fair to establish churches that AA is not a church. Estuary is not a church. These are not churches. Churches have a role, and I, I like Calvin's little, it's simple, it's small. Preaching of the word. Churches need to, part of what churches need to is continue to promote and present the teaching of scripture to the world. Churches need to administer the sacraments to the people, and churches need to practice discipline. And so I'll, you know, true to my Dutch Calvinist roots, I'll camp there. Now there are lots of really sketchy churches out there with sketchy doctrine. I mean, so much of the evangelical church is way off on sacraments. Peter Kreeft recently wrote a book comparing Tolkien. I think it was Tolkien, Lewis and Billy Graham on sacraments. Peter Kreeft likes doing these little dialogue, triologue things. And, you know, part of the corruption of so many evangelical churches is the emptying out of the sacrament because of Zwingli. And all churches need reform because all churches need purification because all of the churches in this world are full of us and we are not yet purified. We are not yet as we should be. So churches are on the way and there are churches that are closer and churches that are further, and that's both true of denominations and of individual congregations. And so I know many of you struggle with church. And I just want to encourage you to not give up the fight. I tweeted this morning, Chris wants me to stop ripping off his stuff. Okay, Chris, I'll stop promoting your channel. I was watching Karen Wong's conversation with Sherry Harkin this morning too. Karen Wong, she gave me a sneak peek at her conversation with Paul Anleitner, which is coming up on her channel, which was tremendous. I love that conversation. I tweeted this morning the conversation between Karen and Sherry, where Sherry is describing the art group that started. And those of you who've been watching the channel for a while, remember Sherry. Sherry come on my channel and we talked and, you know, hey, let's get an art group going. And she had about 50 takers initially and that always whittles down and then she's down to, you know, eight to 12. And if you want to change the world, help people start good groups. It can be estuary groups, it can be art groups, churches are groups and they should fractal down into small groups and then large groups and individual congregations and denominations and all the way up to the body of Christ. Because we need individual transformation, but individual transformation finds its telos as we group up together. And so churches are, there are a lot of churches all on different spectrums, but things you want to look for are, is the church continuing, is the church continuing to make the Bible available to people? Is the church embodying the life of Christ through its, through administrating the sacraments? And is the church practicing discipline? What I mean by that? Well, formal church discipline is sort of an extreme, but this is part of the way that the American churches today are demonstrating their tremendous weakness. And I think part of the credibility credibility that some Orthodox churches have right now in our context is that Orthodox churches, partly because of their, some Orthodox churches, survival of communism, they have not lost discipline. And churches in China understand church discipline. Now church discipline in America is practiced badly. And in this libertarian context, it's really hard to figure out how to effectively practice discipline here and now. But I think Calvin was right that it's a, it's a mark of the true church. So there's my answer. There's my answer. Now I quipped, will Hitler's dogs go to hell? And I said, no, but his cats will. And then Andre reminded me that I in fact prayed a blessing on his cat. So I do love cats. I do love cats. I kid about cats. There's just something when you look, when you look in a dog's eyes, you see a faithful companion. When you look in a cat's eyes, you can't help, but imagine that that cat is thinking, if I had two, 300 pounds, that human being would make a nice meal. So not all cats, there's a YouTube channel out there of a guy who has a Puma for a pet. Living with a big cat like that is quite something. And that's part of the reason cats fascinate us. So, all right. I've been thoroughly disappointed with the ways in which economists try to maximize social welfare, the economic term, not food stamps. Social welfare is typically measured through some norm, normatively applied function, like a Pareto optionality, total welfare maximization, inequity, minimalization, or maximize the utility of the worst of people. Each of these I find unsatisfying. My question is, how should theology be informed by our economic policy such that we can come up with an objective function for social welfare that can then be maximized? I think in some ways the, this is something that Peugeot's illustration of don't harvest to the edge of the field is applied. This goal of trying to reduce human wellbeing into a mathematical equation is in some ways idolatrous and potentially demonic. Having said that, I think it is a good thing to use math and economics for human betterment. I think what we will find is what we continue, we will continue to find what we have already found. That, well, it's all of, it's all of my betterment fascinations lately. Is more money better than less money? Most often, but not always. That's why winning the lottery, winning the lottery can probably best be managed as betterment by someone who's already wealthy because they have already learned how to take care of money and how to manage money. There are the ironies that pop up in that all the time. Good food is best managed by people who are not starving. And it's this complexity of the world that economists both in some ways have a better handle on because they see the challenge, but their discipline itself can become idolatrous. Now, I'll try not to pick on economists too much because every aspect of life has its idolatrous aspect. I think that's the most important thing about economists, too much because every aspect of life has its idolatrous aspect. Some of the pushback on dogma and doctrine and the modernist appropriation and idolatrous imagination of doctrine, that's what happened in modernity. If I can ascend confessionally to the best doctrine, then what? Jesus himself says, no, the final compression engine is action. Okay, so what would the best life, what would the best look like? Well, Christianity says the best looked like Christ. And what that means is that I think Jesus says, if you live like me, you will die like me. Don't imagine today, and Dostoevsky had a point, don't imagine today that if Christ showed up in your community as he did in the first century that the church would celebrate him. His Jewish community didn't celebrate him, and he said, quite frankly, if you really knew Moses, you would know me. And what was going on were competing interpretations of Moses. Even his disciples were unbelieving in some respects, they didn't show up at the tomb on Easter Sunday morning. Jesus calls them out as having little faith. They didn't get him until after Pentecost. And I think they couldn't get him after Pentecost because they needed to start dying, which is exactly what starts happening after Pentecost. James is the first one to go. So I think economics is good. We need economists, but you will never reduce human well-being into a formula. When that happens, humanity ends. And Brave New World is about that. The meaning crisis is about that. John Vervecki, I think he's dead-end correct when he notes, we thought that if you give a human being food, shelter, amusement, if you make, if you make, think about C.S. Lewis's, the beginning of C.S. Lewis's great divorce, human beings in that dark gray world can have anything they want just by thinking of it. You know what they can't have in that world? Each other. And part of the reason that economists will always fail establishing a formula for human well-being is because economists are making the formula. That's the same reason you can't establish a formula for the marketplace, because we're all still watching each other. And it's all spy versus spy all the way down and all the way up. So I want to see economists do better. And I think what we wind up doing is we run these experiments. Well, let's see how affluent we can make human beings. Well, we've done a lot of that. We have a lot of stuff. Did that fix everything? Now we have a meaning crisis. Dostoevsky was on to this with notes in the underground. You know, give a, give a human being everything that they want. We should know this and see this in children. How do you spoil a child? You might ruin the child for life. And C.S. Lewis points to, points this out when he notes that we don't, Christ lavishly gives the world many great things. What he doesn't give us is the kind of security we think we want and need. And this again goes all the way back to Petcow's point about becoming an adult, becoming a man, becoming a woman, growing up in Christ. Growing up in Christ means understanding that life is about dying and rising. W.V. Pilgrim. How much of the whole of the culture left by the church was dug by the mainstream denominations placing psychological wellbeing above spiritual wellbeing? The difficulty with that question is the word spiritual because you would have to define it. I wouldn't say that the evangelical church is less psychological than the mainline. In fact, I'd say they're more. And read Molly Worthen's Apostles of Reason for that. Evangelicals in their own way made their peace with science and psychology. Look at Larry Crabb and have used it. And rightfully so. The whole in this, the whole in this is a very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, the whole in this, the whole in the culture left by the church is a question of authority. It's fascinating. So James Lindsay did a podcast recently about theology. That was fascinating. I spoke with him a couple of years ago and he's gotten to the point that he basically says, well, we, a culture needs a theology or the university is going to fall apart. But of course he's saying, well, it can't be, it can't be a, it can't be a theology based on the words he would use would be something like supernatural dogma or revelation. He's in some ways retreading what has been tried for the last 200 years and always failed. And this is, this is where, this is where things get scary. And this is where, again, Chris and Emily in their conversation, no way more than James, because they understand that what, what, what needs to be at the center of the culture is at the limit of ourselves. That's terrifying because what, when we want to construct what's in the middle of the culture, that demonstrates that we don't know our limits. I know that sounds terribly cryptic and a little bit esoteric, but that's the best I can do just off the cuff now. But that's what we're talking about with all, with all this stuff that we have to worship what's above us. We have to worship what's above us. There's no other point, there's no other point to worship. And we have to worship that which we can't contain in our equations. And that's why we always have to go to the frontier of death and in a sense, come through the other side. It sounds, I know, I know, so I'm a Protestant minister. I know it sounds esoteric, it sounds vague, but you, you cannot, the world is, and again, part of what's helpful about Verveckis, he comes at it from the other side with respect to science. And you can see it through the scientific lens as well, combinatorial explosiveness. You cannot encapsulate everything in an equation. You can encapsulate some things in equations, but you can't have everything because, and this is just kind of logic, because the equation, you can't contain within the thing, the thing itself. Let's say we need to make a box into which the entire universe would fit. Okay, from what will you construct the box? The universe? Just think it through. The hole in the middle of the culture must always be that which is the whole universe. That which the culture is aspiring towards in potentiality, but has not yet arrived at. It's like, I'm going to make a bus out of a car. Well, you have a problem. Well, what's that? You've got the material for a car and you're trying to construct a bus. You might add a few more seats. You might add some more space by reconfiguring it, but you'll never arrive at a bus. So these are the dilemmas that we face as humanity. And there's a reason that all cultures have at their heart a religious core. It's simply the category. It's like saying, I'm going to build a sandcastle. I'm going to build a sandcastle the size of Jupiter. You're on the earth. It's these kinds of dimensionality issues. All right, next question. Can you riff on 1 Corinthians 1 23? But we probably preach Christ crucified a stumbling block to the Jews and foolishness to the Gentiles. I'm wrestling with what the stumbling block means more than the wisdom approach because I kind of grasp the vanity of wisdom. This isn't dissimilar to everything that we've been talking about so far. Every religious system in striving for answers wants to arrive. None of our systems can arrive. They can do better. They can do worse. Christ is a stumbling block to the Jews because he's the Christ of the Jews. He's a stumbling block to the Jews because he's the quintessential Jew. He's foolishness to the Greek because the Greek imagined that the answer to everything was up and they were partially right. He comes from above, which is both the stumbling block to the Jew and foolishness to the Gentile or to the Greek because the word becomes flesh and tabernacles among us. That's foolishness to the Greek. That when in later centuries you had Gnostic Gospels, the existence of those Gnostic Gospels demonstrated the difference because Judas is the hero because Jesus now is allowed to escape his physical body and does not decay because he becomes upper register merely. But that's not the story and all such attempts to satisfy the story of the resurrection by turning it simply into a non-instantiated symbol has that same problem. But the insistence of the Gospel accounts but the insistence of the Gospel accounts is that Jesus who first took on flesh now takes on the flesh of creation 2.0. In fact, he is the seed of creation 2.0 in his resurrected flesh and just as he is the author of creation 1.0, he is also the author of creation 2.0. That God would become man is a stumbling block to the Jews, quite rightly. I mean, I hold no ill will towards my Jewish friends that have deep skepticism about the assertion of the incarnation. I hold no ill will against my friends who struggle with that and deny it. I hold no ill will. I totally understand. But just look at how this splits up. So in the ancient world, given all of the miracles that people would hear about Jesus and imagine some onto him, in fact, in successive centuries of legendary Gospel writing, the Greeks had a tough time imagining Jesus was human and the Jews had a tough time imagining Jesus was God. There's the split. It's right there. And that split continues to remain. So if you were to walk around Ephesus or Corinth or Athens and if people came to the belief that there was this man in Galilee in Judea who was running around doing vast miracles, they would say he's a God. He looked like he was human. He could fool us in that, but he was a God. And you can find other places in the world that would say exactly the same thing. Jesus was a God who came down and did amazing things among us. And so he should be worshiped and revered and we'll make statues of him. And we will try to, you know, one of the big differences about superheroes, the rest is history, we did a superhero podcast, is that when Romulus wanted to encourage the Romans to stand against their foes, he called down Jupiter into them. In superhero movies we would expect a physical Jupiter to come down and throw lightning bolts, but Jupiter came up into the bodies of the soldiers and allowed them to stand against the foes of Rome. I'm riffing on Mary Beard's book on Roman history. So stories about Jesus doing stuff? Well, clearly he's a God. Is he human? Can't be. No, no, no. That's the demigod at best. That's as close as you can get. So earthly mother and, you know, godly father. The Jews? No, he's not a God. That's blasphemy. We stone people who claim that. He's a stumbling stone. Jews have to get over the assertion that Jesus is God. Greeks have to get over the assertion that Jesus is human. There, it's right there. Right there, there's the divide. So it's a stumbling block and you'll hear it all the time. You know, I see a lot, you know, I see a lot I like. There's a lot I can agree with, but the one thing I just can't agree with is, well, there it is. It's the incarnation. It's the divinity of Christ. So, all right, Albert. How does the doctrine of Trinity manifest itself practically? This came up in a recent live stream but wasn't really addressed and it's something that I've been wondering about. Surely there are many ways about an infinite God that are true and that he does not reveal to us, but it seems to reason that those parts of himself that are revealed must be to our good. What does believing in the Trinity do for and through us? That's a great question and it's a question that deserves far more than I can give justice to it now. A simple way to think about it is this. Why God in three persons? Why not more persons, infinite number of persons, which is something similar to the religion of India. Why not God in one person, which is Islam and Judaism? Why three persons? Why not two? Why not four? I think it has to do with what I've often talked about in terms of consciousness. One person is too few for relationality. Two, you can have relationality, but only limited so. Three takes it as far as we can go. Beyond that, it's just math. I don't think it's a marriage is not a church. It's sort of a little church, a la Protestantism and Luther made that comment, but it's not enough. Three is a church. It has everything to do with relationality and the potentialities within relationality. I don't think it's Christianity is going to continue to win. Now Christian winning, as I said, with respect to death is a really complex thing because Christianity, Christianity also has to do with the power of the sword. Christianity always has a difficult relationship with the power of the sword. When Christianity picks up the power of the sword, something is lost and we all recognize this. That has everything to do with this Rene Girard stuff about the tools of Satan's kingdom. Satan's kingdom works with the power of the sword. Christ's kingdom works with mutual love. It's not simply erotic love as between a man and a woman, but notice how the New Testament images of binary love are Christ and his church. There's a polarity. I think the three afford something that scales all the way down into our lives that is greater than the two. And I think for that reason, for that reason, the profession of a triune God over long periods of time is going to finally play out in the communities beneath it in a way that will continue to be superior to communities that have a God of one person. Paul? Yes. So just because we're having all these discussions about neoplatonism and the word person and Father Stephen DeYoung keeps on bringing up the fact that yes, Judaism believes that God is expressed in many persons and I realize that's very surprising to people. And yes, we believe God can be expressed in many persons, but God's essence is one. And this word person, which Christianity has turned into something I think very few people understand, is confusing. And the idea that there are three persons canonically, that there's something essential to God that is three, that itself in my view contradicts what Christians say the word person means, which is expressions of God. Yes, God has a expression of God. Yes, God has expressed himself in many ways, not specifically three of them. When Christians are baptized into the name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit, that's the canonical expression of God for Christians. I think there's basically one, two, three, and infinite. I don't think we do four. I don't think humans can do four. And I think once you get past three, it slides to infinite. And so I think Christianity and the doctrine of the Trinity tries to hold that tension. But this is something that I don't feel myself an expert in, and I'm happy that we're having the conversation. I'll say it that way. Thank you, Jacob. Thank you. I think we are in a position to continue to have conversations around the Trinity. I don't think it can be helped. And part of the reason for that is, as you said, Jacob, we're coming to terms with a lot of the neoplatonism that was built into these confessional, these creedal statements from early church councils. So Yeats, not a question. And Joey says I should read it then. The act of naming podcast conversations is an attempt to name the spirit of the conversation. Yes, I agree with that. I think that's a good point. I think that's a good point. I think that's a good point. I agree with that 100%. And I deal with that every day. I think about that often when it's when I have two conversations that are in the can, and I'm excited to share them, and they'll probably come out next week early at some point, depending on how many other videos I make between now and then, because they don't really have to sort of come in sequence like some of the other videos I make. I've been thinking about this. I've been, as I mentioned before, I've been listening to Will Durant's treatment of the French Revolution and the rise and fall of Napoleon. How do we compress the world? We use language, we use narrative, and then we act. So titling, one of the things that now that I've been doing YouTube for a few years, one of the things that's immediately apparent to me that is so apparent is whether or not your video gets any attention has everything to do with title and thumbnail. Now that's a dangerous business because if you come up with a super powerful title and thumbnail and the video is dissatisfying, YouTube audience will punish you because you have raised expectation and you have disappointed. Most videos suffer from poor titling and thumbnails because thumbnails are in a sense a visual title, an image title, but it's an attempt to compress. So I have a conversation that I'll post between myself and an individual, and I'm going to compress. I love that conversation. He took me so many places, but to title it? Oh, it's so hard. I often, sometimes I'll have a great idea for a title. I don't put that much time in the thumbnails. Obviously I don't because I, I, every thumbnail would deserve hours of thought and reflection. I only give thumbnails five or 10 minutes, but it's an attempt to distill. It's an attempt to address combinatorial explosiveness by trying to express an essence. That's what titling is because if you, if you just go for clickbait, you know, Paul's nipple rings, that might get some clicks. The thumbnail would probably put people off. It gets clicks because it's, and we all see this and we're used to this now in this internet age, we see a lot of click baity stuff and we recognize it as click bait and part of us despises it for click bait because when we are pulled by click bait, we feel, we, we feel the, our biases manipulating us. So yeah, yeah, it's a great point. Oh, there's Chris Pacow. Oh, there's Chris Pacow. There's Chris Pacow in the question section. Okay. So within this context of recognizing that there is no transformation without death and also recognizing that Western culture has afforded us a life that doesn't offer enough pain to induce the transformation our ancestors experienced. Now, I want to pause there and note that Peter Craeft has a great podcast out there and you can find it in written form to called the dark side. And what Craeft asserts is that we have exchanged certain kinds of pains for other pains. We have minimized physical pain to an amazing degree. We have thought we could banish anxiety by making our world safer. What we didn't recognize is that when you make human beings safer, our anxiety looks for smaller and smaller things to obsess about and to feel vulnerable towards. The most anxious people are often the safest people. So it is not that we don't have enough pain. We have changed our pain and a lot of that is at the heart of the meaning crisis. Okay. Would you be willing to consider perhaps psychedelics could offer the proper trauma mental frame break to initiate a rite of passage into transformation? Sam brought this up in a conversation. I don't remember. We had so many conversations. And fact check me, please. Those who are studying psychedelics said it's 60% effective. When I talked to James Frazzi of our local meetup, who has a doctor degree in this stuff, one of the things that he throws out with respect to psychedelics that for a certain number of people, they are not going to be able to do it. And so he said, one of the things that he throws out with respect to psychedelics that for a certain number of people, taking psychedelics may well trigger or initiate in some people chronic mental health situations. In other words, this is a high risk drug. Now, a majority of people who take it don't suffer those ill effects. It is astounding. You know, I am not about to say that vaccines today are without risk. Everything you inject in your body has risk. Everything that you put in your mouth as food has risk. I, every day, I interact with men and women who have lost their minds. Unmedicated schizophrenics, bipolar, people who have diagnoses that I can't begin to guess at. They are living on the street. Rick's not here. Yeah, Rick, Rick's going to send in something. He's going to have to start walking. Who are, who are living on the street. I watch them every day. I don't think it was the polio vaccine or the MMR vaccine or I don't think it was any of those normal vaccines that people get as children that triggered their young adult onset schizophrenia. These psychedelics are dangerous. And I understand that. I understand that many of you have taken them and have you said they've done me well. I praise God for that. Alcohol is dangerous. Alcohol is an enormously dangerous drug. And it's an enormously powerful drug. I understand that it's all risk. It's all risk all around. And I understand when Chad, the alcoholic says, I praise God for my alcoholism because it led me to him. Yeah, I get that. But I, you know, I listened. I haven't finished. I haven't finished your conversation. And, you know, I've got, Emily was one of the early conversations I had on the channel. You can dig through my archives and find it. It was a wonderful conversation. We've only had one. Should probably have another. And I listened to you guys and yeah, yeah, yeah. And in fact, I said to a pastor friend of mine the other day, I said, I said, I said, I said, I said, I said, I said, I said, I said, I said, I said, I said, I said, I said, I said, I said, I said, And in fact, I said to a pastor friend of mine the other day, I said, I said, I said, I said, I told, talked to him about it. You know, psychedelics. And he kind of mentioned, you know, you wouldn't do any of this. I don't even drink. And, and he said, you know, he talked about pot. I said, you know, pot, pot's a little mild or perhaps, but I don't know. I don't know. I, I'm still skeptical. Still skeptical. It doesn't mean I don't love you. It doesn't mean I won't listen to your story. Still skeptical. I should finish the question. Perhaps psychedelics could offer a proper trauma. One of the things, so, so I have this pitch PVK thing and someone mentioned trauma. And so I am planning. So most of you know, Catherine in the discord, she's married to Amen. And I've, I've become good friends with Amen and Amen participates in a Bible study that we have at church, even though he's in up in Northern Canada, he zooms in along with Warren from Australia. And so I've told, I told Amen, Amen's kind of busy right now in his work life, but he's going to have, he's going to become less busy soon. I want to do a video with both Catherine and Amen Catherine, because you could tell in the, in the marriage crisis video, you know, just how gifted Catherine is. And those of you on the discord server know that. So I'm going to do a conversation with them about trauma because, you know, both of them know trauma and Amen is, Amen works in indigenous communities in, in Canada. And so when Amen tells me stories from these communities, these communities are swimming in trauma. Humanity is swimming in trauma. There's a wonderful book, the body keeps the score. And it's a book all about trauma. Trauma is a funny thing. And this is where, again, I default to my Calvinism because trauma can, in fact, God can use the traumas of our life to perfect us. And so just look at my conversation with Chad, the alcoholic and his story. He suffered all sorts of trauma, young. And, you know, I don't think there's any doubt that the trauma had everything to do with the alcoholism because, you know, if you read the body keeps the score, his assertion is that basically most of humanity has sort of endured trauma with alcohol because it numbs. But how to, how to heal trauma. And I had, I am a person who has not suffered a lot of trauma. I had, I am a person who has not suffered a lot of trauma. I had, I had terrific parents. I had a wonderful childhood. So it's difficult. This, this stuff is difficult. It, our psychedelics, sort of a safer trauma for people. Again, I'm not against the Johns Hopkins study about psychedelics. I think we need to know more about these things, but I find this to be tremendously ironic as we're having these freak outs about vaccines. Are they dangerous? Yeah, could 20 years from now, could we all turn around and say, oh, those vaccines were a bad idea. Yeah, that could happen. But, um, yeah, to initiate a rite of passage into transformation. My, again, I've talked about this before too. My skepticism is also that I hear on the lips of some, I'm not saying either you, Chris or, or Emily, the idea that psychedelics could be a panacea. Psychedelics have been around thousands of years. That's the assertion of the immortality key. You know, the Aboriginal peoples have had psychedelics. Uh, the Greeks had psychedelics. I mean, everybody's had psychedelics. Why didn't the kingdom come then? Why did I think Tom Holland is right. Christianity basically, it blew away psychedelic religious communities. Now fragments endure but the world religions ate them for lunch and none of the world religions are centered on psychedelics. All of the world religions are much more centered on other practices that to one degree or another have, have disruptive shamanic trans, you know, transcendental practices and transcendental practices that evoke in people experiences all the way up to and including the mystical. All of the world religions have that and they are integrated into systems that also have thought, wisdom. I mean, that's part of the reason it's really, really difficult to establish a new world religion. They don't come around very often and when they do come around, they come around sort of haphazardly and accidental. A lot of, you know, the most recent attempt at founding a world religion, which is most successful is probably scientifical. Scientology, which most of us will look at and say it's a scam. Well, they're trying to leverage our greed. So when you think this through, I don't think psychedelics will ever be more than a fringe. And again, I, you know, I've convinced, I'm convinced by Peugeot, don't harvest the field exhaustively, leave a fringe. And so for psychedelics to remain at the fringe, you're not going to find me fighting it because I'm not going to fight the fringe because there are reasons for the fringe that are important. But what I hear, and this is what fringes always do, fringes always, the fringe wouldn't endure if the fringe didn't aspire to be the center. But there is in fact a structure to creation. You can call it created order, you can call it natural law, you can call it natural law, you can call it natural law, you can call it Peugeotian orthodox patterns. There is a structure to creation that when the fringe succeeds in taking the center, you wind up once again with a chaotic phase at which everything is scrambled and eventually the created order, the natural law, the natural law, the natural law, the created order, the natural law, the pattern, pattern, pattern, the structure begins to reassert itself. And this is exactly what we're, what we're finding is that when, when the fringe takes the center, the whole thing collapses and it's going to take some time for the created order to once again reassert its structure and things begin to structure again. And you know, that sounds like, you know, certain Eastern religions that there's structure and then it falls apart and then there's structure again. And so we see these structures. Chesterton wrote about it. The Protestant Reformation is part of that, but this is, this is sort of, this is sort of the way that the world unfolds. And part of the reason religions have so much power is because religions are sort of the only lens through which we can actually observe these, this process happening time and time and time again. And so I think psychedelics are going to remain at the fringe and do they have some utility? Like just about everything on the fringe? They do. But when you push them in the center, I think we're going to see what we saw in the 60s with psychedelics that it all sorts of fall sorts starts to fall apart. Now that's not the only thing when you push other things to the center that are belong on the fringe, everything falls apart. And we're seeing that in lots of different areas right now. And so that's, that's how I feel about psychedelics, their fringe. And the fact that many of you are coming into the center from the fringe, absolutely. That's the natural flow of things. But when you bring psychedelics and you put them at the center, I just think about this. Go home at night. You're having a family meeting, mom, dad, kids, and you decide you're going to lace all the food with LSD. Yeah, I think there's going to be some trauma in the family. No, what do you do when you all come together? You practice the center. It doesn't mean that mom or dad hasn't dabbled in psychedelics at one point, but it remains in the fringe. It remains in the shadows. Mommy, can I have some LSD? Mommy, can I have some LSD? No, it's not for you. And this is the way reality unfolds. And so that's, and does it, will the church have to come to terms with this? Yes. And I pretty much said it on Twitter, Chris, I posted your video on Twitter and I said, this is something, you know, Emily's from Grand Rapids. I know from where she comes. And this is something that the church is going to have to come to terms with. And I think it's going to come to terms with by keeping psychedelics on the fringe. All right. Would it be okay if I responded? Sure. Thank you for posting my video, by the way. And I'm really, really, really tempted to turn a song into, Mommy, can I have LSD? So you really shouldn't have said that, Paul. You guys reap all you must. Well, I think that your response is really, really generous, especially as a pastor of a church and the responsibilities that you have to your flock. So I think that you're being very generous with what you're saying. So I wanted to say that first. I think that like when we're talking about this, it is important to look at it as something that you approach with fear and trembling, that you approach as something that isn't a toy, isn't a game, isn't something you do all the time, isn't something you give to your kids or that you would ever give to anybody that didn't know about it. But what and I also agree with you that the idea of it being on the fringe is probably where it belongs. Having said that, like with what you're talking about with the Western society and the trauma that Western society is already inducing on people and what we were hoping for was kind of this Western utopia that we could all, you know, basically create this heaven on Earth by becoming comfortable. And what's happening is the physical pain is going away, but the mental pain is just getting worse and worse and worse. I'm asking the question if for some people all that's required is a frame break, not all people, not all the time, but in a certain setting and context, I think that the 60% success rate that John Hopkins is having, I think that the church could have a 98% success rate because I think they have the tools to do it. I think they have the proper framing and the proper context and the proper way. And so like it's important like that when you talk about this type of stuff, people know exactly what you're saying. What I would propose is for people who are interested to make something available like this in an annual or bi-annual way, structured in some form of liturgy with a lot of structure, a lot of context and a way for people to have the experience. I think that, and I know that like in a sense that I guess what I'm arguing is like my prescription for the trauma that we're experiencing is more trauma. I know that's almost what I'm saying and it almost is, but I think that if you're really catching what I'm saying in that podcast about perhaps death being the path through, I actually do think that it could be a positive path towards transformation for certain people in the right context. And I agree it needs to be fringe. I agree it can't be the center at all, but I guess that's just what I want to propose to you. I don't even know what you can, if you can like, what you can say as a Christian pastor, right? Like you have responsibilities, but like this is like, I just wanted to throw it out there. I'll say a couple of things. No, I really appreciate it. I'll say a couple of things. Number one, do you want your pastor administrate administering your colonoscopy? I don't think so. You don't you pastor pastor. I need a colonoscopy. I'd say go get a doctor. So if in fact, these are studied by Johns Hopkins and if in fact the psychiatric and I've got plenty of issues with the psychiatric community and their use of medications, trust me, I've spoken about it before. If in fact these things get studied and they continue to find psychiatric value to them. And when, if this happens, Christian psychiatrists and psychologists are going to begin to wade into this. And if in fact they find value and set and setting, I could imagine Christian, if in fact all of that happens. Okay. So that's all the if. I could imagine Christian psychiatrists and psychologists working together to perhaps someday, if all those things happen, that if that happens, I could imagine this stuff coming into the life of the church in an analogous way to which Christian counseling, which is also credible in terms of psychology as a science has come into the church. Okay. Because you do not want your pastor administering your colonoscopy for the same reason. Because I am not in any way equipped to give you a colonoscopy. And so I ain't going to try. But you give people colonoscopies to their soul every day. Yes. And I, but that's someone comes in for pastoral care and I say, drop them and bend over. I'm going to stick a camera up. They should run out of here and never come back. But what I'm saying is that this is the kind of colonoscopy, this is the kind of shift I think you're actually good at dealing with, sir. Well, we'll see. So I'm again. Is this the depths of people's souls? I think that I don't know who else is more trustworthy than a man of God is kind of my point in this realm. But see, we pastors have particular sets of tools. And one of the things you learn as a pastor is, in some ways, to stick with the limitations of your setting. Now, ours is in many ways far broader than many in sort of this narrow focused world. And so I'm happy to let Johns Hopkins do their study. I'm happy to let Christian psychologists and psychiatrists invest in this. I think all of this is going to take decades. And I think in decades, we will learn more. You know, I read How to Change Your Mind and I thought it was a wonderful book. And I learned a ton from the book. But let me say this, imagine a group of friends decides they're going to get together and do mushrooms. And after that session, one of them has a psychotic break and they wind up in the mental hospital and they wind up with they wind up basically the rest of their life institutionalized. And that happened after the little party. What that's trauma for the rest of the group. Now, I again, and as a pastor, as do doctors, we tend to deal not just in individual cases, but we tend to deal with communities. You know, there is a son of a member of my church who, when I first came to town, he suffered a stroke. Why did he suffer a stroke? He suffered a stroke because of all of the street drugs that he did. And he has, for the rest of his life, he's a wonderful guy, but he's lived with his mother and he's had crappy jobs and he has half of his body crippled. And he has been permanently disabled because of his street drugs. Now, I know that mushrooms and LSD are in some ways not even as dangerous as alcohol in some respects. I get that. But that's why, again, I think at this point, no. And so, John Hopps, Johns Hopkins is going to study it. Friends of mine who are doctors, psychiatrists, psychologists, this stuff is going to be worked on for the next few decades and we'll know a lot more. And so, maybe we'll have a different idea. You know, I've got a Christian counselor in my church who does, what can I think, EM, is it M-M-E-M? It's basically when you look at these flashing lights on this little machine to reprocess trauma. I mean, the thing sounds just crazy. When I first heard about this, I thought, wow, does that really work? I read about it and the body keeps the score about trauma. And she's an evangelical Christian woman who was quite conservative and seriously committed to Christ. And she has built a practice on treating people with trauma with these flashing lights. And, you know, I look at it and say, that sounds crazy, but I'll take her word for it. And I'll have the same openness to psychedelics when and if the medical community, which again, lots of issues with the medical community, the psychiatric community too, but I go to my doctor, I go to someone for a colonoscopy. I don't go to my pastor. And so any pastor that's handing out something other than the water of baptism and the bread and wine of communion, you should really pause before you take what he gives you. That's where I stand on it, my friend. That's where I'm at. Thanks for talking about Paul. I appreciate you. All right. Thanks, Chris. I appreciate you too. Keep on doing what you're doing. All right. Okay. Well, the church has to come to terms with this. We are. But it's the body of Christ that comes to terms with it, not just the church as institution and pastors. So yeah, we'll see. We'll see. Just like the church has been coming to terms with psychology as someone who's never been to church, are there any pointers to getting a foot into the community? Perhaps view me as a krill that has never seen the church interior. I would first find, I would first look around for a trusted friend and maybe start going with them because chances are your friend. Now it might stop there. Getting into a church community, you should assume right from the outset, it's going to be a process. And it might be a long process, but if you have a friend who goes to church, most people who go to church would be thrilled to have a friend say, I'm thinking about church, I'm thinking about church. Could I go to church with you and sit next to you and just do that for, but you're going to, if you really want to get involved with church, begin by making a discipline of deciding that you're going to do this, at least to begin with once a week, because you're not going to get the reps if you only go when you feel like it. So find a friend and ask your friend, can I go to church with you and start going with your friend every week? Now it may be that within, and then give it a good try, like a couple of months at least, maybe within a few months you begin to say, oh, I'm beginning to think that maybe a different kind of church would work for me. Then maybe look for another friend or ask your friend, because most church people have an idea of other churches and other friends that they have, and then you might say to your friend, I'm kind of, are there other churches, other kinds of churches that you know of? And they might say, yeah. And then do you know anybody who goes to that church or do you have a recommendation for that church? Churches in America, at least I imagine in Europe too, right now are thrilled to have someone come in and say, I'm exploring this, I want to give it a try. Churches will fall over themselves welcoming people because they're so hungry for legitimacy and validation and for new members, generally speaking. So I would do that. I would say if you're really interested in it, just mark it out on your calendar. It's probably going to be Sunday morning or Sunday evening. You're going to go to church every week. And then maybe you go to one church for a while and you say, this isn't right, then try another one. Again, and as best as possible, if you can find someone to go with. So the conversation that I'm going to put out with the Indian Christian. So he came to America, came to Fort Worth, Texas, and started going to a church. It's key to make a friend. And then if you find a church that you can tolerate on Sundays, see if the church has small groups or Bible studies, and then try and then get into that second level of church. But it's really all about the repetition. It's sort of like saying, I want to learn to play basketball, but you only try it once or twice. Well, you're never going to know the joy of basketball if you only play it once or twice. Or I want to learn to play the piano. It's practice, practice, practice. So yeah, I'd say that's a good way to start. Charlie Brown, as a follow up on your video on Audrey Assad deconstruction story, who is doing the act of deconstructing in a deconstruction of the faith? Many presentations of a journey of deconstruction faith suggests that it was something that happened to someone. Yes, that's true. Not what someone actually sought out. Absolutely. On the other hand, who is actively working towards the reconstruction? God, society, the individual. I'd say it's the work of the Holy Spirit. I'd say when you have, this is kind of the biased perspective of a Christian, but if a deconstruction is positive, it's the work of the Holy Spirit. If it's negative, it's the work of the devil. There you go. I said it. Yeah, but what you point out is so true because people feel that it's, when people leave the faith, they mourn it. I mean, you find this consistently in deconstruction stories. They mourn their loss of faith. They mourn the enchanted world they have left behind. They often will have a meaning crisis on the other end of deconstruction, and then they're going to try to reconstruct something because meaning-making is continuing to recalibrate your map of the world with your experience of the world. Christianity provides, as Mark nicely says, that container. Well, that container gets mediated all the way down, and so your reconstruction is going to have to work its way up. And so I think part of the problem people face when they deconstruct is that they're naive about what human flourishing really takes. And what human flourishing really takes is community. And so in our culture, when people deconstruct, they usually find themselves without partners to really pursue a productive reconstruction. But that's a great question, Charlie Brown. I need to do some more follow-up videos on the deconstruction reconstruction thing. And in fact, I got some material today from a friend that might come into it. And so it's an ongoing theme of this channel, partly because it's right now in terms of pastoral ministry in America, it's vitally important. Joseph, I'm noticing a theme today between the comments on church discipline in communist countries, affluence in the economics discussion, well-being, et cetera, that you may keep pointing to value and adversity. There is value and adversity. As part of the meaning crisis, including the crisis within religion, lack of adversity in our modern life compared to our ancestors? Absolutely. See, and again, Chris is right that it's... So one of my homeless Mormon friends, his favorite verse in the Book of Mormon is, I have a copy of the Book of Mormon here for him every now and then, because he has always quoting it to me and he never remembers what he used to quote to me, because his memory is almost shot now, which is really sad because I really love the guy. But now I can't remember his line. Basically, there must be adversity in all things. And there's truth to that. And it's about opponent processing, that there's always going to be back and forth. And I think one of the key... For years, I've been struggling to figure out how to articulate this in a really compact, powerful way. But the lie of affluent Western culture is that adversity can be eliminated. It's in some ways, affluent Western culture is an idyllic substitution of the kingdom of God. Makes perfect sense given Christendom, that we imagine, hey, let's have universal basic income. Well, maybe in America we can print money and suffer no threat of inflation. So let's just print enough money and give everyone $200,000 a year salary. $200,000 a year salary and everybody gets high speed internet and everybody has good medical care and everybody has the food that they want and everybody has access to... And see, once you start rolling this thing out, you very quickly realize, well, then houses are going to cost twice as much as they did. Hierarchies always develop. They always do. So there's a lie in American society that the next consumer acquisition is going to be your breakthrough into your best life now. And so perhaps for that reason, we've been so successful at eliminating the common traumas that have plagued humanity. We are now so hyper neurotic and anxious, we have microaggressions triggering us. And so the only resort is to take a substance to give us an experience of death because we've never had a close call. Wow, maybe that's it. And no, you're exactly right, Yosef. I mean, why are the Jews such a remarkable people? It's because they've suffered productively for so long. This is part of the reason I love Glenn Lowry and John McWhorter because I think both of them recognize that the you infant American culture is trying to help by infantilizing those who are on the list of marginalized and many Jews recognize, no, that doesn't actually help anything. You just make people weaker. And Greg Lowry and John McWhorter recognize that. No, we're not going to be able to do that. We want black America to flourish, not become a permanent client population. And the irony of this infantilization, well-meaning though it may be, is that it's in some ways simply a a redux of racist attitude towards the people who are on the list of marginalized and many a redux of racist attitudes of racial inferiority in the South. No, this is all we can expect from those people. They can't do math. They can't succeed in business. They can't rise to the heights of the Ivy League institutional towers. I mean, the ironies are just profound in that conversation. So, no, there must be adversity in all things. And that is a theme of this podcast. And it's why we must die in order to live. And now again, when my five children were born, all were born in a hospital because I didn't want to see my wife die the way my great grandmother did. I didn't want to see my children die the way people all around the world for centuries have. I remember doing an adult education class in the Dominican Republic and I asked once, how many of you have lost a child before they reached the age of five? Everyone in the room had. Do that here in North America? Most have not. So at the same time, I think we have to figure out how not to waste our sorrows and our sufferings because in the age of decay, they always come to us. Trouble will find you. It always does. And when it does, don't waste it. Use it to become, Jordan Peterson's word, use it to become a monster, but a good monster. Rick, I knew when I made that comment in that video, Islam, modernity and the rise of Muslim evangelicals, I made a comment about Commodore 64 when I looked at this stupid title page of the lost history of Christianity. And I said, it looks like something that someone on a Commodore 64 would make. And Rick weighs in, as a member of several Commodore 64 clubs, your recent video, Islam, modernity and the rise of Muslim evangelicals left me speechless. The image you attributed to Commodore only displayed five colors. When in actuality, the beloved, esteemed, sacred to Rick, at least Commodore 64 used an advanced 16 color palette. Do you repent, sir? Yes, Rick, I repent. I am sorry. I've aligned your beloved. All hail the Commodore 64 computer far before its time. Now hallowed and enjoyed. I repent of the words I said against the Commodore 64. All right, last question from Tyler. Hey, Paul, I'm not really present. I'm on parenting duty. So I'm sending my electrons to represent me. I've missed being here to appreciate your efforts in real time. But that which often calls me away is worthy of continuing to sport an adjacent spaces, the efforts of whatever pastoral care may be possible over the internet, primarily the spoken word, it seems. No esoteric inquiry today, just a prompting from a friend from an adjacent space. Why do you can? Why will you consider doing a conversation with Tim Adolin from the voice craft podcast? I talked to Randall's, I'll talk to almost anybody. I tend to avoid high status people, but because I don't recognize his name, maybe he's not terribly high status. I'm not sure I'll talk to him. If he hasn't reached out already, he will soon. Okay, I'll try and so I again, I'm going to apologize to some of you who've sent me email that I've never gotten back to you. Either Google hasn't sorted the email properly to me, or I might have missed it. So if, you know, the widow of Luke 18, 16 or 18, I think it's 18, the persistent widow, there's a parable that has legs, you know, if those who are persistent can get rewarded. So, so Tyler, if I miss it, you know, find a way to get back at me so that I can talk to him. If he hasn't reached out, or well, I believe he intends to try and bring Peugeot into it as well. Okay. He, Tim and others in that space are interested in exploring God in conversation. And they have come to respect your presence in discussions online. Well, thank you. I won't be able to hear your answer. But thanks for considering and thank you for the words and energies you put into bringing people together. I don't know Tim, Tim, Adeline, Adeline, Adeline. I don't know the voice craft podcast either. So I'll have to check that out. Anyway. So that's all our questions. Anybody from the voice room? Want to throw a question on top? Two minutes left. When are you going to do a video on Neoplatonism? When I learn enough. I, Neoplatonism is hard. So I've been trying to get through a bunch of the, those Wheaton, those Wheaton philosophy lectures, they're really good. But, you know, part of the difficulty with Neoplatonism is this runs through Augustine. Now Aquinas says Vervecky. I've got some thoughts, but I need to learn a lot more. So I'm and learning takes time and videos are spurs of the moment. So it'll, the more we'll come up in time, I'm sure. Anybody else in the voice chat? Otherwise I'll land the plane and, um, Hey Paul. Paul. Yeah. Chatty out. Hey Chad. I guess I just wanted to say that if you were actually doing colonoscopies, you might actually be more effective than the psychedelics because that can really break someone's brain. Yeah. Yeah. Chris is promoting trauma as a, as a therapy, having your pastor do your colonoscopy. I think that would be terrifically traumatic. So, all right. Okay. I think that's, that's good for today. I'm going to, I can't tell Rick to end transmission. I'm going to do it myself. So thank you everyone online for, for joining us. I'll stay in the room for a few more minutes. And if I get time later this afternoon, maybe I'll, um, I'll drop in the impromptu live stream room and, um, do another little quick video. So thank you all for joining.