https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=lK3R5IBE9Rk

 Hi, this is Paul and this is Rough Draft for Good Friday, where I walk through the current version of my Good Friday message. Good Friday is about the apocalypse of the hidden king. In Lent, we've been going through apocalyptic parables and we've seen the hidden king and the missing king and the absent king and his waiting followers and also those who have rejected him. The parable of the tenants or the parable of the vineyard and the king, the tenants decide to take hold of the vineyard and the king says, they will respect my son and they don't. In the banquet of the king's son, the wedding banquet, the king declares the wedding must be filled so I'm going to go into the highways and byways and bring them in and he does. The bridesmaids are waiting for the bridegroom, waiting for the son to arrive and only those with oil with their shopkeeper apocalyptic values are they ready to receive and they go into the feast where there's dancing and singing and the door is shut and others are left out where there's darkness and weeping and gnashing of teeth. And then you have the sheep and the goats, the judgment according to the treatment of the hidden king. And Good Friday is all about that treatment. Now in Palm Sunday we saw the triumph of the hidden king and when I say triumph I mean a Roman triumph when in a sense you parade through the city and the glory is displayed to the people of the city of the returning king. But it's a very ironic day because the people that, well, many of them rejoice and say, Hosanna, but by Thursday they will yell, crucify him, crucify him. And as in the grand inquisitor of the brothers Karamazov, the grand inquisitor, the steward of the city holds out his finger and bids the guards to take him and such is his power so complete are the people cowed into submission and trembling obedience to him that the crowd immediately makes way for the guards and in the midst of the death-like silence they lay hands on him and lead him away. Then the governor's soldiers took Jesus into the praetorium and gathered the whole company of soldiers around him. They stripped him and put a scarlet robe on him and they twisted together a crown of thorns and set it on his head. This is Jesus that just a few days ago was welcomed into the city by a triumphant crowd. He was declared to be the son of David. He banished blindness and lameness by not by killing or chasing them away but by healing the blind and the lame in the temple. Now the crowds demand not just his death but his public humiliation for their sport and enjoyment. He is handed to imperial guards to do the work. His disciples are hiding. Now he is beaten and stripped. In mockery the Romans take a Roman robe probably of one of the soldiers and a crown, crowns which should have rays of light showing glory. Well now those rays are cruel and they penetrate his skull and he bleeds. And they put a staff in his right hand. The most quoted Psalm in the New Testament is Psalm 110 which is all about a scepter. The Lord said to my Lord, sit at my right hand until I make your enemies a footstool for your feet. Jesus is the footstool. The Lord will extend your mighty scepter from Zion saying, rule in the midst of your enemies. His enemies seem to have him well in hand. Your troops will be willing on your day of battle. Where are Jesus' troops? Arrayed in holy splendor, your young men will come to you like dew from the womb's morning. Where are the young men? The Lord has sworn and will not change his mind. You are a priest forever in the order of Melchizedek. The Lord is at your right hand. He will crush the kings on the day of his wrath. He will judge the nations, heaping up the dead and crushing the rulers of the whole earth. What a Psalm to be quoted more than any other in the New Testament. It seems so ironic because Jesus now with this staff in his hand seems the complete opposite of Psalm 110. They knelt in front of him and mocked him. Hail, King of the Jews, they said. They spit on him and took the staff and struck him on the head again and again. The king is hidden in plain sight. This is the man who stilled the storm. This is the man who made the blind to see and the lame to walk. This is the man who rode an unbroken animal. This is the man who raised the dead. Isn't it easier to injure than to heal? Why does he not strike them blind like the angels outside sawed him? Why does he not strike them lame? Why does he not turn the staff into some kind of spear or sword like we would imagine someone in a superhero movie and then lay waste to all of these soldiers that are mocking him? He doesn't. He doesn't. He doesn't. After they had mocked him, they took off the robe and put his own clothes on him. They then led him away to crucify him. As they were going out, they met a man from Cyrene named Simon and they forced him to carry the cross. This was unusual. They came to a place called Golgotha, which means the place of the skull. There they offered Jesus wine to drink mixed with gall, but after tasting it, he refused to drink it. Jesus is weakened by the beating and endured that he endured with the staff that they had placed in his hand and could not carry the cross piece of the cross. So they grab a man from the crowd, Siren, who's from North Africa, just where Libya His sons, Alexander or Rufus, red haired or red colored, were known and remembered by the Christian community later. The wine was laced either with something to numb Jesus or to poison, to hasten his death, but he refuses it. We don't find Jesus cursing the soldiers. We don't find Jesus lashing out at the crowd. We don't find Jesus taking the gall or the poison to anesthetize or quicken the death. He struggles on. This doesn't look like a hero. When they had crucified him, they divided up his clothes by casting lots and sitting down they kept watch over him there. Above his head they placed a written charge against him. This is Jesus, the King of the Jews. The Roman soldiers, not likely Italians, but Josephus says from the Roman province of Syria, they were there to make sure that no one comes and takes his body down or does anything. The execution must proceed. They've mocked him. They've had their fun. Now they wait until he dies. The sign above Jesus again reveals him to be the King of the Jews. The hidden King is revealed. This is the apocalypse of the hidden King. He is revealed, but revealed in a way that is designed to offend Jesus and the Jews and the work of God, to show the supremacy of Rome over all would-be claimants to their dominion. Jesus, the hidden King, is there in plain sight. Two rebels were crucified with him, one on his right and one on his left. Those who passed by hurled insults at him, shaking their heads and saying, You who were going to destroy the temple and build it in three days, save yourself. Come down from the cross if you are the Son of God. In the same way the chief priests and the teachers of the law and the elders mocked him. He saved others, they said, but he can't save himself. He is the King of Israel. Let him come down from the cross and we will believe in him. Trust in God. Let God rescue him now if he wants him. For he said, I am the Son of God. In the same way the rebels were crucified with him also heaped insults on him. Show us Jesus. Demonstrate to us. Isn't this how God's plans are always revealed? That's certainly what Job's friends said. It's all clear in the terms of winners and losers. It's all right there Jesus. Show us if you're him. He's crucified between two insurgents. Those who would rearrange the political order. A Son of God is someone who commands outcomes, who is effective in conquest, who is effective in outcomes. The crucifixion itself and Jesus seems impotent in saving himself. Is testament enough for many then and today and they dismiss him. God wouldn't let such a good man be crucified. No there must be some, there must be some switch. There must be some, some change. God wouldn't let his own son be humiliated in such a way. What's interesting is that doesn't dismiss the assertion that Jesus in fact claimed to be. It's on the lips of his mockers. It's on the lips of his enemies. Everyone there seemed to be completely convinced that Jesus claimed to be the Son of God. It's common to hear today Jesus never claimed to be anything more than a great teacher. But here on the lips of his enemies that's the basis of the mockery. The testimony of his enemies given to mock and deride him bears witness to the fact that it was publicly known that he was in fact claimed to be the hidden king come to redeem God's enslaved people. The same goes for his miracles. Jesus, you did all those miracles. Do them now. Now would be the time. It's nearly identical to what Satan says to him in the wilderness. Wounds into bread, flying around the temple, worshipping so that you get a quick end in all the palaces of the earth. Jesus, this is what any reasonable person would do. Why do you hang on that cross? They mock him as a liar or a lunatic. He is in their minds exposed as a fraud. From noon until three in the afternoon darkness came over all the land. About three in the afternoon Jesus cried out in a loud voice, Eli, Eli, Lama sabachthani, which means my God, my God, why have you forsaken me? When some of those standing there heard this they said, he's calling for Elijah. Immediately one of them grabbed and ran and got a sponge. He filled it with wine vinegar, put it on a staff and offered it to Jesus to drink. The rest said, now leave him alone. Let's see if Elijah comes to save him. The son of God title was a title imagined even for those who would be seen as fortunate, abnormally skillful or successful or the gods would be on their side all the time, a son of the gods. But now nature seems to be responding to the events on the ground. Darkness is a plague in the Exodus. Jesus all along from the Passover supper until now has been playing Exodus themes. Numerous Old Testament passages about darkness and the day of the Lord come to mind again and again in the prophets. Speak about darkness and God's wrath. The sun refuses to shine upon this crime against its author. Would the father forgive the forget the sun? Jesus uses the words of Psalm 22. Can a father forget his son? Ask the prophet Hosea. Parables about the father's love for the son who would be wed. These are the parables that we've read but the mockery continues. And then we come to the turning point. When Jesus had cried and when Jesus had cried out again in a loud voice, he gave up his spirit. Now it's very interesting that it's not until the 19th century that commentators begin to talk about the physical cause of death. Before then nearly everyone simply assumed Jesus was in charge. Jesus finally gives up his own spirit. It's not taken from him. Notice the series of apocalyptic signs that go from heaven to earth. Remember darkness has already fallen. At that moment the curtain of the temple was torn in two from top to bottom. The earth shook, the rocks split and the tombs broke open. The bodies of many holy people who had died were raised to life and they came out of the after Jesus' resurrection and went into the holy city and appeared to many people. It's quite clear that Matthew sees this as the turning point, a transformation. Something has happened. Jesus has accomplished something that no one was expecting. They mocked him, they derided him as impotent, as weak, but they couldn't understand the difference between exertion and losing. Notice the series of apocalyptic signs from heaven to earth. Darkness in the heavens. Jesus gives up his spirit. Then the temple curtain torn from top to bottom. The temple connects heaven and earth, not from bottom to top, from top to bottom. And again the temple is, those of you who have seen some of my old videos know that the temple is in a sense this portal between heaven and earth. The earth shook and rocks split open and those under the earth in the tombs come out. The dead are raised after Jesus' resurrection. His resurrection is a first fruits. They go into the holy city and appear to many people. Jesus is the beginning of a larger resurrection. Things are going to start going now in the other direction. These soldiers who had been mocking Jesus, well what have they seen? When the centurion and those with him who were guarding Jesus saw the earthquake and all that had happened they were terrified and they exclaimed surely he was the son of God. Ah, notice how things have gone in reverse. If you're the son of God, if you're the son of God and now the soldiers with whom this thing begin start declaring him the son of God. The soldiers have now been moved by the apocalyptic signs from heaven traveling down below the earth to have their head exclaim that the hidden king of the Jews is indeed the son of God. Now what would they have meant by that? Well they're Roman soldiers. They would have had sort of a generalized understanding because the ancient writings are full of this kind of thing. Ancient writers would write about darkness and earthquakes with the death of great people. Josephus had many signs and portents interpreted different ways by Jews and Gentiles at the time of the destruction of the temple. They're watching when they saw Jesus naked, beaten with the thorn of crowns and a scepter in their hand and no word from above. They mocked and derided but now in the apocalyptic the hidden king is revealed and they see him and they're terrified and they cry out. The motivated mockers have been silenced and the observers who don't have a dog in this fight are witnesses to the death of the hidden king. He is now seen by them. This is Apocalypse. Many women were there watching from a distance. They had followed Jesus from Galilee to care for his needs. Among them were Mary Magdalene, Mary the mother of James and Joseph and the mother of Zebedee's sons. As evening approached there came a rich man from Arimathea named Joseph who had himself become a disciple of Jesus. Going to Pilate he asked for Jesus' body and Pilate ordered that it be given to him. Joseph took the body, wrapped it in a clean linen cloth and placed it in his own new tomb that he had cut out of the rock. He rolled a big stone in front of the entrance of the tomb and went away. Mary Magdalene and the other Mary were sitting opposite the tomb. What a haunting moment. At the end of the day, the worst day they could have imagined and they sit stunned on the other side, opposite the tomb, waiting. We'll see them again Easter Sunday morning. The turning point has been reached. The women stay with him. The hidden disciple comes forward to claim Jesus' body. Things will begin to turn around. The women were witnesses to the crucifixion as they will be to the resurrection. Joseph of Arimathea steps up at risk to himself, unveils himself as a disciple and claims Jesus' body. This is the apocalypse of the hidden king. Apocalypse is an unveiling. The hidden king is seen in a way the world has never seen anything before. He was mocked as a lunatic. He was mocked as impotent. He was mocked as God forsaken. He will be worshipped as the truth. He will be worshipped as all powerful. He will be worshipped as having all authority in heaven and on earth and under the earth as the very son of God. He is revealed to the pagan centurion. His true disciples will be revealed. He is hidden beneath the bread and the wine. He is seen in the breaking of the bread. He is hidden within the body of Christ assembled here at the table. Amen.