https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=miDMI3PDdMQ

 Send it to you then. Perfect. Yeah, greetings from Grand Rapids. How's the weather? It's getting colder. Yeah, and the leaves are falling. It was a late autumn this year like usually the leaves are turning at the beginning of October a couple weeks in but the leaves are just now like changing up. So really? Wow. Yeah, that is late. I know we're approaching Thanksgiving. So Yeah, it was a weird year. But where in town do you live? I am in the south side of Grand Rapids. So okay. Like I don't know you probably I'm familiar with Grand Rapids. I lived there for 10 plus years. So Cool. I'm gonna turn you off a little bit. Okay. Sweet. Yeah, so it was a like hall in Kalamazoo. Oh, yeah. Yeah. Yeah, I lived there. I lived I lived on Kalamazoo right by Franklin and Yeah, I lived in that neighborhood a long time. That's where my grandparents actually grew up in that neighborhood. No kidding. Yeah, that is so nuts. Yeah Yeah, so I grew up in Hudsonville and You know, that's pretty close to Holland. Yeah, so it's that Dutch that Dutch connection there that I have with you a little bit although my mom's like super Danish, so that's The novel fever pancake balls, you know the whole nine yards The Danes amongst the Dutch Yep I'm sure there's plenty of plenty of jokes. I heard about that in the past too. So yeah. Yeah Yeah, so so tell me a little tell me a little more about yourself. You're a student at cornerstone or you were student at cornerstone Yeah, I graduated from cornerstone University I think in 2016 it took me like eight years to end up actually Fulfilling my degree requirements after transferring from Moody Bible Institute. It seemed like my biblical studies degree was sort of obsolete Anywhere that I went, you know, but That's alright, you know, I didn't really think I was gonna do much with it. Anyways After the first couple years there and Then I tried to get into a bunch of state schools and then ended up training turning to cornerstone and they they took me in Open arms and I started studying biology like immediately imagine that like biology at cornerstone it's really bizarre and then I Met the literature professor and soon Transitioned into the humanities program which they got I did and Somehow scratched through and got a degree there and then I've never go back to school again, but it's like All the time like now I'm revisiting like my thesis and like all this stuff and it's all been Related to Jordan Peterson and in a big way So, yeah Yeah, I moved out to Washington for a while and then I ended up coming back and Ended up meeting my wife and we got married like right right after I graduated from From college and yeah, we've been making a home here. So, okay. Okay. What are you working? Are you you got a job? Painter so that's a Painter so that's a See it on here I painted for a summer in college and so I know that I know the look I think I paint on my face. I was painting ceilings today. So But yeah doing that and that that frees up so much time like I've heard so many people say to just listen to endless Podcast books you name it it's just Yeah, eight hours that I've got to fill time with and I know that some people are envious of that but you know, I feel like a like a monk, you know where like they say like I what would it be the Benedictine monks that specifically talked about freeing like working laboriously with your hands and freeing your mind to contemplate God like their their Tracks so yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. No, that's true. That's true And and you know, I didn't know this until I started doing this YouTube channel, but there's a lot of people out there that they Just by nature of their job They they're happier if their mind can go someplace while their hands do something else and some people can do that And other people can't and it depends a lot on the job. But yeah painting I totally get that Yeah, anyway, it was it's a bizarre thing too because I never would have imagined I would be working in a trade you know because your parents fill you with all sorts of aspirations and tell you how wonderful you are and how they see so many gifts in you and and you know that whole that whole speech and then it's like You know, I'm not I don't think I'm a disappointment to my parents at all in the least they you know, but it's a It's one of those things where they they see that potential in you to maybe do great things that nobody else can see besides your parents and you know, it's It's like I gotta pay bills For me and it's like where's my where's my heart lie to is it is in the work or is it in the is it in the purse or is it in is it in something else like Family like I can do anything As long as I is if my heart is like correctly ordered You know like correctly ordering your loves and being like well family comes first and it's like alright. Well, then I'll do whatever I need to in order to have that family, you know And we don't have kids We're hoping to so okay. Okay. Well that you know, I often think that the church the church The church traded out a more biblical Vision, I mean in the beginning of the Bible God makes Adam with his hands and God is seen very much as a tradesman and Adam and you know Adam and Eve are gardeners and and then the Greeks come along and it's like Oh, no, we should work with our minds. It's like well Here's the thing you can you can do two things if you're working with your hand you can work with your mind and your hands and But yeah, it's a fairly Greek culture in that sense because we we we value people who work with their minds I have a friend who? Actually a member of this church who works in a trade school for electricians and he says, you know These are these are great paying jobs and we're we never have enough People who will you know who are interested in the trade? So what are you gonna do? Yeah, I don't I I think that Everybody's hurting for good help. And so and it's weird to see the resurgence sort of happening in in the trades, too and I don't know how far that will go but Yeah, there's there's a lot of people that need it right now because everybody I mean I graduated with You know a solid GPA and was off to like looking at MFA programs and stuff like that and I was like, what am I doing? I'm already like I Was on the low end of the debt scale like I only had you know 20,000 in debt and most of the students alongside of me had like 60 to 80 thousand dollars in debt and it's like okay, well They can't find any jobs and it that was that was the crazy part is it was like learning all this stuff for jobs that weren't gonna exist by the time we graduated and it was bizarre but By my great-grandfather was a house painter in Grand Rapids about exactly where you are and he painted houses, but then he also Painted, you know, he would do landscapes. And so he was an artist and he would he would paint those so Yeah, that's a crazy thing I'm chameleon anyways Yeah, I've got I've got so many things in my in my head that I want to talk to you about that are actually serious and then I Don't know how to bring them all together though because it's like that's that's my big issue I think it's trying to bring all these things together, but and Jordan Peterson's been helping like a lot with Sorting through some of this stuff that I've just left as loose ends and in so many so many things are loose ends in my head I'm trying to tie them together and it's It's okay to not I've sort of settled with being okay with not tying some of these things together And that's the great mystery So I'll start anywhere on your list and we'll see we'll see where we go Yeah so I was For my undergrad I had to write a thesis Which ended up being like the longest paper I ever wrote it was like 60 pages or something nuts like that and had to be my minor was philosophy, so I had to integrate sort of like Creative writing and philosophy. That's what I studied was creative writing, but the philosophy minor and then So I I ended up looking at Poetics and I Kind of that was where my mind just went naturally because I've always been obsessed with the nature of the poem and what the poem is communicating and the the ways in which we try to grasp experience and put them into words the These like tacit sort of Thoughts or maybe that's the wrong word but Whatever is looming in our heads that we can't quite articulate so it was like and I and I saw that poetry was like one of the only forms of writing that and Maybe even if it was uncommunicable to somebody else I could still get I could say whatever I was feeling, you know, or or I could I somehow connected to Maybe connecting is the wrong word, but I connected to some sort of Articulation even though it was through metaphor or or some of these some of these other rhetorical devices that we would use in and the classic forms that that one would follow in poetry and That was a That was a interesting spot That was a interesting spot to land because it brought me straight into Like Plato's work Aristotle's work and then up through Like all the way into Aquinas and then found this intense like amount of Information and Aquinas that I still am trying to get through Regarding like the metaphysics of human cognition and so I think that the The thing that I I want to talk about is intuition and I feel like that's one of these things that I Think that Jordan Peterson Has alluded to in different areas And I think it's something that maybe is part of his conception of the world because or even the conception of human cognition because I think he's He's touching on these these experiences that individuals can have that sort of grasp the Universals like the good the beautiful and the true and embody them in the concrete material form So it's like there's this concept in and poetry called the concrete universal and it is the actual idea that Somewhere within The human intellect there is it there's because well Aquinas places the intellect within Her places intuition within the intellect and that's sort of obvious even at an etymological level of those two words, but Yeah, so the intuition is actually Rooted in the intellect according to Aquinas even though many would argue against that because he sort of created that and then on on top of that there's a There's an experience that somehow we can we can capture or apprehend a universal and And not not even a top-down or bottom-up, but it's a it's a Either the universal is always there and it's captured in the essence of an actual Actual material particular or it is Or it's an apprehension of some universal way out there and and somehow we we grasped hold of it, so I guess my thought is on That is I don't I don't know how plausible these things are and how how If there are even things to concern myself with but I think fundamentally there There's something to this poetry thing that I I am attracted to simply because of This connection that I have found This connection that I have felt all my life with God this supernatural deity this this thing that I can't shake, you know, and and and I feel like there's just these glimpses And and they're so elusive and and and I'm so attracted to that because we're naturally attracted to elusivity and it's like this thing in art that I Don't know brings us brings us into contact with the good the beautiful and the true and I don't know if you want to call that God, but I Think that's the beautiful and true. That's for sure but I it sounds way too new like platonic in my head and I think I think the the Western philosophical Tradition standing back to antiquity is just it's wrapped up in my head with my Christian Ideology and it's like hard to separate these two things Well, it's so I'm going to I'm gonna share screen which I can do on Zoom and This is a This is a course that's on YouTube Okay, and I I've only gotten through about three of them, but all the kinds of things you're talking about Are at least in the first three and all of and he runs through. I mean that the title is a little Distracting he hasn't gotten into Buddhism at least in the first three that I've listened to But but all of these kinds of issues of trying to trying to figure out Okay, how do we know that it you know, what is dog? And so here we see a dog and we know that it's a dog and but what is dog and so this is a This is another professor at University of Toronto and his the sound in the class isn't great It's not you know It's not you know Anybody who's listening to YouTube stuff always complains about sound unless somebody's taking some Taking some care to get the sound right, but it's it's it deals with a bunch of those same issues That that you're talking about so you might want to let's see if I can figure out you might want to get You might want to check that out so yeah those I Didn't it I've been doing a lot of thinking lately about About words and orienting and We just have no idea how any of this works we really don't Know man, that's that's the hard part is it's like that's what I don't get is the certainty of so many people And that's and it's like that's even even talking to I mean it's a militant atheist or my mother, you know, it's like Who's it who's a? Devout, you know Christian woman in I love her to death, but then I start picking at her, you know and and You know talking about how maybe it's not good to be a certain maybe maybe Doubt can be a tool. I think Real Who is it real? He's a poet and and he talks about in letters to a young poet. It's probably like the most Famous little letter writing exchange that this Notable poet has with like this underdog poet and he's he talks about how Doubt can be such a Useful I don't want to use the word tool because I don't think that's what he uses but doubt can be so good and Man I read that before I got into a lot of my Pragmatist readings, which I was able to take the course on pragmatism at cornerstone Which was taught by a professor named Michael van Dyck. Do you know who that is? Probably not Dyke he's a Dutchman. He's got to be Yeah, that's why I figured you you knew him, you know All those all those people with Dutch last names. They all know each other Yeah You know, it's it's so You know and even even doubt so, you know Rene Descartes Launches launches the West into you know into the land of doubt in a sense with with that methodology Yet at the same time like you say, you know, it's a great tool but when you paint You know, you don't you you you buy these cans from you know You buy the can't these cans from the supplier and you don't doubt what's in them and you don't doubt that it can sit On the wall and you don't doubt that I mean it's it's It's a phenomenal. It's a phenomenal world that we live in you know, I was so I was in church on Sunday and Sometimes sometimes in church or sometimes if I'm at a church meeting lately I've been having this thought when I've been listening to examinations of new of new pastors and I just think How does this whole thing work with language why why is it Why why is it that? How does language work with this? So then this morning I was watching Jordan Peterson at the Cambridge Union because that video was up and that was a He's kind of he's he's kind of out there being his old wild self again in a sense out on the trail and and and so he's talking to these you know a whole group of College-aged kids and it's like okay. What's what's going on in this room? But we all we all do it We have a sense when we're doing it that it's important and that it's helpful and and the church is just so So neck-deep in this stuff and in you know, my tradition a confessionalist tradition, okay Here's this body of text that you subscribe to Okay, but if you're if you actually work in a church you begin to realize that well people subscribe to things that they don't really understand and Even if you you know, I was working on Something I was working on a video that maybe I'll get time to do it today But even with a phrase like son of God and Peterson mentioned that actually in a video what do we mean by that? What do we mean by God's son because in Christianity we don't believe that you know God hooked up with mrs. God and you know had Jesus well then now doubt you know, I listen to Jonathan Peugeot and and Rachel Fulton Brown talk talk about Mary and it's like oh no, here we go and and So well Mary isn't God the mother and then Jonathan of course that they go off and talk about those things But it's like okay. What's the relationship with language with all of this stuff? How does this help us and then Peterson mentions in the Cambridge Union? Well and and dead-on right when he's talking about it as a psychologist because this is what I've learned as a pastor most of what I do with people is I just listen to them and so often after Hours of listening someone to be like oh pastor you really helped me and it's like I Just listened and You talked yourself in and out of a lot of your problems and Peterson notes Correctly that when we talk we're thinking and so then you get into poetry I don't know if you've watched note in the network, which is a guy He's read he's been reading a lot of Northrop Frye and William Blake And so some of his early videos and that he goes into this question of of language and so I Forget the guy's name, but you know these ideas of so poetry I mean poetry is just eminently weird because you use language in a way that so by definition non prosaic and It works for us you break all the rules of grammar and sentence structure and you lay it out here and You're kind of feeling it. You don't know what you're doing and you're posting those words up there and someone else reads it and says Yeah Yeah Yeah, what's with that I Don't know inner inner subjectivity or something I you don't know if you've ever heard of that, but It's like experiencing someone else's If we if we post this video there's a guy Who will watch this video because he and I have had some exchanges offline But you know, he's a he's a huge poetry fan He's writing poetry and he sends me some of it and I can't I can't keep up with all the poetry he writes but but poetry too is is okay, so Just the just the amazing thing that one person can use language in this way and others They get it but they get more than what the original person put into it. Yeah Yeah, don't I can't even go there in my head I Mean I get it though. I get it's like I've read this, you know But what we're talking about people people not that I care but people will laugh at it, you know It's like it's one of those things where like that that's absurd to even say And but I that's what's drawn me to it so much and and I think it's what's drawn me to Jesus to you know, because and it's drawn any any art form especially like have you heard of a Calvin Sear valve. Oh, yeah. Oh, yeah. He's CRC. He's a big guy. I'm a CRC Yeah, so he has that book Bearing fresh olive leaves where he talks about what's missing in Christian art is elucidity and I mentioned that earlier but I think that was like an important piece that I I read that sort of made me realize that This Christian music stuff in this very straightforward cookie cutter black and white and It's this the rigidity of it of it is it constricts people so much and and the they find it so unattractive and then You get into stuff that's a bit more mysterious like there's even even Jesus's responses to like some Bible or like just absolutely absolutely ridiculous and they're like, I mean or like you can't not ridiculous They're profound, you know, but you can't fully grasp them. They're like vague notions They're like they're like close, but they're not there. They're grasping at something that we can't even understand fully but but we're we're trying and and there it's just attractive like I don't know how you can read Jesus's Words in the way that he interacts with human beings. I mean he was a human but I mean It's just it reveals I feel like Who he who he is, you know, and it's like that that gets me and I don't know what to do with it, you know, but I Every single thing it's like reading reading reading it over and over again and it's like what is Mean and it's like trying to wrap your head around it and it's like maybe I'm not supposed to wrap my head around it maybe I'm just like supposed to kind of go towards it or something or Try to understand it and get close enough and I think And maybe it'll be revealed in time or in the end and The end well well this is again this is why to me Christianity as a religion in which we don't finally save ourselves Really works for me because I We you know, okay Aquinas, you know You know giant intellect brilliant man Okay Dequinus doesn't save me I can't even understand some of what he writes and and and so and so you and some of the stuff that Peterson So part of part of Peterson's question about Christianity is Okay, so Jesus Let's say Jesus rises from the dead and And so every year because I'm a preacher I have to go through some of these texts and you know a couple years ago I got enough familiarity and distance at the same time from the text to sit down and say Now if I was Jesus if I was Jesus publicist After he rose from the dead What would I tell him to do and what he does is Completely different I'd say okay You just march up there into the Antonia Palace and you find Herod and you find pilot and you say You know, how do you like me now, you know Jesus doesn't know any of this and You say yeah, and you say okay Yeah, and you say okay, so what game are you playing and and so part of Peterson's Commentary about the resurrection is exactly that so so Jesus does this but then and I hear a lot of other people say These kind of things do okay, but then like the world as we know it doesn't end But part of the problem in that sentence is Well, when you say the world as we know it you're Presuming us here in 2018 the view we have of the world and And we know enough that the people around Jesus time did not see the world like we see the world so so that right there you have the question of I Mean there's just so many questions with this stuff and you're right It's Christians on one hand Christians sometimes Lock this down and let's say they write the left behind series and here we're gonna This is all that's gonna happen and you just have to say if you read church history You read lots of that stuff that people have been trying that forever and the truth is nobody knows. Okay, that's the truth Okay. Well, what do I do with that? You say? Well, okay. Nobody should be sure about anything No, that's not right, too because you got to be sure about something because you walk into a room you need to know it's in the can and you need to Know that paint will adhere to the brush or the roller and you need to know how to do it So and and so it's okay I don't have a problem with with as fundamentalist people as you can find saying this is my certainty I say, okay God bless you. You have your certainty. I appreciate that But yeah, there's a lot of weirdness to this world and to me it all boils down to I got to trust Jesus more than I trust myself because I don't know what the heck is going on You Know it's really bizarre in this whole thing. I remember writing an essay called the Christian pragmatists and I had to sort of reconcile pragmatism to Christianity in that class and I I was thinking about death a lot and like the end the end for all of us is death and nobody's seen the other side really but that's like the It's I don't know if you can really get get there philosophically as Simply as I'm making it but it's like That's the end of knowledge Like conscious knowledge and so That's like the end for all of us and the only people that know are the people that have gotten there already And it's and it's not that's not like I mean you could take that to If you if the pursuit of knowledge is like, you know the whole idea of learning how to die or whatever but the That if that's the end of knowledge Human knowledge or something you I Wrote I wrote this down and I was like unless you've died Rotted and were risen from the grave. You can kiss my ass I It's like that's how I feel sometimes because it's like who are you who am I gonna trust? Who am I gonna trust? I can't trust any of you except for this guy Who has gone there? Yeah Defeated death. Yeah, and then he and he didn't come in back and go to Quora and answer our questions And at the same, you know and at the same time so then you have all of these other visions and experiences You know, let's take let's take the Apostle Paul when he's writing in the book of 2nd Corinthians he's writing about a man who's been to the third heaven and most scholars believe he's talking about himself and Almost everyone that comes back from that basically says, ah, I don't know how to talk about this Yeah Okay, so Yeah And it's like you have other people that yeah that you know claim these supernatural experiences of going to the other side and and it's just like but is it I think the whole rotting in the in the in the tomb for three days really struck me too because it's like Typically your body is already you reaching its rigmarole reaching its rigamortis sort of stages and It's it's like no, he's actually dead. He's not he's not just faking it. He's actually dead and then to defeat death is is to rise from that like well, and we don't even we can't even conceptualize this so there's been a whole spate of Hollywood attempts to treat resurrection in the last couple of years Usually on TV type series and I've seen some of them and they really intrigued me because What all of these shows shows show is that? There's so many questions around this that we We just can't navigate Yeah Yeah, and I guess Where does it that where does it leave us? With our questions though is that you know that that's that's the hard part is it's like I kind of keep on going through this intellectual journey and I I Have my my Christian upbringing which I feel is you know, gosh, I think I Gave my life to the Lord when I was three supposedly, you know, and it's like how do you do that? I don't know. I guess Jesus said let the little children come to him Not a lot different than we do at 12 or 20 or 50 probably so It was out of complete in total ignorance and and But I don't know it's that's a bizarre thing to wrap because it's like is this reason or is this something? Something beyond reason or is it located in reason in what what varieties of not is there different degrees to knowledge and and what about the metaphysical makeup of human cognition and and to pretend like we know anything about that is is I mean, I think that we have pretty decent theories like Of what that is or what that what what comprises the human mind and emotions and and Intellect and The will or or the effective affective portion of our desire But man it's Yeah, the whole certainty thing really messes with me because it's I don't know if I can have Certain faith I cuz and that's the thing is it's like what is that that that sounds like a paradox to me? There is no such thing as certain faith is you know That's right. If you take the Hebrew's definition of what faith is So and you know a thing that occurs to me often too is that when we're talking about knowing in these conversations, I think behind it is the both the desire and the expectation that when we know something we will have mastery over it and The ability to colonize it. I think that's the thing And the ability to colonize it I think that has that has come to become our definition of knowledge And so if I know my dog My dog will be the perfectly trained obedient service animal that will never break from its programming and then we have that over some of our machines that we Construct sort of but we lose it because machines decay and they break and so and and I think all All of this is part of this CS Lewis actually gets into it in the third chapter of the abolition of man Which is where the title the abolition of man comes from? Because the idea is that if I can know enough psychology that in a sense I Can read through you and take away the mystery of your personhood then I have knowledge and When you when you understand that desire and that vision in that way you begin to understand its demonic quality Because what I really want and this is what Tolkien gets at in the Lord of the Rings what I really want is to Subjugate you all your glory all your power and your future and The amazing thing about the Christian God is that This is what he does not do to us that his Will as expressed in creation is actually freedom Freedom sufficient that we can Do the horrendous things we've done to this world that we've done freedom sufficient to the idea that this is where I'm not a universalist freedom sufficient to the idea that we can finally Say to God my will be done and God says Okay That's you know That's why I think we we can't know and And we shouldn't know in that way Now there's that's one idea of knowing another idea of knowing which I think is the idea that we were made to know Which is in a sense what we might say We are made to know his glory Because that's not a control Because that's not a controlling and so again all the way back to Genesis 2 The man and the woman are gardeners. Well, what are gardeners? On one hand they don't you know, they don't have the genetic imprint of the plant so they they can but yet they They are sub creators. They are partners with nature to make nature more glorious Than it begins with and so now we together with nature We produce glory to the likes what that that he it delights us and it delights God and And when I see that I say, okay, this is what this is what we're made for. This is what we're born to This is the knowledge This is the knowledge we should seek and not the other knowledge which is Which is the in a sense the knowledge that Satan? wishes to displace God and to You know to to appropriate nature in such a way as we destroy it but as soon as you call that a certain name like reason or You know, and I'm not saying that that's what you're trying to say or scientific knowledge as opposed to Poetic knowledge or something making like a distinction like that. I think it's it's hard because then you have like the entire pre-modern Understanding of a epistemological understanding to kind of cornering the the modern Epistemological understanding and it's like Because for 2,000 years or more, you know, like people operated with an understanding of their themselves that was much more than we even give ourselves Operate with now so it's like but in in that's provided so many positives yet, it's also Potentially, you know like I don't know Killing the planet only our own destruction, you know by I don't know industry and and And some of these things where you can even see it at an ecological level, you know If you I guess if you think that Climate change is real. I don't know. I don't even know what I'm saying right well not even climate change, but how many other ways, you know, I grew up in patterns, New Jersey and You know the industry in Paterson fouled the Passaic River to such a degree That you know, no sane person would eat a fish out of the Passaic River. I mean, oh No Do not do that. Well, what have we done? Yeah, and and so this to me is helpful in terms of you know and Tolkien gets at this with the the kind of the kind of magic that the elves had versus the kind of magic that Sauron practiced and You know and you see that you see that spectrum with with Gandalf and then Saruman and And then Sauron You know, what is the elven magic in a sense brought the glory out of that which was implicit in Nature whereas the other was I am going to it's the difference between elves and orcs Yeah Wow, I've never thought about reading the Lord of the Rings, but I like it a lot and I think that there's something there for sure. Yeah. Well, there's a lot of really the Lord of the Rings is a And I don't get that's you know, I get that stuff I mean Tim Keller talks about Lord of the Rings often. There's a lot of good Lord of the Rings research out there Yeah, I know same with any of these these stories dealing with these archetypes potentially and some of this stuff is it's not like they're clean-cut, you know, like like obvious things that we can Then turn around and talk about with their group of friends and in a circle on the back porch, you know at least not with I Have a lot of friends that are very bright people, but I don't have a lot of conversations like this, you know, so It's hard to It's hard to Generate this sort of Content for myself outside of What I'm experiencing on YouTube You know and it's I wish that uh, I Wish that that wasn't the case, but also at the same time I feel like that's a little bit condescending so well this I think has been the gift of Jordan Peterson ironically because when I I Mean I'm a pastor of a small struggling dying church and to get a group of men together To get anybody outside the church together. Oh that just didn't happen. And suddenly I do a Jordan Peterson meetup and I have you know 12 people show up out of the blue and we talk about things like this and and and you know, we have a Jordan Peterson meetup, but Jordan Peterson we just use him to start the conversation and find each other and then we go off and we talk about You know the kinds of we have the kinds of conversation that you and I are having now and it's like Jordan Peterson, you know, what what did he do that started this? I don't know but I'm glad he did it and It's really cool that it's happening Mm-hmm. I don't know I Yeah, I agree and it's it's it's a I don't I think it's good timing. That's for sure. I don't but it's Who might even say that it's God's timing I guess well, that's right and what other word can we use for For this no other word is big enough So it's true. I mean and you know, but it's silly little YouTube channel, too I mean that so I was who was I talking to I was talking to my mother today and my so I post these and of course my mother Takes a look and she's like She watches some of these things no, no, sir. So watches everything I put out It's way too much. But my mother watches and she'll pick and choose a conversation that and she'd like well How do you how do you meet these people? How and I say well, they find me and she's like No Yeah What the heck is going on? I don't know but hey ride this wave baby and cool And just be grateful Verded Yeah, my cousin is calling me what's that my cousin was calling me oh You have any meetups in Grand Rapids Jordan Peterson meetups You think there would be and maybe I'm just completely unaware of them because I haven't like gone online and and say Err typed in, you know meet up or tried to look on Facebook, but I probably should Well, it's it's so funny to me because you know Calvin college is in Grand Rapids now Maybe I'm just a weird duck because I'm like, I'm like, I'm like, I'm like, I'm like, I'm like, I'm like, I'm like I'm like, where are you from from Grand Rapids now, maybe I'm just a weird duck because I look at this and think this People in my tradition should be all over this stuff And it's like you're the first dude you're the first dude I talked to from Grand Rapids that I don't know and you're from cornerstone What's that Calvin college? Come on Where's my I talked with my philosophy professor and, hey wife, anyway, she's too shy to come in the camera. That's okay. I was talking to my philosophy department head and I was like, so have kids been bringing up, I went and bought a pig from him because he raises pigs or whatever. So I bought a pig for him. Yeah, he's a Wendell Berry scholar. You know Wendell Berry? Oh yeah, oh yeah. Yeah, so he's written some, I don't know, wrote a book on Wendell Berry or something. I don't know. So, but he runs a CSA farm and all that. I go to pick up a pig from him. I'm like, are kids coming into your class and talking about this Jordan Peterson stuff? And he was like, yeah, we just watched a clip in class about something and talking about the nature of hierarchies and stuff. And I was like, but I remember taking a class from you like postmodern theory or whatever and we learned that all hierarchies are like innately violent, you know? And it's like, you know, he was like, yeah, I don't know what to think. You know, he didn't really have much to do. I mean, and then. Shut up and give me the money for the pig. Yeah, yeah, like get out of here quick. No, he's the best guy I know, but he was like, I just don't know about this whole, his postmodernism. I think he's a little bit screwed up on postmodernism, Jordan Peterson. And I was like, yeah, I don't know. Cause it's like, I took postmodernism and what you did in that class is you took everything. I believe you threw it up on the wall and was like, okay, you can only pick one. You know, and it's like, not really, but it's that class. It was hard to get through. And reading some of the postmodern notable theorists or whatever, it's not, you know, when Jordan Peterson critiques postmodernism, I feel like a lot of what he says is valid, but I feel like it's not this, he's not diving into it to the extent that like, maybe he could, or I'd like to hear him do. Cause it's like, I'm like, okay, I'm following you. I'm tracking, but go further. You like, you know, but it's like, I can't make demands like that. So, yeah. But it's true. And I think I haven't had, I had actually Quentin Schultz a conversation if he wants to, but you know, Quentin Schultz is a communications prophet, Calvin, and he made a few little YouTubes about communications style, Jordan Peterson and Donald Trump and such, but, and I know some people in the Calvin community are talking about him because I get, I have my spies and they tell me people are talking, but it's like, you know, come on people, all you need is a Gmail account, say something. You got a webcam on that MacBook Air of yours, you know, contribute to the conversation. Yeah. And there's so many bright students in this area that, I mean, I've gone on to do, have either graduated and gone on to do incredible things or, you know, I mean, even you, you graduated from Calvin and here you are, like doing these videos. And it's like, it's just, and I'm not saying they're, I'm not trying to inflate your ego, but these have been so helpful for so many people. And like, I just wish that, cause there's almost like this weird thing where I feel like, yeah, the untouchable, like don't, don't, there's, everybody shrugs when you bring up Jordan Peterson sometimes, or at least a lot of my really bright friends who I'm almost embarrassed to talk about my fascination with it because it's, it's, for some reason I'm worried that they're gonna, they're gonna think I, for all the same reasons that Jordan Peterson gets called a conservative or the alt right or something, you don't want to be affiliated with, with that sort of thing. And it's like, how does that extend all the way from Jordan Peterson down to me? Where I'm embarrassed. I'm embarrassed to say this, I'm embarrassed to have my friend at Calvin, you know, or something like that. That's exactly right. I think he's gonna shrug me. So. And people, I'm sorry, people are just cowards. You know, and I hear this, so Peter Boghossian and James, I forget his last name, they were on Joe Rogan. And so they're, you know, for years I've been saying this progressive liberationism, this is a religion. It's infecting the church. And I think it's actually a Christian heresy, but it's, you know, just, just, just, it's helpful to identify it and recognize it. And, you know, recognize some of the validity of what they have to say, so on and so forth. But then you have people that are like, you know, well, I would say something, but, and it's like, okay, I understand. But at some point, at some point, you gotta just stop and say, you know what? This is what I think. And Peterson on this is dead on right when he talks about Solzhenitsyn and, you know, the whole society trundles along down the slope because people don't stop and say, hey, this is what I think. And you know what? Okay, hate me for it. And just go ahead. I don't care. You can feel what you want to about me, but it's the way it is. And I don't know, I don't know. That boldness, I feel like that's one of these, like I didn't really want to, I didn't even know if I really wanted to join in on this conversation and even have a, like have a talk with you because I feared, I think I'm filled with fears as we all are. But it's like fearing to even take that first step into having a conversation, like beginning that dialogue with people. And it's like, man, I'm glad some people took the steps because they showed, they've kind of paved the road already. And it's like, I can kind of walk down that a little bit. And get my toes wet and then maybe my ankles. That's what leadership is. That's what leaders do. Leaders stick their neck out and they don't get everything right. And Jordan Peterson doesn't get everything right. He's a human being, none of us do. But at some point you stand up and you say, this is what I'm seeing and I'm gonna say it. And I'm gonna put it out there. And you don't like it? You don't like it. I can live with that. But that's what you have to do. And I think, part of the thing that's, so yeah, I'm the Jordan, I'm the pastor of the intellectual dark web. Well, there we go, I'll just hang that on my wall. Yeah, right. But it's also the truth that, okay, I'm in my 50s. So I'm not going to be running for any denominational muckety muck position. So I'm a pastor in an insignificant church in a backwater place in the Christian Deformed Church. I don't pass, I'm not a pastor in Grand Rapids, Michigan, which is of course the holy city for the Christian Deformed Church. But why live if you're not going to engage and do it? And yeah, get some stuff wrong. But just don't sit there like an idiot with your mouth shut and let the world go by. No. Yeah, I wonder if that has any relation to like a pandemic of psychological issues and like mental illness sort of running rampant. And I mean, it's affected me and the majority of people I know now. So it's like, you're either on an antidepressant or you're smoking marijuana or, like you're doing something of that effect. And it's like, there's major self-esteem issues. And it's like, that's what's so interesting about like what Jordan Peterson is doing too, because it's like, it's giving these people the strength in their legs to get up. It's like, you're stuck in bed for days on end and it's like, okay, maybe I can't even clean my room, but at least I can like go downstairs and microwave this macaroni. Yeah, yeah, exactly. Cool. I think part of the thing with Peterson is that he's actually weak in some of the right ways too. Yeah, oh yeah. There's a fragility about him that you can tell. It comes out with his diet, with his moodiness. Even his thought, even upon self-recollection, I mean, I think it's hard to have a conversation with people about like, okay, well, you could have done what Hitler did. Like, how do you see yourself as rising above in that situation? Are you the person standing before Jesus nailed to the cross and being like, you know? Are you going along with it? Are you, you know, and it's like to begin seeing yourself as a person who is as depraved to the extent that you're capable of pretty much any atrocity that man has ever known. It's like, then you understand and you get to that point where you realize what Solzhenitsyn said about the line of good and evil dividing the human heart and understanding, I feel like that's missing and for a lot of people, but how is that empowering to understand how depraved you are? And I'm trying to, I know Jordan Peterson talks about it a lot, but I'm still trying to wrap my head around it because there's so many people that view that as being something that you shouldn't, you should never probably entertain the idea of you being depraved to that extent. Yeah. You know, and so in, you know, obviously my tradition in the Christian Reformed Church and Calvinism, I mean, total depravity was a, you know, this is something that we were all nursed in, but I've seen it go both ways and Tim Keller has a phrase where he says, you know, you have to be, you have to be, both you have to be sad and just the right way to be happy enough. You have to be happy in just the right way to be sad enough. And I see the doctrine of total depravity as enormous liberation because I know I won't get it right. So that should tell the perfection aside of me, you go sit over there, you go sit over there and fuss with the fringes on the carpet and wash your hands 50 times. You go sit over there. You know, when I went to the Dominican Republic, we had a little language school thing that we did before then. It was supposed to help us learn languages. And the guy in the thing said to me, he said, you know, to learn a new language, you have to make a million mistakes. You might as well get started. So that's how I felt about my videos. I'm not a perfectionist and I'm gonna say all kinds of things wrong, but you know, I might as well get started and knocking them down. And I think the, you know, and again, I think C.S. Lewis nails it in the abolition of man that people, you know, men without chests, their heads look big only because their chests are so small. And people ought to be saying their piece. And the left gets this. I mean, their whole culture of calling out and standing up and speaking out, hey, good for you. You know, you got an idea, you're gonna say it. Now be ready to listen to the other side too and we're gonna have a conversation. We're not gonna hurt each other. We're not gonna throw stones. We're gonna try and practice abilities. That means we're gonna have to kind of keep a handle on our emotional selves, but that's how we sort things out together. Yeah, civility dies with the death of dialogue, I think. I don't know who said that, but that's scary when you realize that so many people are holding their breath. And yeah. Hey, I got a question for you though. Yeah. How do you feel about the whole, did you ever read the Ragamuffin Gospel by Brennan Manning? Familiar with any of them? Yeah, yeah, yeah, a number of years ago. I think that book sort of saved my life at a particular time and I needed that message. But then there was a lot of critique that came around after that sort of saying it was too oriented on grace and love and God's unconditional relentless tenderness. But it's like that was, I think at that point I was so broken and I needed to hear that message because I, I am, I, gosh, I've been on and off antidepressants for what, seven years now, you know? And so it's like, I need it. And I don't know why I was as broken as I was, but it was like an understanding that God loves you just as you are, not as you should be, was the thing that like, when I read that line for the first time, I think it like, it rocked me. And it's like, maybe people in my past when I was young sort of spoke that message, but it didn't hit my ears until I read it in that book. Yeah, that did that for a lot of people. That was a really important book for a lot of people. See, here's the thing about language. And we started talking about language. This truth that God is way more good and loving than you can possibly believe is true. And it's likely true that we cannot language or represent it, because that's what we're doing with language, we're representing it. We cannot represent it strong enough to actually express how deep that truth is. It's also true that God is more demanding and demands more from us than we can possibly achieve. So the grace is both so powerful and the demand so powerful that, when you listen to Jordan Peterson talk about the demands of the sort yourself out, don't give yourself an excuse. You can't hit that hard enough to fully represent that aspect of God, but the other is true too. And the thing is, it's very difficult for us to integrate that. And so a lot of what we try to do are fine, and it's kind of like the circling the drain thing. So, oh, now I'm out of balance on the one, oh, now I'm out of balance on the other. And so we circle the drain. And that's part of the reason that, so I often work with the structure of the Heideberg catechism, which is misery, deliverance, gratitude, because when I put God's demand, when I get, it's not even balance really, but when I screw it up and God's demand crushes me, you read the Sermon on the Mount and it's like, I can't meet that bar. And then you see grace and then light of the other. So now I see grace. And then you want to slip to, ah, no, but then there's the other. And saints live that out in amazing ways, but we struggle to represent it in language, and we struggle to represent it in our lives. Is the desire to want to integrate that well, or as well as you possibly can wrong? Like, I don't know. Maybe that's the wrong way to say it, but it's like, it's almost striving for perfection again at that point, if you want to integrate it so perfectly, where it's like, well, you can't. Yeah, I'm not worried about getting it perfectly. Ah, I will. Baby, that boat is sailed. I have messed up in so many ways. Perfection is not on the table. But I do, I do, and that's, I think, where Peterson gets at, where part of what he's really brought to the table is this idea of meaning and how that integrates it, because it's the, and I love how C.S. Lewis articulates this in the last battle. It's further up and further in. And this is where God's infinite nature is so breathtaking, because we can go further up and further into him and never exhaust him. You know, the words of the great hymn, Amazing Grace, gets at this. You know, when we've been there 10,000 years bright, shining as the sun, we've no less days to sing God's praise than when we first begun. And what we should know about what praise is, is that, we should know that we're not just singing praise and we should know about what praise is, is that it is gardening in Eden is praise. Painting a room is praise. Making a video is praise, because praise is singing and praise is liturgy and praise is, but all that we're doing here is praise. And no exhausting God's goodness. Yeah. Oh man. And some of these things are so grounding too. You know, like some of these practices, even going back to just the practical things that we do. It's like having not only the habits, but I don't know, for me, it was oddly enough when I was going through depression and I found, I went through some cognitive behavioral therapy and then I also, I found gardening, and which was oddly synchronized with meeting my philosophy professor who, you know, was a Wendell Berry fanatic. And then it was like, I was gardening and like smoking fish that I was catching in the rivers and doing all, just getting my hands dirty in some of these, I don't know, what's getting my hands into some soil? What is that? It's very like, how did that heal me? It was healing to do some of those things. Yes. Well, you're made to do those things. You are. And this part of the reason we're, there's so much anxiety and so much depression is that we're not made to sit in these little cubicles and look at these screens. Yeah. It's crazy making. And so, no, that makes complete sense to me that get out and do something with your hands, paint a room, work a garden, learn how to dance, learn how to dance with plants. My blog, my little description on my blog is gospel word gardening in the age of decay because that's what we're doing. That's what I do as a pastor because I work with words. But you get your hands in the soil and this crop didn't turn out. So next year I'm gonna, this is what we're made for. And again, in my view of the resurrection, we're never gonna stop. It's just gonna get better. And that's a tremendously joyful thought. Yeah. Man, I love that. When you say that though, do you mean, man, maybe this is too complicated of a question to ask, but when you say that, do you mean that we're bringing the kingdom in a way? We bear witness. God always brings it. We're always sub-creators. We bear witness. And all the witness that we bear in the age of decay, you know, Paul says we labor not in vain, which means that in some way, in not only the resurrection of our bodies, but the renewal of all creation, that which we have borne witness to is fulfilled. Now, C.S. Lewis in The Great Divorce, I put this in a video, I think it was C.S. Lewis on the resurrection, I put it in that video. In The Great Divorce is this amazing passage where in a sense, the resurrection starts moving time backwards. And I don't know how this works. We can't even describe what happens, you know, Paul can't describe the vision that he saw. Okay, so we're not gonna represent it well. But we have reason to believe because of the resurrected body of Jesus that your capacity to imagine joy cannot come close to what God has planned for you. Yeah. Now even just think about that promise. And someone will say, ah, you're not justified in thinking that. Take your justification, I'll tell you where to stop it. You know, I believe it and I believe God is that good. And I believe his plan for the redemption of this world is that joyful and that beautiful. And I, you know, and when in those moments that God gives me the grace to see it and to feel it, you know, I can suffer, I can suffer that which I need to bear. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah, yeah, I can attest to that. And it's ironically so often in the low dark moments that it's sometimes in the darkest moments of my life that God has shown me that I've been able to experience that beauty. And I don't know why that is either. Because you would think, it's grace, it's grace. We're not in control of this. Yeah. And it's when, go ahead. No, no, no, I liked what you were saying. I just, I had a thought in regards to like deliberately entering into suffering. Because you almost have that resolve when you taste, or you don't necessarily say like, bring it on, but you kind of do in a weird way where it's, bring it on, I will go through the void, like if I need to, or what have you, because it's, you know the blessings that await on the other side. And so the light at the end of the tunnel is, it's, that's your whole focus. And it's weird because like, I heard somebody talking about psychedelics and it might've been in Rebel Wisdom's stuff, but they're talking about how psychedelics is our way to sort of, you know, go through an ego death. And I was fascinated by ego death for a long time. We don't have to go down the whole psychedelics road, but I, my whole view kind of has shifted from kind of being very intrigued by that stuff. And I mean, I probably will forever be intrigued by it because it's fascinating, but it's, at the same time, it's like, I think I have so much fear that of that sort of realm and the whole quote from Carl Jung, be aware of unearned wisdom. Unearned wisdom, yeah. And that like, that is profound. And it's like, well, I feel like going through suffering and reaching the other side to whatever, maybe enlightenment, if you want to use that word, but that's not one I'd prefer to use. I don't know which one I'd prefer to use, but you'd get to the other side and that suffering was validated or somehow necessary. And you see it from the other vantage point. And it's like, there's like a shortcut and then there's like the not shortcut, you know? It's like, and I almost view psychedelics and I might get a shade for this, but I almost see psychedelics as a shortcut. And it's like, I don't want to speak negatively about it because I know people could potentially be relieved from a lot of pain and suffering if psychedelics could be used and supervised and taken with the magnitude of what these plants actually embody, but I think there's a road to enlightenment that's through suffering and there's a road to enlightenment that's sort of, I don't know, you just pop a couple mushrooms and, or you take a, you know, I don't know, man. It's like, it's weird to me that that's a route that people take to, and somehow they see that as being more profound than anything they can experience through deliberately pursuing difficulty, I guess. I don't know. Well, I don't know that we have to deliberately pursue difficulty. Often what we do is stop, is pursue meaningful meaning instead of expedience. I mean, expedience is the, that's the cop out. And, you know, and it comes down to being faithful in a relationship. It comes down to doing, it comes down to the kinds of, the kinds of common sacrifice that men and women have been making throughout the centuries in faithfulness to each other and to their community. And yeah, I don't know, I don't know what to think about about psychedelics. God made the plants too, and. No. What God does with them, I'm not gonna, I'm personally not going to, I have no plans of taking any psychedelics. I have ways from 50 years of being a Christian of experiencing God's joy. And so often those ways are, those paths are, they're two tracks with suffering, just as you said. The joy and the suffering come together. Yeah. And I can't explain that, but it's, the suffering, and that's why suffering is not escapism or distraction. It's the partner, it's joy becomes its partner and joy redeems it. And we know that because every single good movie, every single good story is about, is about triumph over suffering, calamity, catastrophe. And that's why we can imagine, that's why we can believe that having gone through the miseries of this world, God will use those sufferings to make even more joy than we could have had without. And I can never, and I don't try to do that math with individuals because I can't do that math, but I believe God can. And so I leave it with him. Yeah. Wow. Well, we've done an hour and a half of this, Luke. You said, you thought we weren't gonna be able to talk very long. Well, now do you? How'd it go? I thought, yeah, I didn't know if I could even articulate myself well enough to get this far, but thank you for the opportunity. It's been a pleasure. Well, it's been great fun. I recorded it, so I'll send you the recording and you can decide if, you can rewatch it with your wife and decide if this is something that you'd like to share with the world. And pop a bag of popcorn. That's right. Here we go, I'm gonna watch myself. I never watch myself. That's too painful. Yeah, yeah, I know, that's the bad part. That's why actors don't watch their movies. I believe it, I believe it. Well, it was great to meet you, Luke. Yeah, good to meet you too. And God bless you. Yeah, you as well. Okay, thank you. Bye-bye.