https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=Ra2NpY5EZUE

 There we go. All right. How have you been? Hey, good to see a friend. It's good to see you too. It's been a long time. Been a little while. Yeah. I was just reviewing the notes from our last conversation and it was very good conversation and there's actually a lot of things that I think, you know, there is a lot of overlap, you know, justification systems. Yeah, so I just saw, I just saw the email that you sent a couple of minutes ago. So I'll let, I'll let, I mean, last time I got to ask tons of questions about you personally, which is my usual mode, but we don't have to do that now. So, okay, why don't you jump in? Sure. Well, there are a couple of things on my agenda. You know, first off, it's good to see you. I've listened to several of your always illuminating conversations. I'm just coming off of the one you had with John on classic theism and common theism, non theism, and it's beautiful. You know, so that was such a remarkable conversation and conversations are sort of like dances. I mean, they're not, they're not up to either side. And so when it really goes well, it's, it's quite a remarkable thing. So, yep, I, as I take my walk these last two days, you know, that's, and it was the walk would go flying by. It was beautiful. So I'd really, there's a lot there that I would perhaps like us to circle in. I also listened to some of the commentary that you offered in different contexts on the whole for Vicky Jordan Peterson conversation. That's a little dated now, but I wouldn't mind just at least picking your brain about anything that's alive for you in that context. And just yet to get your kind of take about where what what's happening and what have you been thinking about lately? And I could certainly share what's been going on in my crazy world. So, yeah, well, we'll start picking away and I'm sure we'll I'm sure it'll start to flow. So maybe you could offer I'm really glad to hear you experience that as a dance. That was certainly my experience as a would you be willing to then offer some summary for folks that are, you know, for it to and maybe I could certainly do that for my little audience or whatever. But let's maybe talk a little bit about the summary of the exchange you had with John. Well, so, so I relistened to a conversation that John had with Rafe Kelly. And Rafe has been interesting in this conversation because he has in some ways talked about his interest in Christianity, while remaining skeptical about, let's say, his profession of ontology with respect to God. And there's a there's a lot of people in that camp. Yeah, I think that's a great point. I mean, I think part of what Peterson did was demonstrate the functional utility of the conceptualization of God. Yep. I think part of what Peterson did was demonstrate the functional utility of the conceptualization of God. Yep. Now, so then when when John Vervecki comes in with his non theism, you know, it it with all of these conversations, it even though we're just sitting here talking and we're nodding and we think we know what we're saying, we're talking about things that take a while to sort of sink in. Amen to that and understand. And so I. You know, I, you know, right away with Peterson, I began to notice, you know, kind of the the tensions about about conceptualization of God and sort of the vernacular talk about God, I believe in God, I believe God exists, yada, yada, yada. Then with the Peterson Sam Harris conversation, that's where it dawned on me that Sam Harris and Jordan Peterson were talking about two very different things. Yep. And that's when I coined the God number one and God number two. So then I spent really a couple of years trying to figure out and I intentionally kept it vague with number one and number two because I wanted those boxes loose. Yep. I didn't I didn't want. So once you start calling it, you know, a bunch of the things that I did, general versus special revelation, implicit versus explicit or, you know, trans, you know, trans transcendent versus imminent. And then eventually the one of the best schemas that began working for me was John's agent arena dynamic. I really thought that was something and God. Number one is a God. Number one is arena. I'm sorry. OK. Yeah. And God. Number two is agent. I got you. OK. And so when Jordan Peterson was talking to Sam Harris about the God that he sees, it was very areonic. It was rather impersonal. Yep. But yet quite consequential in terms of in terms of history. Now, obviously, when in that conversation, they switched to talking about prayer. It was quite a bit more agentic. But as the way human beings work, that line between agent and arena is not what we think it is. Right. Especially when talking about God. Yes. Yes. You know, and I push, you know, I've pushed this and, you know, part of the reason I love working in a church is unlike, you know, academics and intellectuals and wonky people that tends to be our community online here because we don't find ourselves with these esoteric interests. What do you say, Paul? In a church, you're talking to regular people who who when I ask them, they'll recognize the name of Plato, but they won't be able to say anything about it. And and so so that for me is a wonderful challenge because I can both test ideas with them, but also I have to figure out how to talk about these things in a way that the broadest possible audience can understand. Gotcha. So. So part of what all of the last three years have done for me, especially conversations with the Roman Catholic scholar named Brett Sockold from Canada, who wrote a book on transubstantiation, because if you had asked me 10 years ago, if I would, you know, transubstantiation, that's that Roman Catholic belief, which is sort of that bread turns to flesh. Well, that's dumb. Scientifically, that's just dumb. But talking to him and reading his book, I begin to appreciate, whoa, there's a lot that's going on in terms of theology, in terms of their claims about what we mean by this word God. And, you know, I look at all these footnotes and Brett Sockold's book from Bishop Barron, and then I look at this conversation, this debate that Bishop Barron has with an atheist. And I listened to John and it's like, wait a minute. And I read, you know, at least part of part of this book about, you know, basically Hebrew revolutionary monotheism, which is very different from sort of the evolutionary polytheism that most people just suspect that the gods just all sort of became integrated. But rather that the Jews, their conceptualization of God replaced what what what Kaufman called an impersonal metadivine realm that again, if you actually look at mythology, they tried to they tried to instantiate in agents such as the fates, right, even fatalism or the fates. So, so then, and the more I and, you know, John keeps an eye on my video stream, which which is tremendously generous of his because I put out way more than anybody should bother to listen to. But, you know, and, and then I began to say, Wow, John's non theism is not that far from classical theism in many ways. And a lot of the a lot of the headbutting that has happened really in the modern period about the existence of God isn't really having a very good conversation about what Christians have historically meant by the term meant by the word. And that that ignorance is shared both by the word and the word. And the ignorance is shared both by the atheists got it picked it up honestly from the Christians. So, you know, no, don't want to, you know, be too hard on them. So and that for me, then was an opportunity to talk to John about some of these things. But but I so then for me, it all comes down to the question of. Well, what really what really are our differences here? And a lot of them have to do with. Relationality and you know, these were some of the earlier conversations that I had with John. Yeah, which basically said, you know, if let's say you're late for work and you go out and you know that your car is getting old and your car won't start, why do you talk to your car? You know, you're letting me down here. Exactly. You name your car, you talk to your car, you plead with your car, you and you know, we will call this, you know, we we agentify our car in some way. Yeah. But and again, that's, you know, anthropomorphizing. We have this fancy word for it. But it seems to me that that is simply that is simple. And then I connected it in earlier conversation with John with with a differentiation that Pascal had become between sort of a spirit of geometry and a spirit of finesse. These are these these are these two modes we approach the world with. I was going to ask you about this and describe this beautiful. Go ahead. Yeah. And then when then when I read someone like Ian McGillchrist, well, these two modes not perfectly, but sort of map on to you can finesse it. That's right. This bicameral mind that we have. And and I mean, of course, that maps on to all sorts of other things. And and so. You know, again, as a as a Christian minister, I work in the application of religion and of a religious tradition to regular people in their day to day life. That's what you do as a Christian minister. And. So. I just find these conversations around. You know, non theism versus classical theism and and so much of what a lot of it boils down to, I think, is. The the social cultural. Social cultural reputational hierarchies downstream from the enlightenment, when the philosophes for the most part. Began to debunk. A lot of. Basically, they began to to they began to hold. Story verse claims to matter verse. Totally. Heckings. Yep. And so beautiful. You're saying it. And I think, I think in a lot of ways, the enlightenment. You know, really forced and you see this actually in church history, because not only did you have the rise of Protestantism, which sort of championed this mode for a while, but the counter reformation. You know, was was deeply a part of this too, because, for example, one of the things that the Roman Catholic Church really clamped down on were official miracles. Miracles had to be validated. Right. Now. You know, and the one of the ideas that I think is really important is that and the one of the ironies of Wittenberg is that Wittenberg, the, you know, the magistrate for Wittenberg had had accumulated one of the most impressive collection of relics while also protecting the guy who would basically destroy the the power of relics in the popular imaginary, at least for the Protestants for a number of hundred years. Wow. So there's a ton going on in this. And it seems to me that where we're at right now is that if, if medieval Europe and medieval religiosity overplayed its hand in terms of the story verse, modernity has overplayed its hand in terms of the physical universe. And what the end of modernity means is that we are once again, in a period of renegotiation about the relationship between what I call these two registers. Beautiful. So, and, and, you know, I, I lately have been talking about upper and lower registers because. Have you read a Karen Armstrong's the case for God? No. By any chance? No. So anyway, this is, so this landed for me in 2000, I think it was 13. Um, I basically had this same process where I think I might told you, you know, I was raised as a new atheist kind of deal. And then I started to be like, wait a minute, the whole structure, well, I didn't turn me into a personal common sense theist, I started to get wobbly about it in terms of what do we mean? And then I read the case for God. And basically her story is this, and it's a big, thick, complicated book. Um, but I got the gist of it, read most, maybe half of it, and certainly took home the base message. So the message is this, there's a fundamental difference. I'll use my term here in different kinds of justification systems. One of which is logos. Okay. Logos, the logic of the day whereby you want correspondent principles that analyze truth claims and debunk them if they're not right. And then the other is mythos. Okay. Mythos is an embodied way of living in the world and a way of animating the world in a particular way and way to relate to it in a particular way. And in the context of mythos, you don't analyze them in terms of truth claims. You analyze them in terms of meaning basically, and embodied relationality. And therefore the argument is, is that God is that what you move toward as you embody the mythos and experience the sacred. Okay. So then when I read that, I'm like, Oh, Oh my God, we can embody. And then, so now if you get to listen to, so this is essentially a complete parallel, uh, to the conversation. That's why I was so enlivened by the conversation. Like this is the transformation I sort of went through when I read this book and then was like, yes, it's, I want to seek sacredness. And if you just kind of put the icon upon the load star, which orients by sacredness, my realization, my experience, my transcendent, um, transformation, it's like, yeah, that's I'm oriented in that way. And man, does that create an enormous amount of, uh, alignment, uh, in, in a particular way. So that, that was, what was resonating deeply for me. That's really interesting. And that's, that's very helpful. Um, I mean, part of what I, you know, I know I've struggled with is part of the reason I make so many YouTube videos is that I just simply found that I, the more I talk, the more I, the more I figure stuff out talking, talking is better than just the, the little, the little debates within my consciousness Congress and partly because, you know, the little debates in my consciousness Congress are all limited in here, but using YouTube to begin to work these things out verbally was far more powerful. Yeah. And by the way, I think I owe you a tremendous debt of gratitude. You know why? Because you, part of what you did in your conversation with several people who did this for John basically, but part of your conversation for John activated in him, the shift into DL logos. Right. Because it was basically, wait a minute, there's a community embedded in this process here, not a rational reason. And you know, psychotechnology for the self, this is an embodied community practice. Right. So in that John and I then started the DL logos process on the cognitive science show academically, not to mention the larger hyper community conversation that we're all having in relationship to this collective sense making. So, and then I got sucked into that and have experienced the power of academic DL logos with him so that now I can not writing papers back and forth or competing in any way, it's like connect and dialogue and watch a synergy between, you know, I'm now, I didn't think I was a Neo platonic thinker at all, but because of dialogue with John, I'm like, Oh my gosh, the Neo platonic version, because I'm my eyes, like I'm my Aristotle history. The tree of knowledge does matter, life, mind, culture in a very Aristotelian structural functional sense. So I've always been, you know, natural material, scientific, biological, organismic, and that was, Oh, that's Aristotle, you know, Plato's up here in the damn forms. Okay. And then I'm like, no, that's not really the history. That's a lot more complicated. So anyway, that's a long-winded way of saying thank you basically. You're welcome. I'm not sure what I did still, but you planted seeds of your, of the engagement of thought, and then we made them network them and now there's a collective intelligence, you know, I mean, obviously it's one little drop in the overall bucket, but it's an important drop. So I think so too. And you know, the video I just put out today, so part of what, you know, so then my channel got to a certain size and I have a small but fairly devoted following. And then some of the guys started making clips of my videos and started doing some of what I've been doing. And, and so then I watch what they're doing and you do begin to get this. Even, even videos that I've made and things that I've said, when I see me saying them in a slightly different culture initiates insight and, and it's like, okay, and, and that's, you know, I, it's interesting to me how that's sort of in contrast with, let's say the, the academic, you know, okay, no, we're going to write this paper or we're going to write this book and that's going to trickle out and the, the speed of this is, you know, compared to the old system, there's, there's liabilities too and downsides too, but it's really quite remarkable what's happening. And again, to me for a, you know, as a Christian minister, the, a part of what develops in any community, communities all need boundaries and, you know, your language to this idea of, um, justification systems, communities develop justification systems that allow the community to actually have productive conversation without those justification systems. It's sort of like the body doesn't have skin to sort of hold it in or an exoskeleton to keep it up. So you sort of have opponent processing in that. That's exactly right. And so for example, in, in a Protestant, in a Protestant tradition, your justification system is some sort of, it's nowhere near as scientistic as a lot of Protestants would love it to be, but it's a, it's a coherent with, it's a coherence with the biblical text and, and still, and again, a lot of Protestants don't like to own up to this either. It's a coherence with their tradition around the conversation, around the biblical text and in modernity, Protestantism has sort of gotten itself into some binds because it wanted to sort of take a scientistic approach to biblical interpretation. It really doesn't work because the, even, even scientism has, you know, scientism falls out for its own reasons too, partly because we're human beings. Yeah. So, totally. And we, I mean, I use the term scientism actually as derogatory when people are trying to over apply, you know, so yeah, totally. That's a great description. And so, yeah, for me then the systems of justification, a word for them is capital C culture, so capital C culture then are the network systems of justification that coordinate people and legitimize is in awe as the context or container that frame their dialogue, their behavior, their engagement, etc. So it immediately, once you enter into the context of justification, then that creates a shared culture if you're inside it, and then you understand the assumptions of is in awe and then within then you operate and justifications get designed as that unit, they then also emerge into, against other systems. So Protestantism emerges against the, you know, authority of the Pope and Catholicism in a particular kind of way. And then science is a justification system of rent, you know, against Christian theism in a particular kind of way. And all of our histories are then, and you have to really see their emphases and assumptions and framings and legitimizing structures as this large, in this network, in this larger sea of justification too, from the outside, as well as then from the inside. And that gives you this dynamic flavor of what really these things, what are these things about? And I think the systems of justification, that the competing systems of justification then actually also afford, you know, interesting... Human beings don't like stasis. We need a degree of stability in order to live, but we hunger for some novelty because we want to improve the stability. So, especially with, let's say, science and religion, you know, they're always, they're always sort of... They have to be an oscillating... I think it was Peterson that once said, hey, if you got, if somebody actually game up, gave the perfect setting, all the right answers in like a week, humans would destroy that thing. Yeah. Well, that's from Dostoevsky. Okay. Well, fair enough. That's from Notes of the Underground. Application of notes to the underground to all of this. All right. Well, fair enough. But yes, absolutely. There's a complex dynamic system that's not going to be reduced to recipe and needs these oscillating aspects of between opponent processes. Totally. You know, it was interesting. I was listening to this one philosopher who made the argument that, you know, modern philosophy, you know, the words, words get fudgy pretty easily, but modern philosophy partly developed in order to, in some ways say, oh, wow, look what we're able to do with science. Let's now apply that to realms that religion used to have mastery over. Totally. Part of what's interesting about that is its failure to actually accomplish that. Totally. Not to say that philosophy has been a failure. I mean, philosophy has, you know, proved to have a lot of good knowledge. Totally. I have a name for this called the Enlightenment Gap. Okay. So the Enlightenment Gap is once we invented science, which did such an unbelievably powerful job of mapping matter in motion, and then gave rise to a certain kind of epistemic authority. You mentioned that before. And then people were like, oh, I guess this is the way it makes sense out of shit. Stuff. Sorry. And then, okay, so then we go from there to, yeah, basically philosophy then has to come to terms with what you get Kant, and Kant basically is like, well, we have epistemology, right? There's some kind of ideal epistemology and phenomenology, because we can only see stuff rather than the thing itself. But he then, he's a physicist basically too. And so you get this kind of blend, but what happens, and you can see this just across the landscape, no synthetic philosophy emerges, okay, that can jointly manage the complicated relationship between matter and mind. And this is actually within naturalism. We can then get out on what's on the exonatural higher dimensions, if they're real or whatever, but endonaturalism even, meaning that we don't know matter in mind relation, which mind-body problem, like exactly what is this physical billiard ball analysis on the one hand, and then we're actually analyzing it, feeling it, seeing it, what's that in that relation? And also, what is the scientific knowledge relative to social knowledge? Okay, so you then get the postmodern critique about the power of individual reason to establish progress, and which then is entangled with, you know, whiteness and maleness and colonialism as a justice angle, as well as basically the problem of justification, which is like all these systems are embedded in language systems that are motivated by other kinds of things, and to use a Wittgensteinian claim, they're basically language games that are always imminently situated, and you can't really, from his vantage point, you couldn't get escape from that. And so therefore, when you get that sophisticated, yeah, all those, you know, abstract claims are actually contextualized. So you get the philosophical critique, you get the justice critique about science and reason relative to social knowledge and context. And that's what the Enlightenment gap is. It says, hey, we didn't have a knowledge system that solved the mind-body dynamic and afforded clarity between science and social knowledge. And it ultimately gives rise to a chaotic, fragmented pluralism of understanding. It just sort of, the academy just gives us a sort of blow. It's like unbelievably specialized, but poorly organized, and there's no coherent thematic structure to it at all. You just basically are like, oh, from an academic perspective, I would argue. It's interesting. So Dallas Willard, I mentioned him to John. Dallas Willard taught philosophy at University of Southern California for most of his career. He did his doctoral work on Husserl and phenomenology. And he also was a very committed evangelical Christian who came out of, I should reread his biography, came out of sort of Baptist, holiness, Pentecostal groups, and went on then in his, you know, later in life became, you know, a very prominent Christian writer. And his, my favorite book of his, The Divine Conspiracy, he opens that book, basically talking about what in the 80s and 90s was this crisis of morality in academia. And of course, if that crisis of morality written by, let's say, Robert Coles in the 80s and 90s was a cold, I mean, the drama over morality now in that sphere is absolutely pneumonia. It's gone critical. Yeah, it's gone critical. And, you know, he- Unintended, but anyway. He points out, you know, early in the, well, a number of articles were coming out in the 80s that were noting that, here's a little story that exemplified it. A young woman, smart young woman, you know, makes her way into Harvard and is, you know, she's from a poor community, so she has to work while she's in school to pay the bills, etc., etc. And she's in this, she's in Harvard Medical School or something, and she's so in this, this ethics class with a bunch of guys who's, you know, their fathers are doctors and graduates of Harvard, so they have all the money in the world, they don't have to work for anything. And so she winds up basically cleaning rooms, cleaning rooms of her classmates as, you know, basically a housekeeper, and they keep hitting on her. And so she eventually goes to the professor and says, I can't take this anymore, because, you know, we sit, I sit in class with these guys, and we're all, you know, they're probably getting straight A's in their ethics class, but they can't keep their grubby hands off me when I'm trying to work my way through school. I could see cleaning their room. Yeah. And so, you know, then the professor basically says, here's an image of the modern crisis. And in some ways, as a Christian minister, I read Romans seven, the good that I would do, I don't do. And the good that I, you know, the evil that I don't want to do, I do. This is the apostle Paul who can save me from myself. I mean, and, and the, and so, you know, we're at this point now where in some ways, you know, we've so Christianity, you know, if you look at, say, the work of, of Tom Holland, in his book, Dominion, his, his historical thesis is that Christianity absolutely reset the moral imagination of the West, in a radical departure from the classical world where that eventually yielded abolition. Of course, Nietzsche got into this and said, that was the wrong turn. You know, they have the slave morality, but Tom Holland says, if this completely reoriented our moral imagination yet, and this, this, this maps onto the points that you just made yet. So we have this moral imagination. We all know what's right that we have to love each other and be kind to one another and be selfless and giving and sacrificial that has enlivened our view of the good. But where does that good map on to science? And this gets into the Wilfred Sellers dichotomy of the manifest image and the scientific image, because you've got all of this knowledge down here in the scientific image, but you have no art. Yes. What's ought to be the speed of light. Those, those are living in two different, you know, two different realms. And so now we're, we're sort of to the point of, well, you've got this postmodern rise that wants to discredit in a lot of ways, the fruits of modernity. And so then you have IDW characters that are like, Hey, wait a minute. We can't throw this stuff out. The entire thing goes and now I'm just going to go. But at the same time, the fundamental week, we've, you know, very few people realize that the fundamental moral imaginary of the West is simply inherited by Christianity. And so if you deracinate it and take out its roots, you know, people like Tom Holland are like, you know, you know, basically, you know, left church when he was six years old, because they didn't believe in dinosaurs says, wait a minute, we're in big trouble because all this mythos. Yep. We've been debunked, debunking this mythos for 500 years, not recognizing that, you know, it's sort of like an ecological, you know, we've been dumping in the river, not realizing that, Hey, wait a minute, that's our water source. That's going to be, that's going to come back and bite us. We ought not to do that. And so, you know, when I look at John's project, I very much see John's project in that light that he recognizes that, Hey, wait a minute. And we don't want to give up on science by any means or technology. Clearly it's been fruitful, but we have this deep skepticism about, well, where do our, what exactly even our values besides things we measure down below. So beautiful. So, and this is why, you know, my own journey, I think parallels John so closely. You know, we talked about justification systems. In fact, the second key idea on the Utah tree of life back there is justification systems theory. Okay. Which is the idea. And it was my first key idea back in 1996 that ultimately leads to the whole architecture. And it's this idea I was learning. I was looking for an overarching idea of like organization of human psychology. And I dropped into evolutionary psychology and I'm a scientist. So I'm like, Oh, I want to be natural. Oh, that's good. And then it's like, well, actually it's kind of broken. And in part, I realized it as I discovered this idea. Okay. And the idea is this. So we're syncing up as primates. Okay. And we're getting this good capacity for intersubjective coordination better than the other great apes. We're maybe doing chanting, maybe having broken symbols of communication like there antelope. Okay. But the argument is maybe 200,000 years ago, whenever the timeline will be, you know, archaeology and everything, but clearly there's a very clear thing that happens between 200 and certainly by 50,000 years, this thing's taken off. And what is it? So the, from justification system theory, it's this idea that what happened was we shifted from the symbols to a symbolic syntactical propositional structure. Okay. Symbolic syntactical propositional structure. So you say the, there are the antelope. Okay. Now notice that in language, the proposition is the fundamental unit of meaning. All right. And by meaning, we can now say that actually it takes up truth claims. It's a truth claim. Okay. It takes up some sort of factual space or potentially factual space. Okay. Which then actually gives rise to the potential of counterfactuals. All right. Now counterfactuals actually can be accessed with easy cognitive gadgets called questions like how, what, when, why. Okay. And what they do is they then open up the possibility that maybe this factual that you and I are tending to, we should, it's different. It's not right on the analytic correspondence side. No, they're not over there. There are no antelope over there. Okay. Or in terms of our investment and our values. Yeah. But the rabbit's over there. Okay. And I hunt rabbits better and we're going to catch more rabbits and we'll go over there. So now it takes up both factual space and it has shared value elements. Okay. And this thing now becomes this issue of justification. And the argument is, is that these justifications then create problems of accuracy or analytics, which are sort of like their truth claim value. And they also create problems for social value, like groups, like, Hey, what should the group decide to be collectively justified for the interests of the group and personal value, which is like, do I want to be focused on this? And do I want to share with you what I'm really thinking? Because with language, now you have direct access to my propositional knowing system. You can ask me questions. And unlike my old subjective experience of being, which you never have direct access to, you actually have direct access to my propositional mind. Okay. So now I got the problem of actually you have asked, why Greg, do you think we should go hunt antelope over there? All right. And I use the example, it's a masculine example, but whatever. So if you are the alpha male and you go off hunting and you're pair bonded with somebody and I spend it time with her and you come back and say, why Greg, are you spending time with her? Okay. And I say, well, she's teaching me to plant seeds. Okay. Or I say, well, I hope to separate the two of you and take her as my mate. Okay. So now you get into this whole issue of like, what is the justification for my action and what do I want to tell myself? And what do I want to tell you? Right. Okay. And that's one of my clinical psychologists. I see this all the time individually, but I also see this then socially. So the bottom line is why I bring this up now is I got sucked into this place where this issue of fact value in science, okay, merge is very similar to John and his recursive relevance realization. So when do recursive relevance realization, you'll see here I'm talking like, yeah, is odd actually starts to get really weird because you you see things and then you realize things and then you invest in, you know, transjectively. And it's like, actually, that's all entangled in his theory. It's actually entangled in my theory too, because that's the problem. Actually, one of the reasons psychology goes to hell in its conception is because you actually have these fact value science stuff is all tangled in the field is in the field is a very, very, is very confused by this problem because didn't have quite the right architecture. So anyway, the point of it is, is that part of what the solution is going to be is a scientific system that actually helps us understand the evolution of animal into human into moral values from a historical structural description. And then it's going to network together into an explanation that then it's going to get tangled up with our morality. And when we get clear about all of those dynamics will be in a much better place to sort this thing out. But historically, they weren't at all. And they separated the two very, very strongly, which made some sense, but they overshot it. And we have to figure out actually the way to bring that dialectic back with clarity. But when I look at the scientific method, then I'm not a scientist. So correct me if I'm wrong. When I look at the scientific method, I see the the very reasonable attempt to reduce variables into the reduction of variables means that we are looking for small causative relationships that are at least reliable and durable to, to depend on. They don't have to be a hundred percent because very little we have as a hundred percent. And so we're looking, we're trying to eliminate all of these variables. When it, when it comes down to values, not just values, but just about every other aspect of us as human beings. The reduction of variables makes a world of sense in terms of trying to, again, get down to things that we sense are durable. We can say yes and no. Taking, taking Tylenol will help my headache. Yes. Taking Tylenol will cure my cancer. No, I might not feel my cancer pain as much, but so then we asked, well, does taking Tylenol help cancer? And, and so part of what I see, the difficulty of even the scientific method is it relies upon the reduction of variables. And so then, and I think actually this is a function of consciousness because as I say often consciousness is monofocal. That is one of our real limitations and powers. Focus. But then when you have two things, it's sort of, then you have a binary, then you have yes, no. And when you have three things, now suddenly things get complicated because you can have two and one. And so three is sort of the limit. After three, everything's just many, you know? And so part of what, part of the difficulty I see, even in that little story that you told, and you know, a lot of, I listened to Jonathan Height and some of these people. So why should we go hunting for those antelope? Do I really know? You know, now I can, obviously there's, there's a whole bunch of very reasonable things such as, I'm hungry. I want to get food for the tribe, but you, you, you, I don't think you very quickly get an enormous range of reasons. And you know, like with a bunch of the split brain stuff, when it comes to psychology, we always want to say, well, the reason for this is, and, well, that's probably a reason for that. But when you, I, you know, the, this is, you know, this is, this is, this is, this is the nightmare of skepticism. And I think it's deeply related to John's meaning crisis. The reason I feel, I think, is that, you know, I think that the reason I feel may or may not have a lot to do with, well, and then the question is, well, how would I know the real reason or even a usable short list of real reasons? I remember looking at a, I remember looking at a video of comparing, they were doing chimp, chimp exercises and, and, and young children where there's a little candy tree and the experimenter would tap a bunch of things. Most of the things had nothing to do with, let's say the relevance realization of moving the slide and getting the treat. And, you know, the, the chimps very quickly realized all the tapping, you know, they got the treat. The kids would religiously tap, tap, tap, tap, tap. And again, that looks, we, we would tend to look at that and say, well, that monkey is clearly more reasonable than the child. But part of human beings is not only relevance realization, but it seems to be our awareness that our relevance realization is inadequate. So we ironically ape. Beautiful. Experiment early. Yep. Exactly. Because we don't know. And, and of course we look at them, the tapping and say, well, that to me looks like that to me looks like religious liturgy. So, you know, beautiful. So it's, you know, this it's very, it's, it's very interesting to me to look at what sits at the basis of science, which is the absolutely necessary and tremendously powerful relevance realization effort of reducing variables. When built into us seems to be, I think, biologically, the suspicion that we're not smart enough to know them all. I don't know if this makes any sense or helpful. Well, I mean, you know, this is my, this is what I do. So there'd be, there's beautifully articulated and helpful and certainly many, there's all these confusions about science, just like the church, right? So for example, like science, the first thing I'm going to do when we talk about what our reference is with science is to differentiate scientific epistemology from scientific ontology. Okay. So scientific epistemology is the process by which we engage in scientific analysis and critical thought. All right. And one of the things that science does then is it shifts the focus of, of, of its source into what's called third person empiricism. Okay. So it basically says, get outside of your subjective experience and get into a position where an observer could be substituted. So we get basically intersubjective objective observational capacity, which then also then gets measured in quantification and then systematic analysis of variables in relationship to quantification. Okay. And then the processes by which you align those variables to say there's a identifiable, reliable, valid relationship between them. And then we compare that to other explanations and then arrive at the best network of explanations to deduce and justify our conclusion. Okay. So that's all epistemology, but it doesn't say anything about the nature of reality at any level, which is then ontology. Okay. Now science comes with naturalistic assumptions at some level, which creates some sort of, uh, assertation that at some level of cause effect, one, it will be cause effect, one worldism. Okay. And more basic causes will somehow affect higher order causes. Well, though there's a huge amount of debate about that. All right. But science you offered what I would say, one of the great errors of science is a physicalist reductionism ontology, which is just wrong. It's just completely, I would argue it's completely wrong. A raw, greedy physical reductionism. Okay. Uh, so that's then, then that's one of the errors of the enlightenment is like, Oh, we can reduce all this to billiard ball matter. I'm just a bunch of atoms jiggling like billiard balls inside of me in this entire conversation. If I knew all the variables upon that, we could then turn these into, I'm a billiard ball machine. I've heard people say after, you know, uh, class and neuroscience, Oh, it's just a bunch of chemicals. That's what I am. It's like, not at all. A hundred percent. Not at all. That's wrong across multiple levels. So to me, what we need to do is we need to update science ontology. So we don't make the error that it's like, Oh, science says that you're actually, I mean, might as well just say this entire conversation is well, it's a product of quantum field fluctuations. That's one. Does that mean any, so was your conversation with John. And so every other conversation you've ever had. So actually all the relevant properties of everyone that we actually discriminated on, they're all just quantum field fluctuations. So actually it's meaningless to say it's quantum field fluctuations. That's not what made your conversation beautiful and brilliant and have a wonderful dance. So we know that. Uh, and so don't, you know, the issue that people try to make that reduction ontologically is just an error and we ought to correct that. The, I love, I love how you put, you know, the third person empiricism is something what I often call it sort of a monarchical vision and the, I think what you talked about in terms of the, the naturalistic assumption, I often talk about that as sort of the lab leak because here's this tool that was really helpful in helping Galileo figure out, you know, dropping billiard balls. Well, let's apply this to everything. It's like, everything is really big. Um, right. And he didn't, and the ordered Newton think you could, Newton's unbelievably religious in relation and basically said, no, stop it at life and certainly at soul. That doesn't mean anything in relation, you know, and then other people are like, well, but the dual world stuff doesn't really work. So all we're left with is physical causation, ergo, everything reduced to physical causation, and then you just get a nightmare. What's, what, what's interesting to me about, um, you know, so then you have this, then, okay, that, that about, where was I going with this? So, so Newton was talking, you know, so let me get back to where I was. So you have this monarchical vision and that's the way that we can see the world. And, you know, we've added now a couple of centuries of nuance into this, the pragmatist brought in statistics, which was enormously helpful. Um, and so then when we, let's say we roll out a vaccine, we can say this vaccine is going to be safe and effective for, and then we're going to put a statistical number on it because the amount of complexity in a human body with respect to immune systems, viruses, you know, and at the end of modernity though, what we're, what we're sort of again, bumping into is once again, the reintegration of the subject into it. And to me, and of course we're running this massive social experiment right now as a world to me, I don't care if Pfizer is 99.99999, you know, if it doesn't work for grandma, totally done. Right. And, and so, um, no, that's a hundred percent. In fact, we should think about this, you know, I'll play off your God one, God two, and we should have science one epistemology, which is the methods by which we would then know stuff versus scientific ontology. And people get this confused all the time. When we introduce the COVID vaccine, we have some scientific ontological notions about what may or may not happen, but we have, there's so much variation, we've got to drop it in and see. Okay. And then we'll get some ratio and there's no assertion that it's not going to be your grandma that's in the, oh, sorry about that, but that's error. And overall, this is good for all of us. And you're like, but I'm error. There's no such thing as all of us when it comes to me. Yeah. It's, it's, are my life's one of N and N of one. And it's like, if I'm on the backside, how do you, you know, you screwed me over with this whole thing and it wouldn't matter if 90, well, 90% of people have trouble, the whole thing goes, but you know, if you're in the bad category, then it's, you're in the bad category, not your reality. So this, and this issue is, yes, you have policy makers that are operating sociologically, which you do want to make those kinds of issues up, but it psychologically in your life issues are like totally different level of analysis. And it's not, they are not a statistic when you're just your yourself, you're an N of one and it's either in or out. And that's a totally different kind of dynamic. So totally. I remember where I was going to go with, with now, no, no, sorry. I forgot. I had forgotten. I mean, because when I got into my God, number one and God, number two, one of the things that I realized was when Newton, when Newton was developing his mechanics in terms of a God, number one space for him, he was doing theology because what's interesting about me, there's lots of questions about why did the kinds of science we tend to relate as science today, why did, why did this develop in Christendom as it did? Yeah, that's a fascinating question. And I think part of it is because of the, the, the seeming relational stability of this God was leveraged to say that balls will fall from a, an Italian tower at the same rate anywhere within this God's kingdom. Now, of course, Galileo is, is really critical in, in basically destroying the discarded image, as CS Lewis calls it, because once, once they begin to demonstrate that physics above the moon works in the same way as physics below the moon. And of course, people today will say, why is the moon so important? Well, in the discarded image, the moon was the boundary between the realms. So, you know, so that's sort of where God number one comes in because this, when, you know, for example, even in popular folk religion out in the world, people will say, God made me. Okay. I thought it was your mom and your dad. No, God made me this way. I thought it was genetic inheritance of how many successful pairs on back through history. When they say God made me this way, they're talking God number one, beautiful, but leveraging in God number two, because what they're saying is they're both saying, well, this is, this is all of, this is all of human history and, you know, quantum fluctuation and biochemistry and evolution, all of those things. But then they're appropriating a divine choice instrumentation and authority that boils down to whatever aspect they're talking about, whether it be gender, gender oriented, you know, sexual orientation or eye color or skin color or what have you, whatever we're fighting about. So, you know, that to me is where this, this God number one and God number two is just all over the place with us except in certain conversations, because of the enlightenment, we sort of drew this line. Totally. And, and, you know, both sides are playing on these fields because again, the facts and the values, you're not, you're not really going to pull them apart, right? Because all of our facts are the products of, and I think this is one of the real things that Jordan Peterson sort of opened my eyes to, all of these facts are the products of all of these human values, even within a short 10,000 year window. Totally. I mean, they call them the evolution of justification systems. Talk a little bit more about your justification systems. Okay. So, yeah, I just gave the description, this thing of propositions, okay. And then it creates an on the ground adaptive problem of justification for living embodied organisms, animals, primates that we are. Okay. So we're primates syncing up together, doing our hunter gatherer thing. And now we created these propositions, which afford us all sorts of wonderful abilities to coordinate, okay. And make claims in a totally different light, but they come with a tremendous problem. It's like this problem of justification, like which propositions do we invest in and are influenced by? Okay. So then this creates the problem of accuracy, the problem of social, shared value, and the problem of personal value. Okay. So that's, and this is to set, basically, really take off say a hundred thousand years ago. All right. And then what happens is, is that in the question answer dialogue between tribal groups, people find their way to normative structures of understanding that create a context of justification, which are basically the shared belief values or capital C cultural structures that then the group finds to be sense-making at the proper shared propositional level. Oh, this is what's happening. These are, this is what the gods want. This is what the animated spirits are for. And this is if we behave this way, good things happen. If we behave bad, this will happen. The fates out there, we animate them, and then we create a particular kind of way of relating to them. And then we can all harmonize our structure together. And then there's more and more evolution. You get more and more difficulty because you actually have this one special, one goddamn question in particular. One question in particular, why? Okay. Why? Why? It's an unbelievably complicated question, okay, of causes and reasons all tangled up together. So now we have this cognitive gadget. And if they've been around three-year-olds or four-year-olds who are precocious, you know, why dad, you know, why don't we eat cookies before? Why are you balding? Why is the sky blue? It's like, just that's the way it is eventually, you say, kid, you know, that's why, or you say that's because of the gods, right? And this is, and so you then have to develop a sort of a container that frames the system or else you'll be chaotic, fragmented pluralism like a current structure. All right. So then you get the evolution of culture, capital C culture, and you get more and more investment in both that affords you understanding technologies. I think it basically creates a collective intelligence that allows the system to evolve into more and more adaptability. And ultimately we get civilization, you know, there's a lot of debate now about like exactly how far back we go, but say 10,000 years, at least, and maybe 30, who knows. But then you get more and more structures. And then I would argue that actually you go from oral indigenous tribal systems of justification into then civilized systems of justification. There's a fundamental transition. It came at the current, I'm saying I'm hedging because there's some new work coming out in the dawn of everything and a few other books that are like, but if we just go with a sort of standard, we see sort of, we see the evolution of civilization, certainly sort of the Bronze Age civilization, say 5,000 years ago. Okay. So with the Bronze Age civilizations, you now have massive cities. Cities are no longer mediated, moderated by oral traditions. They have to be fundamentally organized by a higher order set of refined traditional claims. You basically get then the religious God nation states, okay, that then basically then afford the city. So you don't negotiate this, you get socialized into a macro level system that then is contained by the refined and established hierarchical authority that regulates things like the control of production, these King, Pharaoh gods that then afford that. And then they interface with the modes of production, the industries of say military control and regulation of commerce and everything else. And then you see that the Bronze Age, you get these different civilizations that are mostly mono organizational at the institutional, industrial, justificatory structure. But then you're going to, then that collapses in 12, whatever. And then there's a horrible, horrible period. Then you get the reestablishment during the Axial Age, where we then see the emergence of what we then can now identify as the great wisdom traditions. And then civilization gets more and more diverse in terms of you get a breakdown in sort of things like commerce and markets versus religion. And then law and modernity does this again, but it splits these, what my friend Robert Ryan calls magistrates. I think that's the right word anyway, but that's the constellation of justifications and societal institutions that then legitimize and then have the power authority, money, military to enact those controls. And then you, so then you get the emergence of the traditional formal period of say over the last 5,000 years, Bronze Age first, then Axial Age. Then 500 years ago, we get modernity and it's, you get the Renaissance into enlightenment, the emergence of the enlightenment philosophy, enlightenment science, democratic liberal ideals, capitalism, et cetera. You get that explosion. It overthrows a lot of the traditional ideals. And then over the last 50 years, we get the postmodern critique. So it's actually interestingly algorithmic or logarithmic. 50,000, in fact, you can go back to 500,000 when we're basically just doing the dance symbolically, but without propositions. And then you get 50,000 and then you get 5,000 and you get 500 and you get 50. Yeah, it's true. And some people think about 5 years, we're going to pop into something else. Well, at what point do we, are we, do we go so fast? I mean, that's sort of where we're at. Change is happening so fast that you wonder if the, the old, you know, system, it's sort of like taking, let's say you have a, a rail line and you put faster and faster locomotives on your rail, but all of your curves and your grades have been designed for, now you're, you've got twice the horsepower. They say, Oh, we can do 200 on this. And an engineer will say, you're not going to do that curve at 200 miles an hour. It's going to go blink. So right. So then the question, and I'm the, my hopeful side basically says this digital virtual will somehow forward an opportunity of a metaverse to use our, I used to use that term now Facebook Facebook. I mean, I had a medical metaverse, the word. Yeah. So there it is. But ultimately the digital virtual metaverse, and then the question is to me, whether or not we actually have the intellectual philosophical, scientific, humanistic, theological containers that afford us understanding that enable wisdom, or if we have a chaotic fragmented pluralism, we'll go right off the rails. That's basically the structure of my, of my analysis and the hope and the beauty of all of these conversations, in my opinion, are the seeding of the necessary ontological, epistemological, axiological value structures that maybe we get together dialogue about, like, Oh my God, if we treat this the right way, we have an enormous amount of wisdom and we could actually build the right kind of digital metaverse around this and stop having all these positional, justificatory battles and actually live in an integrated pluralism where I, as an old school, new atheist come to you as a Christian minister, you help me find God. I see it now, you know, in a kind of particular way. And that, and that to me is like, there's a beauty and a hope in there that I certainly have. So that's what, that's one frame on it. That's very interesting. Wisdom is of course, a word that is, you know, getting a lot of play across a certain, I mean, especially in this corner of the internet and a little wider in the Jordan Peterson verse. And, and wisdom to me is a word that gets, that is interesting when it comes to, to things like scale because let's say to, I grew up, I grew up in Patterson, New Jersey and the Passaic river snakes through it in order to win the world wars in the beginning of the first half of the 20th century. New Jersey, if you look at superfund sites in the United States, New Jersey is like the king of superfund sites. Part of that is because a lot of the industrial capacity that the United States revved up to, to beat the Nazis and the Japanese in the second world war came at the expense of the easiest way to get rid of certain chemicals was simply pour them in the Passaic river. And, and so you have this, this really quite a beautiful, beautiful river in Northern New Jersey that, you know, don't eat the fish. In fact, when I was a kid, I made a comment on Twitter and somebody took offense at it because when I went to, was a kid, we'd go to the great falls and because there's a significant waterfalls right there in Passaic, but when you'd come home from the Passaic falls, it'd be like, why do I smell so dirty? Cause all that mist just covered my body. So, so we get into this question of wisdom and, and, and, you know, when I was talking to John too, I was talking lately about there's sort of the, with, with, let's say a classical, with a classical religious structure, you are living within, let's say an entire cosmos and you have access to the stars that you navigate by the word of God that comes down to you. You have all of these things and this wisdom then in some ways, you know, scales. And so if you have one way to understand, let's say a book like the Bible is that you've got all of this scaling of wisdom. Now, obviously if you're a theologian or a biblical scholar, you begin to see that, Oh, this is, there's, there's a lot going on here, but if you're a pastor, you're sort of a, a popularizer, sort of like, let's say a clinical therapist who on one hand has done all of this education. On the other hand, you're sitting with a, a, a, a client who is in pain, who is in theological terms, Shalom has been broken. Their life is, their life is a bundle of pain. Their relationships are a mess. They're the product, let's say of a dysfunctional family. The patterns that have been produced by that family are now inherent in this person, which have played out in their relationships, yada, yada, yada, yada. And so what you want to do is bring wisdom. And of course that wisdom has to, has to be scaled appropriately so that, you know, whatever degree of agency that person has, it sort of pick up on it and begin to build, you know, as John would say, reciprocal broadening. So, you know, the therapist gives the person, well, why don't you try this in your conversation with your daughter, instead of saying this, like you usually say, why don't you say this a week? They come back and say, I said that. And you know, we still, we still had kind of a fight, but it wasn't as bad as the fight of the week before. Oh, good. We put a basement on it. We let her in the basement. That's right. So now, so now we've got a new tool where you can talk to your daughter and maybe you'll still have fights with her, but the fights won't be so bad. And then, you know, we're going to sort of build up from there. I mean, that's wisdom. And part of it seems to me that the continual human struggle that we deal with is always this, the scaling of this wisdom. Totally love that. And, and how far can we, can we push these things? I mean, dumping dioxins in the Passaic river during the second world war was really helpful in terms of beating the Nazis and the Imperial Japanese army. Wasn't so good for the fish and the little boy who grew up in Patterson, New Jersey, who saw these beautiful falls and nobody could ever bathe in that river. Totally. So, you know, part of it seems where, you know, we're really struggling for is, you know, so you've got religious systems that tend to have traditionally scale. And some of these, you know, some of the fiercest debates and religions, like in my church right now, over say same sex marriage is same sex marriage, a good thing. You know, and so right now, a lot of people would say, well, here's, well, obviously we know that some people are same sex attracted. We know that marriage is, is generally better than let's say, serial monogamy and, and often better than just promiscuity. And so why not adapt a traditional institution for men and women adapted for a same sex couple to sort of fix. And then, but then you're going to have, you know, more complexity questions like, well, is, will that work the same for lesbians as it will work for gay men? No. Well, and then, you know, and, and, but as you said, with the speed, you know, part of what we're dealing, I deal with in a church conversation is a lot of the people who are now in their sixties and seventies and eighties who are saying, oh, this adaptation makes sense because all that we really need to do is make this adaptation for gay couples. And the whole system will just sort of normalize and being a younger person, live in, in a little more dynamic area of the country. It's like, no, you don't understand. There are a lot more conversations coming down the road here, such as man born in a woman's body, such as gender fluidity, you know, the, the, the question of monogamy is itself in many ways up for grabs, whether given birth control, life expectancy, yada, yada, yada, you know, whether, whether that institution is, continues to be viable. And I mean, again, this, this is where we get into not only scale, but also, also plurality because as someone like a minister or a therapist, but especially a minister, whereas a therapist is sitting across from one person and the goal of that therapist is saying, let's see if we can afford wisdom and engender salam in just your life. Right. The minister is sitting in a community and saying, I can really see how for these two gay people, monogamy could nicely fix and settle them. And maybe they'll adopt some kids and that that could really sort of leverage this heterosexual institution and, and afford them some affordance. But what about the buy? What about the fluid? And more importantly, what about all of the relations between these two to a thousand people that I have in my community, especially how this connects us to now, a book that we have been revering for thousands of years that has been a guide both for wisdom in the heavenlies, but also wisdom on the ground. And so, you know, for me as a pastor, we're sort of in a nexus of, and so it's very easy to just sort of, okay, well, I'm going to, I'm going to put up big walls and I'm going to say, you're a scientist. I'm not going to listen to you. You're an atheist. I'm not going to listen to you. But is that we see communities doing that. So then we can take a step back again later and say, okay, these communities have very high rigid walls. How are they doing? What are the metrics? Well, sort of dead reckoning metrics. Are they doing well? But then those dead reckoning metrics have questions about time. They might be doing really well right now, but a hundred years from now, are they going to fall off the map? So, I mean, this is, I think part of where a lot of pastors like me on one hand, look at science and say, yeah, we could really use some allies because well, you know, I got that polio vaccine and we don't see polio around, but at the same time, the level of complexity and the kinds of things that we're facing with the kinds of acceleration that you really nicely just laid out. Yeah. We're, we're this train is a rock and baby. I just brilliantly stated, no, a hundred percent agree with that. So, you know, I warn, I love the reference in the, in the connection of the therapist and the, and cause, and I straddle this well. So I'm trained as a theoretical psychologist, you know, at first a behavioral scientist. So, you know, it's like, I'm the science guy and also the atheist guy and arrogance and basically Sam Harris, you know, guy. All right. That's what I was, you know, and it was like, oh, you know, Sam Harris, you know, I'll pray to Sam Harris. Perfect. You know, I was like, you know, no, actually. And so anyway, so, but part of the issue is once I do that, I shifted into the therapy room. I mean, this, but this whole story is that I then, and then the whole question of science within the therapy room is totally different. Okay. You're dealing with N a one. All right. And then you have this whole issue of values, like what is wisdom? And then what is wisdom for my client? And then what is wisdom in relationship to society? Okay. So like Martin Luther King, I mean, he basically said, Hey, you know, you psychologists gave us a great word, maladjusted. Okay. And you have done wonderful things and helping people reverse their maladjusted neuroses. And at the same time, there's some things we should never be maladjusted to. Okay. Or our maladjustment basically is the diagnostic of the maladjusted society. So our distress at racism and oppression, right, is a function of society, not you, not the person. And then, and then the question is, well, right. How, what? Okay. And like today, like we get the priests of stoicism, my mentor, Aaron T Beck just died earlier this week. And stoicism, he picked it basically formalized stoicism into cognitive therapy. Okay. And cognitive therapy is the hyper rational analysis of adaptive thinking that you then embody. And you don't let sort of neurotic stuff that you're not sure of, you know, get you down. Okay. And you, and you reframe it so that it's basically affords you not to drop into a neurotic cycle and to be adaptive and resilient. Okay. And to be regulated. All right. We are now getting a massive movement also to highlight the fact that, Hey man, in, if you're a person of color or in other ways, marginalized, there's a whole systemic racism and you're exposed to microaggressions. Okay. By the very words that people use, like, Oh, it's a melting pot. You know, I think everybody's got equal opportunity. No, that's actually a microaggression that is systematic in relationship to the history of justification that undermines you. And if you thought that maybe it did, it did. Okay. Now that's a completely different prescription. Then stoicism, stoicism would say what's evidence and air on the side of, and in fact, Jonathan height is making this point and basically like, a lot of what we're doing in this social and subjective concern about the individuals, we're creating broad nerves. Everyone now is hunting for their own victimization, which virtually all the wisdom traditions say. So, so my point basically, I teach people Thomas Zahs is famous claim Thomas Zahs, the anti-science critic of psychiatry, and then looked at us as therapists. He's like, you guys are secular priests. So he called us. Okay. And it's totally right. It's like, we're now the bearers of wisdom, but we sanitize it and we individualized it. We weren't trained to place it in context. Okay. So we see the injustice, we, you know, and the worry, and then we're all going to now validate your subjective wanting because we see the person in the therapy room as, but I always ask my students is like, well, we validated everybody's subjective desires in the way we unconditionally positively regard value your client. What do you think we'd have on our hands? An absolute freaking nightmare because everybody that would feel, could you imagine what it would be? Is everybody wanders around with a little therapist that gives them all what they want subjectively to support them and validate their feelings. I was like, imagine a couple, they come in, you're like, you listen, you validate, you say, I can't believe that spouse. And right down the hall, the other spouse is talking to the other person and he gets together as a pastor. I've watched this happen, you know, and then it's like, and then each therapist, Oh God, I had a client. Oh, it's such a nightmare. Her, her spouse and his spouse. And then actually, Oh, wait, I'm the guy I was validating is your evil person on the other side of the equation. And it's like, you multiply that out and you get unbelievable disaster. And we therapists think at the individual level, we don't think at the community level. So I completely empathize with your perspective in that regard and our wisdom capacity to understand community systems. In fact, I originally trained in community psychology, which is enormously critical of the clinical psychology's narrowness and the failure to appreciate the community level of analysis and the nature of what is healthy and wise for a community. So I just basically, it's a long rant to say totally. Well, that's very interesting. That's very interesting. You know, and, and I think, so when I look at say, when Peterson distinguishes in his own little dictionary definition between religion and, and, and let's say ideology and, you know, that's a rather particular redef redefining them and what he does for, for his rhetorical reasons, which I understand it's very effective, I think. But I mean, part of what religious traditions afforded were, you know, mass. I mean, so, so you have all of these problems and it's a nice, it's a nice, I know pastors that get a little reluctant. Initially, they're like, oh, these people are having a marriage crisis. Well, let's send them to the therapist and the therapist will sort it out. And then they come back from the therapist and the therapists are like, oh, for your wellbeing, you know, you should really get rid of the slouch. And the pastor's like, yeah, but there's three little, there's three little kids on this train here that I understand it might be in her best interest right now to get rid of the slouch. I totally get that, but I'm not sure that's good for the three. And I'm not sure, you know, they have all these family systems. And so what we had with religions were at least we had systems that were, they weren't perfect by any means, but they kept the train on the tracks. Totally. And, but then, but then what you had, of course, you'd have, we've been scaling out for a long time. Let's say you had the tribe and then they had the clan. And then you had, you know, you look at kingdoms, you know, go back to the, you know, the iron age, early Brown age, you've got kingdoms, and then you have empires and empires are accumulations of kingdoms. And, you know, like you said, in your narrative nicely, I think, you know, we've been, we've been scaling up since then. And, you know, 1493, we had the Colombian exchange, suddenly the entire planet begins to form a network. You have trade networks, you have thought networks. And, and so then we're, I think in some ways we, you know, in this little corner of the internet, what we're, what we're grasping for and trying to practice towards is, okay, how can we, how can these, how can these networks interact in a productive way? Right. We've got a, so we've got a pastor and we've got, you know, a therapist and a psychologist, and these worlds have to intersect because, and in fact, they have been, they have been interacting in the wild all along, but we want to get to a place where we can begin to say, and I think we've made progress in the last 20 years, you should talk to your pastor about that. Cause I'm now having people in the church say, I was talking to my therapist and my therapist said, I should have a conversation with you. Good. I'm glad to hear that. Yeah, totally. So, but, but again, the speed question, I think is, if you look at someone like Brett Weinstein and his anxiety, I very much understand his anxiety about the speed question. And I think we've been, especially since the, the development of atomic weapons, that's raised the anxiety because we begin to realize, oh, yeah, we can nuke each other. And I think now since the last 60 years, since the development of atomic weapons, we've also become recognized that, okay, we can actively kill each other, but we've got anxiety as to whether or not the systems that we are relying upon are in fact going to be able to continue to scale. And if the accumulation of all of those systems won't collapse completely. And that then see, so when I listen to, so then I do a little relevance realization listening to John and some of the non-theist conversation, I say, okay, what's the critical piece beneath, let's say the God or no God, very low resolution conversation, even if we've got, okay, so our non-theism and our classical theism, they're not that far apart. You've got, you know, the, the neoplatonism and so much of that is already built into Christianity, that we're close enough to be conversant and in fact live fairly well together. The thing that I, the thing that the piece that I see as maybe the defining difference, and I love how you phrase this with respect to your propositions, is whether or not there is an all, there is a conscious, all powerful, intentional authority that is going to ensure in some way a good outcome. And that seems to me to be the, in some ways, the difference. And then we begin to negotiate about the pragmatic value of that question. Oh, if you have that question, then you're going to be a slouch. Or if you have that, if you don't have that question, you're going to be a neurotic and, you know, be useless to the system because your anxiety takes you away. So to me, and so then you have someone like me as a pastor in a church saying, assuring people, there's a God in heaven above, who even when you slough off this mortal coil as a Christian, it's not just a platonist where you're going to go off and lose your body and be blissful and get to talk to Socrates in some disembodied form. But in a Christian that you'll be reunited with your flesh and you can have the, the, all of the loss that you've endured can someday be restored. And now suddenly we are going to have another interesting conversation about, I don't know, should you be filling people's minds with ideas like that? I mean, that's sort of where I've seen sort of a big taunt between the camps right now. A lot of it, a lot of the celebrity atheists have gone off to fight the woke wars and the Christians have too. So, okay, we're not going to fight with atheists on the internet anymore. We're going to fight with woke and non-woke. But that seems to be sort of where in many ways the difference really lies. I love it. Yeah, I think that's exactly right. That's the crux of the justificatory split that you really are aligned. And here's where I get, so I'm on one side of the camp socialized and now I've come all the way up to the line. Okay. I actually consider, I found this thing called Synth-eism, okay, from a friend of mine, Alexander Bard. And the way he frames it over in Europe and his leadership, I would frame it slightly differently, but I've been really influenced by his leadership on it. And it's essentially can be, for me, I would summarize my American version, so whatever is of Synth-eism, is I now believe in the concept of God. Okay. In fact, I generated a thing called the elephant sun god, which is an iconic representation of that concept that now sits over my garden. Okay. And so, and that's the god of light, okay, an integrated pluralistic, very powerful god of light. I intentionally did it because there's one of the most ancient gods is essentially an elephant sun god from Hinduism, so which is almost in the exact opposite on earth between the West and where I am in East. And so I can see the elephant sun god rising above through Ra and just the icons of all the gods of light, okay, from an integrated pluralism. So the elephant is both the symbol of power, but it's also from the Hindu or Indian tradition of five blind men and the elephant. So we see it from different angles. So, and that then also is sort of Tillich's ultimate concern. I can put myself in using John's language of, well, his builds offer for you other people, but my divine double is then placed in relationship to that. What is the ultimate representation of me being good across scales of wisdom so that I can be a good ancestor in the largest space of time? And that God would then reflect off of my actions. And if I'm in placed in right relationship to that, I feel a sense of transcendent realization and that gets into that. I feel spiritually, sacredly engaged in relationship to that. So for me then, now I'm like as raised as a new atheist where social, oh, God, I'm a myth in the bad Santa Claus sense of the work. I'm now like looking at myself like, oh my God, it's like, you know, not, you know, sort of, but right up against the whole, actually my entire life is starting to become aligned in relationship to the concept. So it's a fascinating, uh, evolution of my own structure. That is fascinating. It's almost like the new atheist said, your gods are made up and you said, watch me. Yeah, that's synthetism. Exactly. It's believing in the concept of God and the God would create and affording that light and then putting yourself in relationship to that and then feeling the sacredness of that alignment. That's fascinating. Now, and now I want to be careful with this question. Now I'm, now I'm going to be John Vervecky, you know, being all concerned about, you know, I don't, I don't want to offend you with my question. It's, is it knowing that you rationally constructed this, does that undermine its potency in terms of you're relating to it? No. And remember every context of justification, everything I'm coming from the idea that the whole concept is foolish. I now believe in how spiritual it is in relation. So, so I'm not coming from the other side, which would be like, if you were to believe that it's ontically real or ontologically real, and then you had to rotate that around and then said, oh, well, actually it's just in my head. That would be a totally different relation. But for me, when I go from, oh, and then I discover, because I'm also, I'm discovering that I'm not just a, I'm not just a, I'm not just a, I'm not because I'm also, I'm discovering the naivete and the arrogance of my own position, okay. My own historical position. And it's enlightening me and humbling me in relation. So as a function of all of that, it carries with it a particular kind of, well, it's a particular kind of sacred relation. It's not the sacred, but it's my identification with it that affords a sacredness, at least in terms of my own fundamental experience of I feel very attached to it or in love with it, or I want to, you know, in that regard. And I heard you and John talking about the God of the arena, which by the way, then this is terms of nature and cosmos and a sense of oneness with the cosmos. That sense of, and then platinus oneness, the Neo-Platonic kind of idea, and then seeing all the great wisdom traditions now affording me a channel, it feels very, very powerful to me. What about the communal aspect of this? I mean, it's on one hand, pragmatically to have a God of that, that you've in some ways, is, boy, this is just fascinating. Because part of, so James Wellman, he's the uncle of a guy that I've had on my channel a number of times, who's a programmer up in Seattle. James Wellman has been right, he's written some books on mega churches. Part of the, I can translate it into vervecchian terms, part of the psychotechnology of mega churches is scale. If you can get true three, four, five thousand people together in a room, and John Hennight recognizes, you get thousands of people together in a room, they're all focusing on one name, they're all focusing on one image, they're singing together, in some traditions they might be chanting together. I mean, part of the limitation of the synthism, I'm going to have to look into this more, seems to be scale because, I mean, obviously a religion that has millions, even billions of people that are, oh, they've all got their questions within it, but there's a degree of alignment through it, potentially could have tremendous impact in terms of a psychotechnology. Whereas, although it sounds like you're sort of appropriating some ancient traditions and bringing them together. James Right, so that's a great question, and I can really just speak for myself. I'm on a pretty unique journey, okay, so like, as I tell all my students, I'm like, be aware if you don't work with me, I'm weird. I'm like way, way out there, okay, in relationship to the ground of psychological science or the academy or other things, okay, so, you know, the journey that I'm on, you know, I got teleported basically into a different conceptual space back in 1996, 1997, really, through the justification portal, and then I built this thing called the Tree of Knowledge, and it was then this Tree of Knowledge that afforded me a way to understand, essentially, objective scientific psychology in relationship to the rest of science, natural science, and separate it from subjective psychology and know how to manage that difference, which nobody really had gotten quite right. And at first, I was thinking gonna be, oh, I'll do psychology, but then the thing backs up, and then it turned into this whole, ultimately, then it comes back into a garden, called the Tree of Knowledge, and then back into the garden, okay, so it's like, I'm like, think of me, like, sort of the whole theistic, atheistic thing now running in reverse. Yes. It's like sucked into the mirror image of that, in my own weird, you know, mythology, as it were, and I was just, I've just been following that, you know, and my wife refers to me as a knowledge archaeologist, because I'm basically, I just go, and I'm just following that. I mean, that's it, and so I'm alone in this, this is definitely, I mean, I'm so thankful to find John, because I see him climbing up a mountain, I mean, climbing this particular terrain, but I mean, I don't work with anybody else, I just build this on my own, because it's just an architecture that my heart, soul, spirit saw, and has been pulled into in a particular way. And, you know, sharing it with other people is very hard, because it's a very, very complex labyrinth of sets of, you know, ideas that blend normal categories in weird ways. Yeah, I can understand that. What does your wife think of this? I mean, mixed, I mean, you know, we've been married since we were high school sweethearts, so she knew me as a normal person. I was a normal person, you know, when we got married, and she stayed a normal person, like most people are. But I got teleported into a different dimension, essentially, and that was, that's been very cool on the one hand, but it's challenging on another. So, you know, where John has his religion, that's not a religion, and, you know, looking for communities of, you know, all the things that John's working on. So where are you in that? I mean, you've got your system. Yeah, is this something that you want to expand? Or is this, I mean, how does that work for you? Yeah, so I mean, you know, I developed, I've been connecting with people a lot, and people have been interested in it, they see the value, I published on it, I built a thing called the, you know, the theory of knowledge society. So it's about 170 people or so on a LISR, basically, I've had a couple of conferences. So people are following this at a particular level, you know, I've got maybe 30 doctoral students who I've graduated. And I now see, you know, there's a whole story here, but basically, I was trying to leverage this inside the academy, the academy just really didn't know what to do with it. I mean, it didn't know what the hell was going on here. And I'm like, Hey, I think I found some answers. I'm like, What the hell? Individually, everyone's like, that's fascinating. Systemically, it's like, what the hell? Okay, because there's no collective, it's just some weirdo going like, I think I got some real answers here. And then what happened is I actually in 2016, it was already weird. And then it launched into the guard, I had to call in, and there's a whole story there, and you get into but, you know, I had this artistic spiritual vision of it becoming a garden in a conference called cultivating the globally sustainable self of a bunch of transformational educators. And basically, they're brilliant people had all sorts of been and then at the end, there was this question about, well, how do we do this? And everybody just stumbled over this question. It's like, it was too macro, too meta, too big, people like, I don't know what the self is, I don't know how we do that, blah, blah, blah. I walked out of there. And I had the system called a two at the time is like, well, plant it to a seed and grow it to a trees. That's how you do this. Okay. And then it was like, oh, my God, I could see an entire garden of knowledge that we could then you could socialize people into and, you know, and weird things like the stone back there is called the stepping stone. Okay, that grounds the garden step stands for standard theory of elementary particle physics. So that's so it's like, oh, yeah, and you could like you could pick up a rock and you learn Newton and you could drop it like a off the gleaning tower of Pisa. And then as you get older and older, it layers come off. And there's like, oh, underneath that rock are things like atoms. And oh, underneath atoms are things like forks. Okay. And you just and that's the layer nature of the system. But I turned my theory into a cartoon garden. Okay, the Academy's like, you know, you don't get peer reviewed on that. You're just sort of like, you know, I mean, you know, who do you send that to? Right? Okay. But, you know, and so essentially, then what happened, and I'm trying to do this and Jordan Peterson comes along. Okay. And I'm like, oh, hey, Jordan Peterson, this is exactly the conversation we should be having. But unfortunately, in the universities, actually, you say that and you're a meter on the left is so much like, well, if you think we should pay attention to him, you're probably evil. Yeah, yeah, yeah. And I'm like, no, we're on the sidelines. We're not we're not taking sides, but we can definitely watch this. And I get that I get that in half the church to now. Yeah, well, it's like, okay, so no, we can watch this from the sidelines, not take sides. But this is a great example for us to come together and make sense. And it's like, no, you're evil. If you pay attention, like, well, no, you're clueless. If we're if I'm evil, if we're gonna play that game, you're gonna play that game, you're a totalitarian problem. And that's the whole reason we need to pay attention. This is like, no, no, and you get and I got blown up, you know, not like seriously, but almost and it was tense. And and then I started looking around and I got sucked into the Peterson phenomenon wake. Okay. I know. And because I did my whole training and backgrounds totally Jordan Peterson, my dad's father's name, Peter. So I was like, I don't really like that. And it's like, and so then yeah, then all of a sudden, I got sucked into the meta modern game be John Verbeke stoia, you know, intellectual dark into deep web conversation. And so now you talk this unified theory of knowledge or theory knowledge society talk society is now one thread in this meta modern conversation. So now and now that I've synced up with John, I mean, John and I systems as far as I can tell john and I system for hand and glove. I mean, I now have found in recursive growth. So I had this big system and I think all neuro cognitive functionalism, okay, is part of the big system. And it's a weak model of the nervous system as an information processing computational control system. Sorry to talk, you know, jargon, but that's what it sits in there. And it's a placeholder. So John's recursive relevance realization drops into that and just gives it a glorious, you know, it's like, boom, and boom, and then ties everything together. And that then fits like a key into the lock of the structure that I built. So now you have and I think this is maybe the first time first time you have two meta theoretical systems in social sciences, actually syncing up with essentially as you can talk to john on his end on my end, pretty much perfect harmony. I mean, these two systems now have synergistically unified themselves. And so he fills a particular system that I was missing, but my system goes around it in a particular way. It's like, Whoa, that's weird. And the people are like, is in the past, you have these meta theorists with their meta theories, and they all compete, and there's no way to adjudicate them, but they all say separate. Well, now you actually have a fundamental deep synergy between two meta theories that are now creating an integrated pluralistic synthesis as it and then can become now other threads can get woven around that. And then you can really start to see an integrated pluralistic meta modern, you know, intelligible structure of that affords then D logos and the cultivation of a new sensibility. What does it look like? If you're right, what happens out there where the guy who drives the shuttle bus at the airport can see? Well, I mean, over a period of time, and I don't know how fast and how long is a great question. How long do we have? How fast can this happen? Okay. But basically, what you have is out there in the everyday lives is that we are raising our citizens and our children in a chaotic, fragmented pluralism. That's true. Okay. Whereby we don't know what love is, and we don't know what wisdom is, and we have all of these knowledge systems, science into physicalism, undermining theism that then gets split. And now we get global exploration into like Taoism, not going to make any sense in Hinduism. And there's just overload. Okay. And there's no structure of understanding that affords coherence propositionally into your body. You and then you're kind of a yeah, you are a primate, you can worry about evolution, but you're a primate and an animal and an organism. And then you live in nature and you're surrounded by technology. If we get this right, we will look back and realize, wow, we got the physical and biological right, but we sacrificed wisdom and undermining cut the wisdom senses. And that left us soulless. Okay. And our spirits are not oriented. If we get this right, then all of a sudden it's the opportunity for coherent integrated pluralism where each individual can find the path to create a vertical and horizontal integration. Okay. Where we actually feel known and valued and with both autonomy and communion and get rid of the game, a competitive stuff that undermines and affords the realization we're surrounded in wealth. If we get along with each other and create a wisdom commons, we can actually have psycho-social theological fulfillment in addition to our physical and biological control. And you can actually be like, oh my God, I'm so thankful to be on the planet at this juncture, as opposed to unbelievably nihilistically confused and be like, maybe I should kill myself. One of the things that I found, this is really interesting. Part of what convinced thousands of people in the Galilee who didn't really understand that Jesus of Nazareth was someone to pay attention to were miracles. Miracles are interesting things because we tend to think of them in a modern conceptualization as violations of physical laws, let's say. Science fiction writers have made the observation, which I think is true, that in some ways technology appears to people as miraculous. I remember talking to a pastor in the Dominican Republic who told me that the first time his mother saw a train, she ran away screaming from it because she thought it was the devil, which is not an unreasonable thing to do. But it's not a bad thing to do. Steam engine is a good thing to imagine to a person who has lived on a small island her entire life. If we were to tell someone that you can travel from New York to San Francisco in about six hours, tell that to a 49er and they'd be like, that's of the devil. Or having a conversation with somebody in the same Zoom room. Absolutely. When we talk about systems, whether they be religious or scientific, for me part of the justification, validation, verification, it always has to be both registers. It has to be true of mind and has to be true of matter. It has to keep both things in sync, which I think is part of, for me, what is compelling about... Now obviously I take... People do all kinds of evidentiary justifications of the resurrection of Jesus Christ, but even just as a... How it functions in the system, the resurrection of Jesus Christ works actually as a pretty good... This is what the culmination of an absolutizing of local truth would produce. And so there are theoretical systems, but obviously as scientists, the validation of the theoretical system is always on the ground. And so it'll be interesting to see what happens when we're talking about the truth. And so it'll be interesting to see with your project and with a lot of John's projects, how these things roll out. And for me, it gets into questions about order and chaos in the universe. Because when Jordan Peterson sort of explodes in the little way he does, it was telling us something about the world, whether people thought he was the devil or an angel. It was telling us something about the world. That Jordan Peterson phenomenon is unbelievably interesting and actually quite large, really, around one person. It's an amazing phenomenon, really. It's very rapid. Rapid and worldwide. I mean, it's so much more than just a little bit of a phenomenon. And so it gets into, for me, questions of... One of the questions that I've had for John all along is usually scale, because a total system should... A theory of everything, let's say, should connect all of the layers. And obviously, all of us walk around with a theory of everything, because I don't think you actually can live in the world. It might be coherent. It might be incoherent. It might be wrong. But we all sort of walk around with a working theory of everything that we use, in fact, to map the world, to frame the world, all of these things. So do you have... You've obviously believed in your theory of everything sufficiently to start to arrange your life around it. Sure. What is your thinking about that? Because again, like I said, we all have a theory of everything, because I don't think a human being can actually live without that. That's basically our operating system. And then the question is, how well does my theory of everything interface with yours? Is it sufficient? We can have a productive conversation, et cetera, et cetera. What's your thinking about that with respect to now what you have developed? Well, that's a great and deep question. It's got many layers to it. So certainly, my life and the theory, as my wife and everyone who knows me well knows, those things are unbelievably intertwined so that the enactment, the embodiment, the extension, if we do some cognition from John's world and my world, frankly, as I see the thing, the world transforms, and then it transforms me, and I'm transformed by it. And then it has grown, and I have been since 1996 on the timeline and say, Greg, before that, and then in 1997, and then boom, and then there's a whole set of transformative timeline events. The scale is really interesting, and I have a sense of that, and we can talk more about that, but I want to also be clear that in some ways, different than some of the other game-B, meta-modern stuff, and maybe similar to John, so I'm an academic, and I'm trained then as a scientist, and I'm very much in that justificatory structure. And what I actually get really focused on is actually an academic problem, and the problem is called the problem of psychology. That's what I call it, and what it is is a pretty simple problem that everyone should know about, and it's the problem that nobody knows what the F psychology is, and that's really interesting because if you know what physics actually is, the science of behavior and matter and energy across scale, and chemistry knows what it is, and biology knows what it is, and neuroscience knows what it is, and by know what it is, it has an ontology. Remember I said ontology and epistemology? It's got a clear ontology that everybody agrees on, and when we point to natural sciences and we say there's the hard sciences, we stop at neuroscience and drop on down because they actually have an ontology. I'm very sensitive to the distinction between ontology and epistemology because actually, you know what science is in psychology? All epistemology. That is what justifies scientific knowledge is the epistemological methods that you apply to then say, oh, I did an analysis. Here's the analysis of my particular thing, and this is why I think it's right, but if you then say, well, what do you actually mean by behavior and mental processes ontologically? Leaning, what's the referent of behavior and mental process? Well, those are unbelievably complicated concepts. It depends on who you ask. If you're a behaviorist, a psychoanalyst, a Rogerian, blah, blah, blah, cognitive scientist, but here's what my school of thought definition of behavior and mental process is, and this is where it exists in the universe of possibility, and you say, okay, but all the other schools of thought say things differently, and it's like, yeah, thankfully, it's a very diverse discipline and we really grow from our strength because we have all these different perspectives, and that's one potential truth, and another is we don't know what we're talking about at all. We're about as clear as our subject matter as a critic might say, you know, theologians are about God. It's like, yeah, we actually don't know what we're talking about at this level from a critic vantage point, and I realized that, and I backed into actually a way to afford a scientific understanding of psychology's ontology so that now I can say, I can solve the problem of psychology, okay, and that's a big deal because that's the enlightenment. When I talked about the enlightenment gap, if we don't know what mind, body, and we don't know what science and social knowledge are, we cannot have a science of psychology. Right, right, right. It's like the epicenter of that, and it's like my system, just at a problem analytic, you know, oh, here it is, okay, solve the problem. So it's not about, I am a therapist and I am deeply concerned about well-being, and I share John's meaning in mental health where I set my soul, in fact, that's actually the whole therapy is like, how do we do this wisely, and then it's like, well, I should because I'm an arrogant, scientist-ic person. I was like, well, science should answer this, and I was like, oh my God, science can't answer this at all, and I was like, well, how might it, and then I figured out, and it's a scientific humanistic philosophy that grows around it, and then it's like, well, I don't know how to scale, but what I can tell you is the enlightenment f-ed this up. The enlightenment screwed us up, and its scientific reductionism screwed us up, and it got ontology and epistemology all confused, and we can actually get it right so we can revitalize the human soul and spirit from a naturalistic angle, and then put it in right relationship with theological considerations. Wow, that's big. Well, even just having someone, you know, I mean, what you talk about, the problem of psychology, I mean, that's, in some ways over the last number of years, it's been increasingly exposed. In some ways, analogous to the way that religions were increasingly exposed by pluralism, and that cultural, I mean, the cultural pluralism began to increasingly suggest to us that we have a psychological pluralism problem, and that all of the, so I made about halfway through the Jordan Peterson Clay Rutledge conversation, and, you know, so here you have two experimental psychologists talking about their tests, and you're making all of these scientific determinations based on, you know, college students and all these little tests you're running on college students because they're right there in the university, they sort of make nice lab rats, but we won't really call them lab rats. Well, they're weird, they're western, educated, industrialized, etc. Yeah, and when you meet a, you know, there's always this grasp for the universal, and that, you know, one of the things I've been thinking about lately, and it's been the categorical, I was, you know, I was listening to Tom Hollins, The Rest is History on Dinosaurs, and whenever we say things like, we came from the Serengeti, I say, no, I came from Patterson. What is this we that is so, that connects me with the Serengeti? And that, well, biologically, well, no, biologically, I'm contained in this skin. No, by a lot, no, you mean, you're abstracting this sack of things up into a relationship with, you know, hominids running around in Africa. And we're just going to wave our hand at that move. And I'm not saying the move is illegitimate, I'm just saying, you know, you need some specification. When I was in calculus in college, they'd say, I show your work. Yeah, beautiful. Right. You're missing a couple of steps here. Right. What do you mean, we know, the dinosaurs are still with us. I haven't seen a T-Rex. No, it's that bird. The bird. The bird is a dinosaur. What's the relationship between the bird and the dinosaur? That's right. And so, wow. Wow. Wow. This has been, you know, I'm, this has been very, very interesting. And I really, oh, I'll just be frank with you that, so I, my, before I went to theological school, you know, I got a degree in history. And so I've always tended to be sort of historically minded that tends to be what I enjoy. The history of discovery, I'll say it that way, is a very interesting thing. Lots of people discover things that, you know, that things that things that change the world and things that don't. And at the time, it's really hard to know which is going to be which. No doubt. And I always, because I love history, I always have a consciousness of that. And, you know, I can apply that within my own religious tradition. A critical mass of first century Jerusalem authorities came to the communal decision, even across culture, war, political, religious lines, that the best path moving forward was to strip, be and crucify Jesus of Nazareth. And that would solve a problem. Right. And of course, 300 years later, the world is a very different place. Slightly different perspective, slightly different perspective on what they did to this man. And so I, you know, I'm, and I always keep that in mind when I talk to people because people will, I'm very high in openness. And so I don't like closing things quickly. I like that's part of the reason I have these conversations because, you know, how, you know, I could be wrong, could be wrong about all ranges of things. In fact, I'm almost certain I'm wrong about all right. We're all right. For one thing, we know we're limited and the universe is unbelievably vast. That's right. And so, oh, this is, this has been very, we're reaching, we're over two hours now. So I think we should land the plane. And I think so. Okay. Yeah, it's, I got a roll too here. So, but this has been, but this has been very interesting. And so let's, let's, I want to think about this a little bit more because I mean, obviously you've got a lot of stuff built into this and I really like some of the ways that you sort of layered things out there. So let's, let's think about, let's think about what we might want to do with another conversation. Sure. I'd really welcome that. No, it's a joy to, joy to hang with you. And I really deep, like I said, I deeply appreciate the connection basically, you know, and in this space. And I think if we can cultivate a sense of, you know, phylia and philosophia and, you know, agape and just in the brother ship of, in fellowship of these moments that, you know, that's what, that's what I feel with John. And I feel, you know, I haven't had as much contact with you, but I feel that through the airwaves and with a lot of people in this time, I think that's a very, it's going to afford us something, hopefully. Well, and part of the way I know that you're sincere is because it takes courage to do what you're doing. I mean, it really does. Oh, yeah. You know, there's a, this is a little, it's been going on for a long time. So yeah, but that courage is not a small thing. No, it's a, there's a whole, you know, obviously, right. We swift into therapeutic dynamics. I can get into my heart and moons and craziness and narcissism and all that dynamic. It's been, it's been a journey. No doubt about that. I believe that. I believe. Well, well, good. Well, this, well, yeah, this has been, this has been very interesting and that's been very interesting. It took some turns. I didn't expect. So I know that the audience will see it because, you know, I know that it's going to be, it's going to be very interesting to see how my channel likes this video, because obviously I've got, it's going to be very interesting to see how much this video, some people are, I mean, I always have this. I mean, when I first started talking to John, a lot of people were, oh, he shouldn't be talking to him. Shouldn't be talking to him. Don't talk to him. Talk to who I want to you cannot subscribe. That's okay. We don't all go on these journeys together. And so, but, and, and now it's interesting because people who three years ago said, don't talk to John Verveke are love John Verveke. And it's like, Oh, I don't know. Maybe I've corrupted them. So I'm, I, I, at sort of the spiritual level, I would definitely say, I don't want to overspeak for John, but John and I are from my vantage point, pretty much two peas in a pod when it comes to the spiritual world. So I haven't found hardly any, you know, my hair, it's breadth of difference ultimately between where he and I land in the territory. So that's, so if they, if folks are wondering about me, you know, obviously there's a lot more to tell and a whole nother set of architectures that I bring to bear, unlike recursive relevance, realization and awakening from the meaning narrative, but it's enormously synergistic and essentially in the exact same value, architect fact value territory of justification or whatever. Interesting. Well, maybe the three of us would do an interesting conversation. That would be fun too. Amen. Well, well, thank you. Thank you so much. Hey, thank you. I'll put this up on my TOK21 channel as well, after you drop it and then we'll circle back around. Send me the link to your, I might be subscribed, but I'm subscribed to like 600 YouTube channels. So it's hard to go. Send me the link to your channel and make sure I have it in the notes. I think I'll, this'll probably come out probably early next week. Wonderful. Hey, I really enjoyed it. All right. Thanks. Rock on. Look forward to seeing you. Take care.