https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=gVt23TSCshE

 How in the world do you have time to keep up with the videos around this little corner? I've spent last week trying to make it work, and even at two times speed, I find I missed two live streams in a video. You cannot keep up with all of the videos. Most of you cannot even keep up with just my videos. Never mind my videos and Verbeke's videos and Peugeot's videos, and this is part of the combinatorial explosiveness of the corner. How do I try to keep up with this, even though I have time for two to four conversations a week? Why aren't there more Rando slots? It's because that's kind of what I have time for. So I can't have that many Rando's conversations. And the number of videos being created has proliferated. I wish I could take credit for my brilliance in designing all of this, but I have no such brilliance, and so I should take no such credit. Part of why some of you watch my channel is because I'm watching other channels, and I take little bits of what they've done, and I say, this is the important part. So now you don't necessarily have to watch that whole Jordan Peterson video. You can just watch my video, because I'm doing the filtering for you. We're outsourcing our relevance realization. That's how humans and community work. Part of the reason I keep very close eye on Grim Grizz's channel and Chad's channel is because I trust their salience filters. And they watch other channels that I don't have time to watch, and they point me to things that I should pay attention to. And so I can't watch everything, but I'm watching the other people what they're watching, and everyone is doing the same thing through me. And it becomes a big chain of dum, dum, dum, distributed cognition, because we're distributing and outsourcing our time. We are actually multiplying the amount of time, because none of us have enough time to watch everything. And so what happens is that there develops a hierarchy, and I can't watch everything, but I can probably get the salient bits by watching these other people. And so that's why I often include other people's videos on my channel, and many of the channels downstream from me, Chad and Grizz, they do that too. Now Karen Wong almost never does that. I keep an eye on Karen's channel, because in terms of who she's finding to think. So I've outsourced an element of my cognition to Karen. But Grizz and Chad, I keep close eye on their channels, because Chad, by virtue of his vocation, Chad and Grizz keep a real good eye on the corner. And so I listen to them, because they keep me up to date. Same thing works in church. Even though my church is very small right now, I listen to my council. Why? Because the people on my council are in relationship in different ways with other people in the church. So I keep an eye on the church through the council. I keep an eye on the corner through the rest of you. And some of you send me links on Twitter. Some of you send me emails. Some of you send me texts. Some of you send me, some of you put it in the comments. I keep an eye on all of those modes of communication, even at the price of watching other people's videos, because I'm using all of you as a filter. OK. A lot of animals in estuary are filter animals. Why? So waves come in, and they bring nutrients in from the ocean. Now, I might be getting some of the biology wrong, so be gentle with me. But those little urchins and those little crabs, something floats along and they take it. Well, we human beings, we're always watching each other. So I see Luke take something, because he's king crab, he says. Oh, Luke got that. I'm going to go look where Luke looked. So then I go look where Luke looked. Oh, Luke found something. So I'm doing distributed cognition through Luke. I'm doing it through Jacob. I'm doing it through Chad. We're doing it through each other. And that's how you keep up with the corner. And over time, generally speaking, not always, important things will sort of rise to the surface. And so the corner itself has a consciousness. And we are participating in that consciousness. It's distributed among us. And it's flowing through videos. And so this is what we're doing. You can't watch everything, just like this is the combinatorial explosiveness problem. You can't pay attention. There's too many things in the world. So the amazing things about human beings is that we network together. But Vervecki's point about, well, the bias and the relevance realization are the same thing. We're all in this hive mind, and we're all paying attention to Jacob launched yet another war about leadership of the corner. And we all pay attention to it. And a whole bunch of people are like, you're going to pay attention to that thing again? It didn't get us anywhere the last two times. We paid attention to it. So then you start paying attention to something else. And then Jordan Hall becomes a Christian. Oh, pay attention to that. And then two or three days later, maybe that loses its salience. And of course, this happened on a larger scale when Jordan Peterson came up. Oh, we paid attention to Jordan Peterson that a bunch of people stopped paying attention, but other people kept paying attention. And so all of that negotiation is always happening between us to try to keep up with the corner by watching everything. Well, if you can do that, God bless you. And then please report back to us what you find. Jacob, you are a key member of this little corner. You are creative in one way or another, and you are creative and you love people. You really do. That's why you can be so caustic sometimes. You really do love people. You really do care. You've got a good heart and a tender heart. And you start new things and they don't all work, but that's the dilemma of innovators. Innovators start 10 things for every one thing that's actually a success. And I can tell all these things to you, just like Jesus told Peter, you'll deny me. None of this is gonna stop you, Jacob, because you are who you are. I praise God for who you are. You're always launching new things and you're doing creative things and you're bringing vitality to the corner. That's exactly what you do. And many more of you do too. And that's the way it goes. That's how we work together and that's what we're doing. And so the corner is richer for Jacob Fedorecchi. The corner is richer for Nathan Orman. The gospel is richer. Now, don't carry this too far. The gospel is richer for Peter and Judas. It's all part of the play. So, you know, even where'd he go? Even our defender of the enlightenment. I don't know, did anybody ban him from the comments? That's why I've only sort of silenced two or three people in six years and I don't block people on Twitter. There are other tools by which I can sort of mute people if they're getting under my skin or if I find myself, you know. I don't wanna wear my buttons on the outside because if you wear your buttons on the outside, the whole world of trolls is gonna press them. So don't do that. Keep your buttons on the inside. And have a little bit of a poker face sometimes. Wear a mask sometimes. It's a very useful thing. But you don't want to, again, this is the fringe argument. You don't want to exile all your enemies. Keep your friends close and your enemies closer. Why would someone say that? Oh, and now I'm not saying that Jacob or Nathan are my enemies. I don't consider them that way. And neither neither Grogan, the guy who's defending the enlightenment, he's probably lost patience with me and wandered off. So this is what we do. And it's a beautiful thing. And I'm loving it. I'm absolutely loving it. I don't mind when people denounce me or call me out or say I'm doing it wrong. It's absolutely fine. It's absolutely fine. And I won't say that it never gets under my skin or I don't get tired of it or anything like that. And every now and then I won't lose my temper and use my status to smack someone down or even mock them or something like this. I will do that sometimes. This is what it means to be a human being and this is the game we're developing.