https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=QP0I91AJN-w

 Second question. Question of the week. That's been the question of the month in some ways. Do you feel you could perform an exorcism? What do you think about demons and demonology? There will certainly be more videos and conversations on this. John Ravachy and I are going to likely have a conversation about Hermes. Father Eric below. Is it a good idea to talk to Hermes? Ravachy seems to think so. Edit. I see you addressed this topic in a video. If you don't have anything to add, feel free to move on. Thank you, Father Eric. A big part of what's happened in this corner is the scrambling of. Facile assumptions in modernity about what we mean by the word spirit. So philosophers have ideas. Ideas. And when some of the ideas get mimetic, they get reliably low resolution. And then they get multiplied throughout the culture to the point that would the ideas basically arrive at something like herd immunity. And this is what happened in the Enlightenment. I've been reading a really good book on the Enlightenment that again. You guys have been getting Randall's conversations because my quota of time that I have to do videos is pretty much full of Randall's conversations lately. So once I get that balance right again, I'll get a chance to do more book things and things like that. Facile assumptions. There you go. So basically downstream from and of course, it doesn't start with Descartes, but. Inherent in sort of a two worlds mythology. And I've I've talked about these zones many times throughout the history of my videos. Plato, in fact, and Socrates very much see the this difference sort of the line of the age of decay is in here where C.S. Lewis says it well. All instantiations of love in this age, in this dispensation. I don't say that as I'm not a dispensationalist is a perfectly good term before dispensation was colonized the term. Dispensation basically means epic age period of time marked with significant boundaries. Every instantiation of love in this in this dispensation will end with death or betrayal. Lewis says that and he's dead on right. But love. Doesn't end and what he's pointed to is something similar to forms. I've run through this. I spent a long time running through this in videos a number of years ago. When my grandmother, I visited my grandmother once when I was in college. I visited my grandmother. I was in college, so 18, 19, 20. She lived across the road from the college in the Holland home. She and my grandfather and I would visit them regularly. And she says to me one day because she's been in her upper 80s and then I'm in my 20s or late teens, early 20s. She says to me, you know, inside, I feel like I felt when I was your age. And when I look in the mirror, I wonder. Where did this old woman come from? And of course, as a someone who was young, I heard that just kind of thought it's interesting and went along with my life. I was distracted and busy and full of all the kinds of things that kept my attention then. Of course, the older I got, the more I realized what she was saying. Oh, that thorn in your paw, T. Grog. Here's the thing about T. Grog. You got to go to Luke's channel when he comes on the stream because like me, he's a troll in the comments, but you get him into a conversation. He's a really sweet guy. I really like T. Grog. And I wouldn't have I wouldn't have liked him if he hadn't come on to the live streams. And that's sort of the power of these live streams in the video. Anyway, I digress. You can use this argument as a dismissive as a as something basically as a dismissal of eternal life. But inside of all of us, we have a sense of eternity. But that is inside of the age of decay. And so one way to think about almost any conversation that we've been having forever is the relationship between those two worlds. And you can you can find it described many different times. One of my favorites is in the Book of Ecclesiastes, depending on, you know, you can play around with just about any verse. But he has placed eternity in our hearts. So it's the reason death fascinates us. Because when you go to the casket of a loved one. And you look at now this embalmed body in the Dominican Republic, they didn't do embalming. They had to get him in the ground in 24 hours. So you do the funeral right away. And I remember one pastor who died, the body was already starting to blow. The body was already starting to bloat. They put an iron, an iron, because there it's not an electric iron. It's a real iron that they put in the fire. Then it's heavy as they put it on. So we would not puff up too much. But when you look in that casket. I looked in the casket at my father. I looked in the casket at my sister. I will likely look in the casket at my mother. My children will look in the casket at me. And now we have all these photographs. And now I have like these these little electric electronic picture things and they cycle through. And I've got I scanned pictures from my father. He loved to take pictures. I scanned older pictures. And so I see my father with myself and my two sisters when we're little. And he's young and vibrant, had full of black hair, wearing a clerical collar. And so we wonder about this. Now, almost forever, one would say, well, the upper is spirit and the lower is matter. The upper is timeless, eternal. The lower is temporal and subject to the age of decay. So on that sense, we have a sense of spirit. But we also have if you just follow the use of the word in our language. That's why I use school spirit, because no one will deny the reality of school spirit. We all we all understand school spirit, at least in the West, if you went to a high school, because that school spirit dominated, it dominated your identity. Maybe you were a jock and you're on top of the pile. Maybe you were a nerd in an outcast and you were over to the side. Maybe you were a nobody and nobody paid attention to you. And the teachers had their favorites and you had this complex spiritual realm in a school. And the building made a difference and the history of the site made a difference. And so you can understand in school spirit, the the the touch point between reality. Like the basically reality is is between heaven and earth. It's between spirit and matter. It's between eternity and now. It's between Kairos and Kronos. You have all of these dualities. So then another big topic that has been a topic for years and Jonathan Peugeot and John Vervecky have talked about this multiple times. It's it's been sort of the topic that they have gone back and forth on is the ontology of spirit. That has been their big conversation back and forth. And and what Jonathan Peugeot succeeded in doing with his channel was imitantized biblical language. Part of there's always this tension between I talked about it on the live stream last week. Anticipated eschatology and realized eschatology. It's back and forth. And we have this in life. Every every expression of telos has this tension because we almost always have a temporal dynamic, a temporal dimension, and we're moving towards something. So let's say let's use Grimm Grizz's channel. What is the telos of Grimm Grizz's channel? Now there's a variety of them. One of them is to break the fourth wall. One of them is to exercise the spirit of set from his dominion that he has held over. Children in the West since the end of the Second World War. And what Grimm Grizz did very well was. The Grimm Grizz is a mimetic genius. He really is. Most geniuses are. Not appreciated because they're a little too far out ahead and they're a little too strange. Preachers are sort of liminal characters because we we we know enough to see something and we're conversant enough. And so we're just always translating. So what I've done often is take Peterson, Peugeot, Verbecky and put it in terms that other people down below can understand. Now Grizz is in that category too, but Grizz doesn't have the status markers of hierarchy like the others have. So maybe a telos that is in Grimm Grizz's channel is for Grimm Grizz to ascend a hierarchy, but it's probably not going to happen. It's just it's who he is. And people like Grizz, the minute he starts heading up a hierarchy, something, whether he does or something around him will pull him down. In all likelihood, not always some pretty amazing people have ascended hierarchies. But hierarchies of now, it might be that 50 years from now, Grimm Grizz will people will watch his channel sort of like people read C.S. Lewis today, The Great Divorce. And you have The Great Divorce. You have all of these references to people that Lewis was sort of talking with. People read The Great Divorce and it's like, I really need a commentary on this to please explain who all these people are, characters are. I understand the archetypes, but I don't know the references. It might be that 50 years from now, Grimm Grizz's channel will be, you know, after Grimm is dead, you know, the whole starving artist thing after Grimm is dead, everyone will be watching his channel and they'll say, yeah, you got to go to Wikipedia to find out who Jordan Peterson is, Papa Peterson, Papa Peterson. So anyway, Grimm Grizz is exercise attempting to exercise set and the children of set from the people that set is possessing. Is set a God? See, this is the memetic genius of Grizz because he takes that little poem, which I don't think was original to him, but is able to use that and put it into the conversation and set colonized us in a way. Now if I were to, if I, if Grimm Grizz were to tell us, I was doing some drugs or I was driving across the Lonesome Prairie in North America and set came in and talked to me. It wouldn't have the same effect as John Vervecky talking to Jordan Peterson about Hermes. What's the difference between set and Hermes? They're both ancient deities. They're both spirits. Grimm Grizz has managed in a very Peugeotian way to show us all that set is real. And you'd say, of course set is real. I'm not talking to a television set, but I'm looking at a monitor right now. I'm looking, I've got the screen on my phone, I've got the screen in front of me, that stream yard is running. Of course set is real. And set has colonized me and set and its branding have taken over parts of me. Okay, has set possessed me. If you look at the Pentecostals, they in the, as Pentecostalism continued to develop, and they really attempted to imitantize the practices of Jesus, including exorcism, they developed more nuance in their language with respect to exorcism. And so when I was in college, dabbling with various charismatic things, I remember a Christian Reformed Church because Christian Reformed Churches were dabbling in various things. And of course the Christian Reformed is a fairly flexible denomination. You've got a fair amount of liberty in it, which is really why the Christian Reformed Church is having this defining conversation. I remember Pentecostals talking about demonic oppression. That's an interesting word. Demonic oppression and the demonic oppression might be alcoholism. It might be an addiction to cigarettes and smoking. It might be pornography. It might be borderline personality disorder. It might be on and on and on and on. And oppression was basically a low grade possession because possession means, well, when Jordan Peterson talked about men living in their mother's basement covered with Cheetos dust playing video games and doing porn all the time, he was basically talking about possession. And that's the reason I call Jordan Peterson the unauthorized exorcist of Mark Nine, because he was exercising the spirit of, now we don't have a nice little historical archetypal name, Grim Grizz might say he was exercising the spirit of set. But of course when Jordan, when Grim Grizz talks about set, he talks about television set and what's down for him from television set and he sees porn and video games as part of the family of set. So Grim Grizz is practicing exorcism on his channel. Jordan Peterson has practiced exorcism on a broad scale by using YouTube, which is a very definite child of set. This is in some ways an image of exorcism. And the Gospel of Mark is, you can find commentary after commentary about this. I'm not making this up. One of the dominant themes in the Gospel of Mark is Jesus' battle with the principalities and powers. Now the Gospel of Mark doesn't use that language. Paul will use that language later. But set is a principality. And Grim Grizz is working on exorcism through it, Jordan Peterson has, I have been. So the truth is we're doing exorcism all the time. The video that didn't get made with my Rando's calendar blowout was a reworking of my second conversation with Jonathan Pujol where we go through angels and demons. Again, Jonathan Pujol was imitantizing this ancient language. When Grim Grizz talks about set, he is imitantizing an Egyptian god. He's doing all this imitantizing because this is the reconstruction and deconstruction we are always doing to make sense in the world and to understand the world. And as we make sense of the world and we understand the world, we participate in the world. So Jordan Peterson and Grim Grizz have been doing exorcisms. Now when I talked to Jonathan Pujol about demons, he as he usually does sort of brings us back to the Middle Ages. Martin Luther is this liminal figure, very interesting figure. I've made the point that some have told me, some have said that the most discussed person in human history in terms of publishing is Jesus Christ. The second most is Martin Luther. Martin Luther was an interesting liminal figure because Martin was basically born on the cusp of the medieval period and the modern period. And so you'll find Martin Luther talking about devils all the time. It's even in his most popular hymn, A Mighty Fortress is Our God. And what Jonathan Pujol does nicely is talk about the devils, the devils that we have inside of us, the demons that we have inside of us. Do you have a smoking addiction? You've got a little demon inside of you. And that demon is a pattern. As in Jonathan Pujol takes the medieval image and then uses a modernistic word called a pattern. Because none of us doubt patterns, because actually a key thing to many of the scientific methods, they're all based on patterns. Because this is part of the reason C.S. Lewis makes the point that all of history is a miracle because it's a one off. Because the whole thing together, the whole show is one pattern. But there are little patterns within the patterns. And what science actually does is recognize patterns, define context and context for patterns and says these patterns are reliable. And to the degree that you can colonize and harness and wield these patterns, you will have power in the world. So it's deeply religious. And so exorcism is basically recognizing patterns within us and interrupting them or dispelling them. In that sense, AA has been a reliable exorcist for the demon oppression of alcoholism. And a whole bunch of people will hear that language and say blatantly obviously. And T. Grogg in the comment section is going to say, there goes VanderKlay talking woo. Yeah. But if you look at Chad the alcoholic and you listen to his language from the big book and alcohol, I mean, if you learn the big book, you will learn a ton of wisdom. But what the what what alcoholics anonymous is, is basically a house of wisdom that has been perpetuating lit wisdom to help people not only. Exercise the demon of alcohol. But also improve their lives in many really important ways. In a very Christian way, because it came out of the Oxford movement. So we're all doing these exorcisms. And we are always at play with demons. Now, again, someone might say, oh, but you're just using that language. I am indeed. I can use other language. Science basically tried to replace the language of demons and say we have a more reliable system. And that's basically what Sam Harris says when he says that, well, religion was ancient archaic technology. Yeah, it was. And that's why I read. CW Weeks has been some of you will recognize this book. Bernie Greisel recognize this book. I saw this book a lot when I was I had to go back and find it. You probably could have found one back there and junks that kept the church. And so I've been dog fooding a little bit. But I've also been borrowing from the Hebrews. We're going to do two questions this week, maybe with this fun little book. And Phlebas told me, said, oh, it's in the Internet archives. You can read it for free. It's like, but I like the hard copy. Because basic to paganism argues Kaufman is patterns that the gods of the world are subject to patterns. And so set is subject to patterns. That's the pagan world. The Hebrew revolution was that God is not subject to patterns. God is free. Someone might say, oh, Calvinism. Yeah, God is sovereign. Set the basis of Calvinism. Calvin doesn't make it up. He finds it in the scriptures. So we're always dealing with this. And in some ways, it depends on the language. Now, I've just immanentized a ton of stuff. But we've been fighting this modernist fundamentalist fight. And the exorcisms of science have been extremely powerful over the last 500 years. Science has been extremely powerful over the last 500 years. Science exercised science. And I'm going to use science. The difficulty is, oh, let's just say Hephaestus. Verbeke makes this point. Hephaestus is the god of technology. And it's a god who limps. I love it when John Verbeke says that. I don't say it as nicely. He's got his patterns and he's got his holy words. He's got his holy words because buzzwords are holy words. He's got his buzzwords down. Buzzwords are holy words because buzzwords are patterned mimetic words. That's why they're holy words. That's why they exercise and they enchant. That's why they're magic words. That's why Grim Grizz talks about defense against the dark arts. Because when Grim Grizz is wrestling with a god set, he's wrestling with a god. He's wrestling with a god. Okay. Basically what modernity does is says, we got this. We got this. We are going to disenchant the world by our exorcisms. And we are going to offer you the life of the age to come here and now. We are going to offer you the life of the age to come here and now. We are going to offer you the life of the age to come here and now. We are going to offer you the life of the age to come here and now. We are going to offer you the life of the age to come here and now. We are going to offer you the life of the age to come here and now. We are going to offer you the life of the age to come here and now. We are going to offer you the life of the age to come here and now. We are going to offer you the life of the age to come here and now. We are going to offer you the life of the age to come here and now. We are going to offer you the life of the age to come here and now. We are going to offer you the life of the age to come here and now. Wow, they're amazing. We can do these things. And now information technology, agency, in agency, out of electricity and tiny little switches, 25 nanometers, 10 nanometers, 8 nanometers, 6 nanometers. We're going to go smaller and smaller. Quantum computing. And as we get into this, we discover... Oh, wait a minute. We thought SET, we thought we would wield SET. And what we discovered was that the demons in us, SET is wielding us. Because what's SET using on the television? He's using us. So who is using you? And that's the moment we're at right now. And this is why talk about spirits is a big deal. Now, Hephaestus didn't actually manage to win because... And you can watch the Matrix. The Matrix deals with all this stuff too. There are certain unruly programs. They call them programs in the Matrix. There are certain unruly spirits that just don't play nice. It's almost like they had... The problem with the kingdom below is that rebels rebel. And so if your kingdom is built on rebellion, you're never going to be able to keep order. And so it's like all the spirits got together and said, OK, they're doing this mass project of exorcism. We might see this as a problem, but actually if we infiltrate, we can take modernity and colonize it. Photography. Photography is this amazing thing. I'm not going to believe it until you show me a picture of it. OK. Well, look at these pictures. They're colonizing you. Various forms of beauty. And so it's almost as if Satan and his kingdom said, modernity? Yeah, we can do that. But there's always a few spirits that are like, yeah, you know, I'm only going to obey my master below when he's really watching me carefully. And so on the fringes, you get these little unruly spirits. And, you know, Roman Catholic exorcists have stayed in business because every now and then something really weird happens. And now, again, all of the modernists think all we have to do is get real evidence for one unruly spirit in our midst. And the whole facade of modernity would go away. You've got all of these people who don't believe in miracles watching Jordan Peterson listening to the story of his wife. It's the point about miracles. The gospel makes it all the time. Miracles. It's only this modern fabrication that leads us to imagine that miracles do what modernists imagine miracles do. They can't because they're outside of modernity. And C.S. Lewis walks through all of this beautifully in his book, Miracles, because he basically he says what modernity is is a belief in the whole show. Now, you can't show the whole show because you're a part of it. But then he walks through the whole show. I've done that in previous videos. So there are certain unruly spirits that just got to keep got to keep doing it. They keep Catholic exorcists and and Pentecostal exorcists and all of these exorcists in business. But it's the minority group. The main group set. Why would set? Why would set bother? You know, exercising some random woman. Some random woman in Indiana. We can have the nation. So then John Verbeke is doing internal family systems. What's internal family systems about? It's it's the recognition of again, why would this arise now? Well, it's because modernity is receding and we've seen the edges of our utopian aspiration. We basically thought. Well, it's a function of rich people are happier than poor people. Yeah, sometimes, often. It's it's you know, it's it's better to have more money than less in a world where money is really handy. Yeah, yeah, generally so. Having infinite amounts of money. Does that solve anything? It solves some things. But then you watch really rich people do really weird things. Just read a biography of Howard Hughes. Amazing story. He could bed scar Starlet's. He flew airplanes. He bought things. He and he dies a decrepit old man with jars of urine around him. Yeah, that's what money will bet you. No, mental health. You think money can. I don't know. There we go. So we've now seen the edges of modernity. And in some ways, the spirits are increasingly being revealed like the spirit of set. And so internal family systems just recognizes that just as. I was listening to Christian Baxter, whitey Chris, whitey. Had a great video this morning. And part of what part of what has been gratifying about this little corner is, you know, Jordan Peterson is building natural large language models of things like Nietzsche and the and the King James Bible and all of this stuff. And you can do that and increasingly we'll be able to do that on our personal computers, our own little personal large language model. I'm waiting for Logos Bible software. It's coming. And I'm hoping that Google will do it to do a large language model within Logos. A.I. is going to be within Logos. And so I can because right now Google is often what I turn to if I'm looking for a particular Bible reference because Google is faster than Logos, even though I use Logos for other things. This little corner is better than A.I. Because. Grim Grizz Chad Kale. Christian Karen. All of the little nodes in this little corner are way smarter. And we're able to we're able to work with each other and we play each other's videos. And oh, which video did they play? Oh, which part of the conversation did they play? And so I'm I am the luckiest of all because my stuff gets used and I get a chance to have my ideas perfected and improved by the rest of you. That's awesome. And anybody can join in. Even T. Grog, who doesn't believe a bit of it, he's having fun with it. I love it. So. Well, how does that deal with demons? Well, we're seeing the edge of this and we're beginning to recognize that. Well, inside of us, we have all of these. I right away, when I started making videos five years ago, started talking about my consciousness, Congress, because I just watched myself. And I watched how Sam Tiedemann colonized a little part of me and Paul Antleitner did and Grim Grizz did and Chad did and Jordan Peterson did and John Raviky did and the Apostle Paul did and C.S. Lewis did and my father did and my mother did and my wife did and my children did and members of my church did inside of me are many. But sanity is the most important thing. But sanity is not only. Having a productive conversation within. But having a productive conversation between. And churches have always been that. And now we're doing it on the Internet. So. What we're discovering is that. These little patterns, these little demons and these little angels are all over the place and they're up here and they're in here and they're all around. And when they get tyrannical, we call it possession. And there have long been unruly demons, unruly patterns. Again, the one of my videos that's most played is when I talk about the Egregores and Chris Pacow really did an excellent job on that. And that has been picked up by multiple channels within the corner again and again and again of. Some of these spirits come up and down and they come back around. Now, I don't know enough Egyptian mythology to understand whether set how strong that meme is or if it's just really clever play on words. It's enough. It's enough to colonize us now. So then John Raviky did a great job. And it's funny because those of us who are talking without much filter on the Internet are displaying to the world the chatter in our consciousness Congress. And so what do you know about John Raviky? Well, he grew up. Why do I always ask people about the homes they grew up in? Because that's when those are the ones that are the most important. Why do I always ask people about the homes they grew up in? Because that's when those are the those are the founding spirits in your consciousness. Congress, Mom and Dad. And said, uncles, the person who raised you, the person who molested you, the person who taught you, the person who gave you religion, the person who gave you a bicycle. I mean, these are deep within us. And you say, well, that's not spiritual. That's psychological. Oh, you think there's a difference? Well, there is. And there isn't. So figuring out where those two things relate is a big part of the whole game. So there have been spirits that have been monkeying with us throughout the ages, and some of them are political and some of them are sociological and some of them are sexual. And some of them are just plain unruly. And they disrupt. You know, it's I've spent a fair amount of time with unmedicated schizophrenics. They're really interesting. We had one that would come to a men's Bible study, and I would just because we're all talking and we're all sort of on the same page. There's a spirit of that Bible study and in comes the schizophrenic. And he talks about Henry Waxman's daughter. Some of you don't know who Henry Waxman is. Some of you do. Henry Waxman's daughter lived down near this guy when he was growing up. Henry Waxman was a politician and his daughter lived near there. And for years, I would hear a lot about Henry Waxman's daughter, obviously, as a young man. Before he came down with schizophrenia, he had a little bit of a relationship with Henry Waxman's daughter, at least a fascination. So I kept hearing about Henry Waxman's daughter. It's just running around in there. It's disordered. And then you look at Jesus and his exorcisms and Jesus exercises some powerful spirits. And then you read the book Dominion. The book Dominion is basically about how Jesus has been colonizing the world by dealing with blood and all of these things that ContraPoints is playing with. So Hermes walks into the corner. Who is Hermes? He's the messenger of the gods. And it's been fascinating listening to the large language model that is this little corner, Process Hermes. So you've got Ron Copperman, who tells his story on Luke's channel, where he talks about the story of the Lord. You've got Ron Copperman, who tells his story on Luke's channel, where he was into drugs and alcohol and all the woo stuff. And then I listened to Navajo, the significant population of Navajo in the Christian-formed church. You read, just read any anthropology, read so many, so many peoples that their religion was fundamentally animism just fall into. Now, on one hand, Vervecky is right. They fall into these axial age religions because they're clearly an upgrade. But part of the reason many people who for whom they are living with a real sense of demons around them come to Christianity because. They're they're saved from the spirits. Now, they might be living in London or they might or New York or San Francisco or Los Angeles. But yeah, they know that demons are real. When I was in the Dominican Republic, we dealt with that stuff all the time. And it's interesting because modernity would like to sort of put it in a little box because that's what modernity does, because that's sort of the the emissary brain practice. But it can't be put in a box because it's part of the it's part of the thing that's bigger than us. So Hermes walks into the corner. I guess we're going to have to deal with Hermes. Will Hermes be a gateway drug for. For John Vervecky and the spiritual journey that he's been on, I think, probably. Which way will it go? I don't know. I thought Sam Tiedemann nailed it on Luke's live stream. I played it in a recent video where he says, well, you know, if if you'll be able to spot the colonization of Hermes, if John Vervecky start some weird sex cult. Probably not going to happen. How will Hermes behave in John's life? I don't know. We'll see. Maybe Hermes doesn't come back. What is Hermes? You know, we've just got a tiny little tidbit of a conversation with respect to this. And the conversation is way more complex because many of us who work in ministry know that. Well, sometimes schizophrenia looks like demon possession. I know lots of people who hear voices. I know lots of very sane people who have heard a voice. I can pull up story after story after story after story of voice hearing. I know a lot of people that they have a little small voice or they have an intuition and that must be the Holy Spirit. Or maybe that's when you back to Peugeot with these little patterns. So don't be hasty. Now, do I have a healthy? Do I have a healthy concern about those? Do I have a healthy concern about those unruly spirits? Yeah. It's so funny because modernist people will sort of laugh at the spirits. But then they're worried about the spirit of climate change or communism. And it's like, oh, OK. You don't really understand what you're talking about. You don't really appreciate the power of set, do you? Even though everybody on TV is wringing their hands either about Tucker Carlson or John Stewart. Oh, no, you do have a healthy understanding of the power of set. Jim Jones was a Christian preacher. Was Jim Jones possessed by a spirit? Yeah, he was oppressed by a lot of ones, too. Did a whole lot of people die because of his spiritual possession? Yes. Was it exercised? No. But things run their course. And those who got close enough to Jim Jones could begin to have a little bit of exorcism in them. You might not recognize it as set, but I want to read you something. A few months before I was born, my dad met a stranger who was new to our small Tennessee town. From the beginning, dad was fascinated with his enchanting newcomer and soon invited him to live with our family. The stranger was quickly accepted and was around to welcome me into the world a few months later. As I grew up, I never questioned his place in our family. Mom taught me to love the word of God. Dad taught me to obey it. But the stranger was our storyteller. He could weave the most fascinating tales, adventures, mysteries, and comedies with daily conversations. He could hold our whole family spellbound for hours each evening. He was like a friend to the whole family. He took dad, Bill, and me to our first major league baseball game. He was always encouraging us to see the movies and he even made arrangements to introduce us to several movie stars. The stranger was an incessant talker. Dad didn't seem to mind, but sometimes mom would quietly get up, while the rest of us were enthralled with one of his stories of faraway places, and go to her room, read her Bible, and pray. I wonder now if she ever prayed that the stranger would leave. You see, my dad ruled our house, our household, with certain moral convictions, but the stranger never felt an obligation to honor them. Profanity, for example, was not allowed in our house, not from us, from our friends, or adults. Our long-time visitor, however, used occasional four-letter words that burned my ears and made dad squirm. To my knowledge, the stranger was never confronted. My dad was a teetotaler who didn't permit alcohol in his home, not even for cooking, but the stranger felt he needed exposure and enlightened us to other ways of life. He offered us beer and other alcoholic beverages often. He made cigarettes look tasty, cigars manly, and pipes distinguished. He talked freely, too much, too freely, about sex. His comments were sometimes blatant, sometimes suggestive, and generally embarrassing. I know now that my early concepts of the man-woman relationship were influenced by the stranger. As I look back, I believe it was the grace of God that the stranger did not influence us more. Time after time he opposed the values of my parents, yet he was seldom rebuked and never asked to leave. More than thirty years have passed since the stranger moved in with the young family on Morningside Drive. But if I were to walk into my parents' den today, you would still see him over in a corner, waiting for someone to listen to him, talk, and watch him draw his pictures. His name? We always called him Set. Television Set. How do you think, how they work in our imaginary? Right. Well, yeah, sadly I don't think right now they work in the right manner. I think that it comes with the same problem of taking consciousness for granted. People are offended at the idea of speaking of God. I mean, like I said, God transcends personhood. That is definite. But personhood is part of God. That is, there is, you know, the notion that God is three persons is extremely important in terms of understanding what a person is. And also, like I said, because we take consciousness for granted, somehow we're bothered by the fact that consciousness exists. It's so funny. People aren't offended by the idea that sometimes you hear people say, like, I believe that God is more, or if there is a God that is more like a force, you know, like a kind of impersonal thing. And you think, so why? Why does it bother you? Why does consciousness bother you? Why does, why do you think that intentionality doesn't exist? That it's a freak thing that exists only in human beings for some reason? You know, it's like there are patterns, there are patterns of being. And that's what personalities are, right? They're patterns of being. They're patterns that are coherent. And they're coherent in a way that they manifest a purpose. And so that's intentionality. And within us, we have several little smaller beings. We also have all these personalities inside us that have their own little coherences, not so much sometimes. And so I don't know why that's so weird to think because we're not that obviously one coherent conscious being that we are, but constituted with all these little, you know, consciousnesses. Why is it so weird to think that that would scale up? I don't understand why it's weird. And so I, that's why for me, it's almost like a mystery when I listen to people. I always think it's just because you don't understand what is consciousness. You also, you don't understand what constitutes a being, how a being is not obvious in terms of scientific analysis. That there really has to be something which pulls it together. And so to me, once we start to see that, then angels, the idea of angels, they just don't, they're not a big deal anymore. Like they're as, and the idea of demons too. I mean, to me, demons are just principalities which are not united in this coherent hierarchy. And that's how the Church Fathers present them anyways, you know. So you have some, usually it's aligned with a passion and makes sense because that's what it happens in us. You know, you have a person, you have a pattern inside you, you know, and this pattern kind of runs and it has its own coherence. But what it does, it's pulling you away from your central core. So it's making you, you know, resent something. It's making you hate your children. It's making you, like whatever pattern that is there and you're fighting against it, you're trying to bring it in. And sometimes you can't and it kind of pulls you. To me, that's just, it's a demon. It's a little demon that is pulling you. And if you read like the mystics, they talk about demons that you're full of demons or that their demons are constantly, either they say you're full of demons or they'll say things like, they're demons riding on you, like you have demons riding on your back, like all these demons that are riding on you. And I think it's just an imagistic way of saying that you have these patterns which are pulling you into death, that are ripping you apart, that are decomposing you. And so you need to bring it together. And so there are cosmic, I think there are cosmic demons. In a city, you could have, you have certain patterns of behavior, let's say. Let's say in a city, you'll have a pattern of behavior which is jaywalking, where everybody jaywalks. I remember there was a story about Giuliani, about how everybody in New York was jaywalking. And Giuliani understood that that pattern of behavior, it looked like it was a detail, but it was actually manifesting a much deeper reality, which is that there was no social cohesion in New York City. And so he said, I'm going to exercise this demon. And once it's exercised, it's actually going to help coagulate the city, bring it together so that it has more cohesion. And so he went after jaywalkers and just gave dick to dick. And at first people were going crazy, like, what is he doing? Why is he attacking jaywalkers? But he kind of understood that we need to exercise these little demons so that the being can now come together. And so that little pattern of behavior, it was that everybody was doing it. It wasn't like people were talking to each other and say, oh, are you jaywalking? Oh, no, are you jaywalking? Yeah, I jaywalk. No, nobody does. It just was it was like this implicit pattern of behavior in the city. I mean, it could be littering. It could be all kinds of things. And once you let it go too far, then it's really hard to to bring it back. Like, let's say once a civic pattern starts to manifest itself in a city where it's OK to break people's windows, let's say, all of a sudden it becomes OK to break people's windows. It's really hard to to come back from that. You know, and then things can degenerate into into chaos. I mean, I lived in in cities in Africa where the social fabric had been so destroyed by war and all kinds of crazy events that it was almost impossible to bring it back because everybody had these all these little demons were kind of pulling the city into all these directions. And it was it was nearly impossible to to to bring it back.