https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=rWAEq7TInO0

 Hi, this is Paul. Today is October 4, 2021. That's the day I'm recording this. This morning I posted the video that I made about the boy crisis and the marriage crisis. And what I often do when I post a video in the morning is I will sometimes write a sort of a Twitter summary of that video on Twitter. And because Twitter is very fleeting, I will often take that and post it on my sub stack. You can find the link to the sub stack down below. Those of you who don't have time or desire to watch all my videos, one easy way to sort of keep tabs of what I'm talking about is to subscribe to the sub stack because at this point I haven't monetized the sub stack at all. It's all free. So you can just go ahead and subscribe and you'll basically get little Twitter summaries of some of the ideas and some of the videos I'm making. Because for many of you, you don't have time to watch all the videos that I make, which is absolutely fine. Often what happens though when I go into that process is I'll think more about the subject of the video. In this particular video I made last week, Thursday, I think, Wednesday or Thursday. I think last week, Wednesday, actually. So there's a little, little while between I had other things stacked up so I didn't, I didn't need it last week for the channel. So then often I'll sort of go back and continue to ruminate on my thoughts of the video and my thoughts will usually continue to develop and progress and to gel from the video and I actually find writing little Twitter summaries or little sub stack summaries helps sort of cement ideas. And then because Twitter is the way it is, I'll get feedback from some of you and you'll usually say, well, what about this guy? What about that guy? And then I'll look at some of those things. So it's again, if you watch my intro to the channel video, this is all part of the learning process for me. So then I was watching, I went over to Kevin Samuel's channel. I'd found his channel a few months ago and we'll talk a little bit about his channel in this video. But then I had a thought and what I often do with Twitter is I tweet my thoughts for better or for worse. Not always in my own best interest, but this is what I tweeted. Part of the deceit of some forms of feminism is that women believe heightened masculine types of status would give them all that it gives to men and it does not. And I first thought, do I dare tweet this? It's a tweet. So yeah, I did. And you know, I said, okay, I'm looking to hide in an undisclosed location. I expect to find heavily read books by Carl, ever heavily read books from Carl Jung and a bunch of beef jerky in the, it said undisclosed location. No Benzos, please. And so I'm going to try and distill this into what will fit into the title of this video, because I think this is actually a huge issue right now in the ongoing struggle between men and women, which is perennial. It doesn't go away. I don't know that. I don't know that it will ever go away in this dispensation, but we have to talk honestly about these issues because the boy crisis, the marriage crisis, these things are causing a huge amount of suffering in people's lives. So I want to talk more about this. I'm going to take apart this statement because I know especially some of my friends to the left are not going to be happy with this statement, but I've been making them unhappy for the last three years. So some of sure have written me off, but I want to get into this. Now I debated a lot about whether or not I'd use the word feminism and how I'll use it. So I'm still not sure how I'm going to use it for the title of this video. It's a very click baity word, but it is part of it. Having said that, with many issues like feminism and gay liberation and anti-racism in the country, a big part of the problem of the dynamic is that the winners can't take yes for an answer. That's been a huge issue with feminism. I know very few men today. I know some, but I know very few men today who aren't generally speaking happy about many of the changes that have happened in the West over the last hundred years in terms of women's rights, their legal rights, their access to high paying jobs, their access to education, changes in terms of roles within marriage. There have been tremendous changes over the last hundred plus years. Women's lives have been tremendously disrupted by technology, as have men's. Women have had the opportunity to do a lot of transformation in our cultural space, and I think a lot of that has been good. But like pretty much all changes, there's good and there's bad. There's winning and there's losing, and they almost always really go together. Most of the people I know have zero problem with women doing many things in church, maybe not all for some of you, but for many of you all. Women in the workplace, women having their own money and being less dependent on men for money, that's a huge issue when it came to really the uptick of divorce in the 1970s. In many ways, feminism won and it can't take yes for an answer, which is why in my tweet I said some feminists, because people who identify as that are all across. The definition of feminism is as fraught as the definition of racism. It doesn't mean that misogyny doesn't exist. It just means that these terms are deeply conflicted and get very fudgy quickly. So hence the use of the word feminism. Now, masculine and feminine descriptions. I have to confess that before a few years ago, I thought very, very little about what masculinity and femininity were. I just didn't think much about it. It's sort of progressivist feminism that has forced me into thinking a lot more about this. And again, I recommend Queens and court gestures with Jonathan Pigeot, where Jonathan and Andrea and Mercury, I thought, had a really good discussion about some of these issues. Jonathan has taught me a lot about it just in terms of thinking symbolically with respect to the masculine and the feminine. And these symbols are very old and they go way back. And there's a degree of consistency to them going back. And again, I never thought about any of this stuff until I started looking into it. And I was forced into it by the discussions that are going on today. If you push a difference, you make the difference salient. And that's a big issue with a lot of people who are highly progressive right now in terms of social constructionism. They are pushing these issues. And this is a big issue in race today. You make something salient. People will see it. And they will see some of the things you want them to see. And they'll see some of the things you don't want them to see. And people keep saying, well, we need to have a conversation. Well, you got the conversation. And part of the way a conversation goes is you might hear some things you like and you might hear some things you won't. But you asked for a conversation. You made everybody focus on this stuff. So here we are. Let's do it. Here's the difficulty. You cannot both promote a difference and abolish its importance at the same time, which is what I see people doing all over the place with issues of gender today. They are both promoting the difference. And they're saying, we need to have a conversation. We need to pay attention to it. And then some are trying to abolish the difference at the same time. The sexual binary is not going anywhere. It isn't. It just isn't. And now we're all talking about it. And so we're going to learn some things. And we're going to learn some things that we like. And we're going to learn some things that we don't like. So buckle up, boys and girls. Let's get on the roller coaster. Now, Jonathan Pujo has done a number of videos, which this is what part of his clips channel, how modern movies undermine the feminine. And I think he's dead on right about it. And you can watch the bigger video that he has of this too. Now, we're not talking about male and female here. You have to think about masculine and feminine in terms of male and female on a bell curve. Generally speaking, males are more masculine than females and vice versa. But these are two bell curves. And they're sort of overlapping. So you can always find a woman that is more masculine than a man in some respects and a man that is more feminine than a woman in some respects. And that's the way this kind of language works. And so we have to recognize that from the outset that masculine and feminine is not identical to male and female. Now, at some point, I want to get a lot deeper into the rise and fall of Mars Hill. And these issues are all over that in many ways. And we'll get into that when we do. Filling masculine social tropes with women elevates the masculine above the feminine and undermines the feminine. And we've seen a ton of that in much celebrated movie progress and representation over the last number of years. You can you can find it in older movies. But when the woman, you know, if you want to lessen in this, go watch the Critical Drinkers channel. He loves pointing it out. If the woman always has to beat up the man, if the woman always. But but the point is she's using masculine traits. And what this does is it undermines feminine power. And again, the link below to Peugeot's video, the clip is only about eight minutes long, you'll get the sense of it. It's a great clip. I won't play it now because many of you have already seen it. And I don't have to really go on too much about this. Our culture has been doing this for a while. And here's the thing. You don't pump this kind of stuff into the zeitgeist without consequences and consequences for men, consequences for women, consequences for boys, consequences for girls. There's a lot of partly because so much of our imaginative calibration is now being mediated by television and movies. People are just unaware of a lot of physical differences. I've told this story before. I remember when my oldest son was 13 and I was talking to my wife about some security issues around the house. And one of the things we were looking at, it would be one of those security doors and my wife basically said, well, if there was someone at the door and I opened the door and I wanted to close it, I'll just close it on him. So now I weigh about 100 pounds more than my wife. My son at that point was about 13 years old. He was in great shape. He was playing basketball and football and but he wasn't as big as he is now, but he was getting there. So he wasn't by any means 100 pounds more than her. So I asked him, I said, you go stand outside the door. You open the door. And I just told my son, just force your way into the house. Didn't have any trouble at all. My wife is really quite a fit, strong woman, but she's only five, six, 100 and I better be careful here. This is just a reality about men and women. We are bigger and stronger generally speaking. In a fist fight, women will lose. I remember a number of years ago, back when there were a lot of stories, especially about football players, physically abusing their girlfriends. Some of these incidences were on videotape by security cameras. And I remember watching a bunch of them. And in many cases, the woman hit the man first and then he hit her second. Now that gives no excuse to the man for hitting the woman, but she shouldn't have hit him. And he still shouldn't have hit her because obviously what all of us know is for a woman to hit a man usually is not a big deal. But you have these college and professional football players hitting a woman who is usually less than 150 pounds. It's hugely consequential and they were rightfully brought up on charges for assault, but these are realities with us and they don't go away no matter how much social constructivism and representation you have in the movies. And I think Peugeot is exactly right. What you are actually undermining is the feminine and you are actually disempowering the kind of feminine, the kind of feminine power that women have in the culture. And what you're also starving is the kind of imagination for women to use feminine power in the culture. And women need feminine power because men have masculine power and as a culture we have greatly prioritized masculine power over feminine power. And if women are going to compete with men in terms of masculine type, status, and power, women for the most part are going to lose simply because of the overlapping bell curves. Now, I want to talk about women and ecclesiastical leadership. And this is a fraught conversation in the Christian Reformed Church. I've touched on it before. Anybody who knows my reputation in the Christian Reformed Church or has known me knows that I have never been against women serving in all offices of the church. I inherit this belief from my parents and I continue to maintain it today. I have, if you go back through the Livingstone Sermon Archive, you will find women preaching. If you ask around, you will find women that I have helped get into seminary and helped process these kinds of ideas. And so when the Calvin Seminary Forum comes out, they had to be really careful with their words commemorating. They probably didn't want to say celebrating, but many would have liked to see them do this. I know many of the women on the cover there personally, and they are wonderful women. Now, there's a lot of really sloppy talk about women in leadership. If women were in charge, there wouldn't be wars. Queen Victoria, Queen Elizabeth. Women have been in charge less than men, considerably less than men in terms of formal positions of usually masculine social structures for hundreds and hundreds of years. And there have been wars and colonization and oppression of women, et cetera, et cetera, et cetera, et cetera. People are overplaying their hand with respect to these kinds of claims. Announce that female leadership would be an upgrade, maybe, probably among some things, but not among others. And once you make that claim, you are admitting that there is a difference, that men and women are going to lead differently. When I was at, get your bingo cards out, when I was a missionary in the Dominican Republic, most churches have the dama missionera. And that was usually a high status woman who had responsibility within the church. Now, those churches would not have imagined a woman pastor, but the dama missionera taught Sunday school, preached, did a whole bunch of leadership things, and nobody thought a thing of it. And we've seen this in the church for a very long time. Now, my particular stance about women in church office goes back to the book of Acts and the story of Lydia. You can debate that if you want to, which is fine, but especially in Protestant churches and the difference between Protestant churches and the Catholic and Orthodox with respect to the entire conceptualization of the worship service, of the church hierarchy, of all of this is different. So particularly in Protestant churches, I don't think women should be barred from serving in ecclesiastical office. That's my take. Now, I don't have any problem working with people who are complementarians that don't believe in this. I think we should have the conversation. I think it's a good thing to debate, and I actually think it's healthy in Protestant land that we have churches on both sides of the aisle here. Because over large periods of time, we will see, and we will get a pretty clear idea about what really are some of the differences between men in leadership, formal leadership, and women in formal leadership. And I think in the Christian Deformed Church, we've had these changes now for, ooh, is it 25 years? Of course it's 25 years. I'm looking at the article. We've had these changes for 25 years and patterns have developed. Now, of course, all patterns are within a context and that context will, of course, impact the pattern making, but the patterns are there. And some of the patterns we like, some of the patterns we don't like. For the most part, excuse me, for the most part at Living Stones, I really like having, if we have, you know, I really like having at least one man as an elder and one man as a, one woman as an elder and one man as a deacon and one woman as a deacon, because in terms of the life of the church and the kind of ministry they need to do. Women are really good at some things that men really aren't at, and that doesn't mean that women aren't able to do it if they're not in ecclesiastical office. But the women on our council have been a tremendous help in the life of the church, I believe. I would have no problem having a woman co-pastor on staff at Living Stones. We don't have that much staffing here, but I would have no problem with that. But I know that I would bring different things to the table than what she would. And I know for a lot of you who are Roman Catholic or a conservative Protestant, you disagree with me on that, that's absolutely fine. I think part of being an adult, part of love is loving each other even within and despite our differences. So this is one that comes up in the channel fairly often, and you can make your complaint down in the comments section and it will be noted. But now, if you announce that female headship will be female leadership, I should say leadership instead of headship because I don't want to get into that whole conversation, would be an upgrade. You have to admit that it's different. And that makes it difficult to complain about that if outcomes are not equal or certain metrics are undesirable. And I've seen that in the CRC. Women complain that they don't get called as often for senior pastor positions as men. And I think there's a real issue of masculinity and femininity with respect to some of those issues. And I'm not surprised by the patterns that we've seen in church leadership in the Christian Reformed Church because of issues about masculinity and femininity. Now, female leadership has never been tried. No, but it's always going to be within a context. And so the debates will be never ending. Men will lead differently from women. One of the things I want to touch on this week is this article from Religion Dispatches, which is a critique from the left of the podcast of the Rise and Fall of Mars Hill. And I want to do some reading of that and some critiquing of that. But part of the issue is, well, very few mega church pastors, very few mega church pastors are women. There was a time when I was much more active in church planting when I know a church that was really working hard. And I've seen this often in church planting, really working hard to recruit women as church planters. They didn't step up. Is this because of higher? I mean, you can look at the big the Jordan Peterson, Big Five personality profile. Is this because they're to be a church planter means to be a risk taker? And for all the upsides and downsides of Mark Driscoll, to be a church planter who plants a mega church, it's almost always men because men are risk takers, much more than women. Women take different kinds of risks than men. But that's just part of our differences. And so these differences in outcome, you want to chalk them up to the patriarchy. I can't stop you. But I really doubt that's actually a major factor in why most founding mega church pastors are men. Now, I've seen a number of churches that after they have grown under male leadership, have brought in female leadership. Willow Creek, of course, did that fairly early. But again, in almost all cases, the driving leadership is men because this kind of risk taking, this kind of kind of entrepreneurial church leadership in the American context, almost all done by men. Now. I was, you know, I read through these articles and I think anybody going to mention Joyce Meyer, there's a woman who has entrepreneurial leadership of an enormous church movement. And you can find other women through history who have done similarly. Now you might not like her theology. You might not like what she's doing, but there's a woman. Now, how about in the main line? Well, you'll find high status women, you know, Nadia Bolzweber just elevated to sort of the public face of the ELCA. And she was a church planter, I think. I'd have to check her story. But she's also has a past as a standup comic. And when we talk about mega churches, comedy is a huge part of that too. Same with Driscoll. Driscoll would not have had the charisma, the preaching chops, the hits on YouTube and on podcast if it weren't for his comedic instinct. There's lots of stuff going on there. But Nadia Bolzweber did not plant a mega church. It was a good size church, helped with a lot of publicity as a gifted writer, as a lot of celebrity, but not a mega church. There's reasons why there's differences between men and women. And that is going to play out in, you'll find this in the business world as well. I'm not an expert on that. Other people are. This should come as no surprise given difference between male and female with respect to masculinity and femininity. It's going to play out. What I'm about to play is going to upset some of you. And I hope he's, you know, whenever I play something from another YouTube channel, I'm always a little nervous. Am I going to have to re-edit this video and take it out? But Kevin Samuels, I found him a number of months ago. And there's sort of a Stefan Molyneux aspect to his channel. Okay. It's the truth teller and people call up. Women call him. And if you've watched any of his videos, you know exactly what he's going to say because he says it over and over and over and over and over and over again. And the women who call him must want to hear it over and over and over and over and over again. Is it because of the attention? And again, as I wrote on Twitter and James from my meetup answered back, I want to know the psychological dynamics of people calling up Stefan Molyneux to have him describe just how exactly they're messing up and Kevin Samuels to do what he does so skillfully to women time and time and time again, which is basically to instruct them in a good bit of reality. Now, again, you might not like the reality, but it is real. And that is what he's doing. That is what he's saying. And it is true. And it is a big difference between men and women and how this plays out in the marriage crisis. So I'm going to, you know, I'm going to stop now before I start playing it so that if I have to recut this video without this segment, I'll do it. Okay. For those of you who are unfamiliar with him, he basically has sort of a call in show where people call in and this is the profile video on his channel. So you can find it. It's one of his more popular videos and it's just a terrific example of what happens in his channel. And there's so much complex psychology that goes beyond behind both why women want to call him and why men love to listen to this that I'm not going to get into because some of it is healthy and some of it is less healthy. But the fact that he is African-American and mostly talks to African-American women is not incidental either, because many of these dynamics that we are increasingly finding in the broader society in North America have been present in the black community for a very long time. And so black men and women know these dynamics and I am not in the least bit surprised about anything that I hear in this video. And it is not simply true of the African-American community. It is also true in other communities in North America. So let's listen now. Remember the title of this video. Women getting status in masculine ways does not get them what they think it will. And this is a terrific example of that. Following along. So first off, let's start. Let's start with this. What's your name? My name is Susan. Hi, Susan. How old are you? I'm 30. All right. What you got for me? So I'm 30 and I have two kids. So I'm single. I have two kids from a previous relationship. So I was kind of trying to rate myself, but I am still like very like young, active. I have a lot to offer. I make great money. I have good, well-behaved children and I am in LA dating and I just find. I love that he gets up and walks away. What this means is this dude is kind of a YouTuber like I am. It's like, ah, I make videos. And sometimes I'll, if I'm making a long commentary, I have to get up and walk out of the room or do something or answer the door or talk to someone. But, uh, I love that he gets up and walks away. Dating in LA so hard. So I actually don't have like a problem like meeting like, um, what you call them, like high profile men, like men. He's got a problem getting a husband. Okay. Now what does she mean by high profile men? Now, as I said before, and we're going to get into Chris Williamson's video towards the end of this, where Chris really nicely sort of lays a bunch of this stuff out. What kind of man is she looking for? She is looking for a man who is attractive to her. Probably two to four years old or could even be substantially older than that. Has more financial resources than her. Um, treats her well, will be a good stepfather to her children. That is what she's looking for. Obviously. I mean, that is all of us should know that. And can she find that? Possibly women do, but now we're going to have to, probably the best chance she could have would be in church and she would going, she was going to have to settle on some of the scores, which is the kind of thing that he, that he, that he lays on in ways that are so clear. Yeah, but yeah. Cause you got two kids. So it's just the two kids. It's not just, it's not just, it's not just, it's big. I mean, you're 30 years old and all this career stuff. But where, uh, how many, how many different fathers? One. Okay. How come, how come you and he didn't get married? I was so young. So, you know, she's on a video link or something, so he can see she's a very attractive woman. She's 30 years old. He's just going to say I'm this height. I'm this way. I'm very attracted. I have no problem getting dates. And he's like, of course you don't. But a husband. When I was in that relationship, so I met him. How does your oldest child? 10. How did your youngest? Seven. So you were 23. That's when I had my daughter. Yeah. So my kid's father, he was older than me. But listen to what I'm about to say. You were younger. You were old enough to make babies. First one at 20, even though I'm not okay with it, you can let it slide. But the second one, man, that's a choice. Why didn't you? No, we were in the, like, I was with him for like six or seven years. But you weren't his wife. And that's a good one. Yeah. So, so if you'll let me explain it to you, I'll try. You know what? Now, now again, why does she call? I'm just new to the channel. It's like, you probably should have watched a video or two before you decided to call because, but she wants to hear the answer. And again, I, I, I thoughts arise in my mind why she would call and have this experience with him, maybe she just wants to be on the internet. It's a big channel. But again, I, I want to know, I want to know the psychological dynamics of this because I don't and it's fascinating. Frankly. I'm a new, let me explain it to you. I I'll try. You're a woman that was with a man for six or seven years and you gave him the highest honor a woman can give any man on the planet. You gave him children. You gave him not only one, you gave him two, and yet you did not require him to even bestow the title of a wife upon you. So you go back out into the market older and market is important. And, you know, it's, it's really amazing to me that you can have people who. Really say, well, I'm against capitalism. Oh, okay. So you're against markets, but I'm all for sexual liberation. Sexual liberation is basically creating a sexual market, traditional forms of male and female sexuality in the world. You have the real problems. I'm not going to disagree with that, but it took that out of the realm of the marketplace to one degree or another. What we have now is an open market. And when people themselves are in an open market, bad things happen. So, you know, if you're saying, well, I don't, I don't trust markets. Don't be a sexual libertarian because all you're doing is saying we think the market should decide and the market's going to make some cruel decisions. With did not require him to even bestow the title of a wife upon you. So you go back out into the market older with two children. You, and you expect someone in that market to accept you older and bestow the title of wife upon you. That's what that's how men look at it. Right, wrong or indifferent. And then being in LA, you know, you're not going to be able to do that. I think that's for me, one of the most competitive markets for women in the world. Competition is stiff out there. I'll be there in a couple of weeks. Beautiful woman. I wouldn't say like, so I do meet, I do meet great men. I don't think it's hard finding the men. So like, okay, man, I, no, no, no. See, this is how we judge over here. We judge by dealing with dating. We judge in weddings. That's the only thing that counts. If you're not married, you're losing. See, that makes it real clear because you've had everything up to that point anyway. Right. I've been engaged. Right. I don't count those either because women, especially a lot of black women have been engaged for a long time, three, four, five engagements. See, when you make it real clear, there's a high value man or whatever you do, whatever term you're using, has any one of them married you? And the answer is no. And that's what I say. It's the dating market is difficult because you're not an unattractive woman. Sure. A guy will take you out for a nice date. You really want to know what we think? How tall are you? I'm five, six. I weigh 115 pounds. Yes. Oh yeah. I'll take you out. Oh hell yeah. I would take you out. I don't have a problem finding men to you. Of course not. But the thing is, but what do you find in the four though? Yeah. I would take you out, take you out, get you a nice steak and some lobster. We'd have a good old time and I would blow your back out, but I wouldn't marry you. See, what I think I really have an issue is finding men that don't want the superficial, I feel like the type of guys, they just want a woman that looks good on their arm. Yes. So when you say... Hold on, listen, let me stop, stop, stop, stop, stop, stop, stop, stop, stop right there. Yes. That's what we want because that's who we are. And you want a man... That's the problem I have with dating. But listen, listen, listen, listen. That's the problem you have with men. And again, good, bad or indifferent, this is men. Listen, you want men not to be men. You want men to think like women. That's not what we value, ma'am. We want a beautiful woman on our arm. Now remember the bell curve. Okay. Not all men, not all women. We're talking the bell curve here, overlapping bell curves. Yeah, that's the problem. Well, no, you're the problem. I'm the problem. Yes, you're the problem because I'm telling you what men want. You've experienced what men want and you've got a problem with it. That's your problem. We're not going to change. You're either going to get on board with it or you will die alone. So what should I be looking for then? Well, honestly, first you need to get down and understand it. Why does she call? She calls for advice. But again, if you've watched any of his videos, you know exactly what advice you're going to get. And it's not the advice that got some, got some, got some of that rise and fall of Mars Hill to play on some of this stuff. That you have no leverage. You have no leverage in this matter. It's the men we control access to relationships. You control access to sex. Right there. Men control access to relationships. Women control access to sex. Now again, these are bell curves. These are generally speaking. You've got to understand that in all of this. And, but what he says right there, if you don't understand that tiny little point, you're not going to understand the dynamic. Understand that you have no leverage. You have no leverage in this matter. It's the men we control access to relationships. You control access to sex. You need to understand what a man that you would want, what he would want in a girlfriend, wife or significant other. Like a good, like a good mother. Um, I should, I'm, I'm sure the, I'm sure the family feud episode that played. About what men would do for what, uh, you know, surveyed a hundred married men, what they would do for sex. And again, the men were like, die bag. And the women are like clean cook. And they're like, man, no, no, a hundred married men didn't say any of those things. They'd rather die and beg and kill for sex than clean and cook for it. And women are like, what's wrong with you? What? This is the point. This is how men and women are different. And it's just hard for us. Like a good, like a good mother. Um, that changes from every man that changes from man to man. Where's your father? Oh, I don't, I don't have, I didn't grow up with a mother or a father. All right. So do respect you, you, you've, you, you don't seem to get that men judge the way we judge and yes, like I said, you have no problem getting men to pay you attention. You've got no problem attracting men, but getting a man to take you seriously. And would you like to be married? I would. Okay. And that's a problem because you're asking a man to become a stepfather. You're asking, let's say you're asking me to come in and take care of one man's child, a man's two children. I didn't create those. It's all downside. I've been a stepfather. It's a horrible deal. What about the men that have children of their own? They want a stepmother. Well, again, you still act as though. Listen, I'll answer. See, you still, you're still speaking as if you have leverage in this thing. And I'm trying to level set you. Even if I have children, I got more options than you. I can go find a woman with no kids. Cause I can afford both of you. If I can afford to, if I can afford to take care of you and your kids, I can afford to take care of her and her and no kids. Why would I pick you and your kids? When I know your kids are not going to, I'm not their father. They'll never look at me as their father. I got all the responsibility and none of the upside of being a biological father. Can I discipline those children? Like they were my own. They don't need discipline. They're very, very good. I see that's your problem. There you go. Right there. She said, and again, it, if you're, if you're interested in this stuff, there's a whole channel of it and it's pretty much mostly the same. And it's saying the same thing patiently, calmly to people who, again, does she want to hear this? Does she not want to hear this? Does she want a husband? Does she want, I mean, but there it is. Okay. Let's be fair to both sides right now. I find some conservative narratives to be insufficient here too. For example, in my last video, I mentioned the marrying young versus marrying later and got a comment, which I fully expected someone basically saying, I did marry young and it didn't work. And I've seen that too. I see it regularly. Part of being the pastor of a church of older people means I'm already pastoring people in their second and third marriages. That's a lot easier than being a church planter when you're pastoring people who are going through their first divorces. That is a much more difficult thing. Now you might say, oh, well, people shouldn't divorce. We have, we are looking through a lens, which is individualistic. And we are imagining that if you just sort of white knuckle it, you can get through. That's sometimes the case. Tim Keller loves to quote a study that says, um, most people who are having real trouble in their marriage five or six years later, if they hang in there, they'll sort it out. And that's true. Generally speaking, again, bell curves here. It's not always true. White knuckling it is likely insufficient. It's sort of like saying, I'm going to run a marathon. Okay. You'd better start training because most of us can't white knuckle a marathon. It's not, it can't be done. And part of the thing in terms of working a successful marriage is that there are some huge challenges to it that haven't always been here. You know, many of them are recognized frequently longevity. You know, I regularly meet people who have been married for more than 50 or 60 years. That is an accomplishment. And whenever someone at church says we're having our wedding anniversary, what anniversary is it? 57. We applaud them. They have accomplished something. Have there been times in their marriage there that they wish they weren't married? I'm sure there were. Have there been times in their marriage, they wish they married someone else. I'm sure there were. Have they had upsides and downsides in terms of staying in that marriage? Absolutely. Education. Right now, if you're going to succeed in many areas in this country, education, generally speaking, is a vital thing. It is very difficult to, to manage the education thing and the marriage thing. Now this has changed considerably. When, for example, my grandfather went through Calvin seminary, the church had a lot more control over people's lives. It was, you were not allowed to be married and be in seminary at the same time. By the time I went through Calvin seminary in the 1980s, I was one of the few seminarians who wasn't married. Almost everyone already was married. Usually right after college, got married right away and then started seminary. The romanticization of marriage that people are picking marriage based on individuals are picking, picking their own spouses based on romantic love. Again, that's not a horrible thing. You know, obviously Jacob sees Rachel and works an extra seven years for her. It's not a new thing, but in terms of span and the culture, it's a difference from arranged marriages. And so there are a lot of variables in this and marriage in many ways. In some ways is tougher than it's, than it's ever been in other ways. Not so again, there's so many variables with respect to this. Economics are a factor. If you are able to, you know, sort of the stereotypical, um, leave it to Beaver, Ozzie and Harriet, Huxtables, you know, if you can manage on one income, better, God bless you better off for it. But this, there are lots and lots of challenges with respect to this. And so the debate between marrying young and marrying later is a good debate to have, and each of us, if we haven't already decided, or, you know, if you're in your twenties, you're going to have to deal with this, is someone available? Does someone want to marry? What I do know is that the current context of the culture that I talked about in the last one isn't working well. Maybe I should just read some of the stuff that I wrote in my tweet. You can read it all in the sub stack. This is what I wrote this morning. In today's video, I talk about the cross between the boy crisis and likely the anticipated husband crisis for high status women in upcoming generations. I had little inkling of a marriage crisis before I started my Jordan Peterson meetup, but very quickly the participants began to share their stories of the breakdown of the general, of what I call the generational handoff. And we did a video on that, which you can find on my channel, the marriage crisis, the failing, um, intergenerational handoff. There are a number of elements that I have contributed to this. Number one, the Christian social pressure against cohabitation and pre-marital sex that I grew up with is gone, not only for much of the church, but from the society as a whole. A lot of times I don't edit these things. And so there's problems in the text that should really change that. The widespread damage of children through the divorce of their parents is now two generations deep. If you watch the bachelor shows, the marriage for life hunger is breathless, but seems overly aspirational. They're not setting themselves up well to do it. They sound like someone who wants to run a marathon, but has never spent a day in their life training. What it, um, what it takes to build a lifelong marriage goes beyond good intentions. It takes wisdom, tradition, and community. The new regime in the, in the pursuit of lifelong marriage is an audition culture. First, you audition a potential spouse in bed. One young man told me that the women he sleeps with always seem to be performing rather than connecting. They're auditioning. They're trying to qualify for the role of wife. And a lot of the men, maybe they don't want that right now. And maybe when they're ready, they'll find, you know, they'll find someone who is in her early twenties, who doesn't have any children and wants that and is ready to start. And all of the other women that the man knew will say, why didn't you marry me? I wasn't ready. One or both parties are saying, oh, the next level of audition is the move in together. This is an open-ended audition comparable to a temp job where you really don't know if it will lead to a permanent position. One or both parties are saying, I like you enough to have sex and act married, but I'm not sure if I like you enough to keep you. If someone better comes along, you might get kicked to the curb. It is, is it any wonder we are building an anxious generation of young adults? The unreliability of their parents is now producing a pre-marriage ritual of unreliability in the hope that reliability will simply manifest itself. And it won't. In some circles, this has fostered the marry young versus marry late debate. It's a good debate to have. Team marry late makes a good point that these 40 years before can afford wisdom, which cannot afford, which can afford better mate selection. Given the overall rapid breakdown of intergenerational wisdom transmission, this makes some sense. A healthy culture affords wisdom to individuals who haven't had time to accumulate it in their biological life. So I talked about the video that I talked about, and I talked about the, the other video that I stumbled across. I believe the current marriage crisis has a luxury beliefs dynamic. Look at Rob Henderson to learn about luxury beliefs. People privileged with beauty and status will consume those fur will consume those further down the hierarchy. Yet even they will struggle with till death do us part. Then you bring in the boy crisis of the Washington Post. Now, Chris Williamson, I mentioned this on Twitter and I tagged him in there and he said, have you looked at this video? And I hadn't. So I looked at this video and it had a lot of the things that I didn't talk about in my previous video. So I wanted to get them in. Um, and he makes some points and then I'm going to step off from one of the points that they make. Okay. Here's the important part of the video. I'm going to talk about the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, any complicated man. So David burrs father of evolutionary psychology. He wrote in 2015, he wrote about the, the challenges you have when you have an asymmetry in terms of education, between men and women. Okay. This is something you said quote, We must look deeply. No, no. Before he gets into this. I want to talk to Anselman. One of my favorite commenters, because I know in. The ills like this Anselman decries the fact that I'm not making these points from the Bible or maybe I'm using evolutionary psychology. The reason I do this is because many of those listening who know the Bible and see the Bible as authoritative, I don't need to make this point to them. It's already in the Bible. Now the Bible is complex on this and I talked about the sex lives of the patriarchs, but the point there is if you're already a committed Christian who believes in the authority of Scripture, I don't need to make these points. When you look at what Jordan Peterson said in that recent Telegraph thing, part of why he contributed effectively in terms of, let's call it, pre-evangelism for many was rationality. And for that audience, this evolutionary psychology stuff speaks to them. That's why I have it in my videos. This is something that he said. Shock. He's exactly right. Shock. He's exactly right. And this is exactly what Kevin Samuels is talking about in Los Angeles. Well, he's going to continue. I mean, Chris is going to make all the points very convincingly and very well. College where you have more men than you do women, you have more long-term relationships because the men have to play the game that the women want. A surplus of women amongst educated groups caters precisely to this dimension of men's sexual desires because the rare agenda is always better positioned to get what they want on the mating market. Roll it forward a little bit. You now have two thirds to one third, educated women to educated men. On the whole, women don't want to date a man that is less educated, less rich and lower status than them and also one that's shorter than them. You are going to have an ever-increasing group of women competing for an ever-decreasing group of high-performing men. The men that sit below them don't win anything. So there's more incels. There's more underperforming men. White-collar women don't want to date blue-collar guys. And most of the women, even the ones that went to college, they're now competing for this tight group of chads at the fucking super performing rowing chads at the top. And the only ones that win are these fucking turbo weapons. The nine out of ten and ten out of ten guys that have got M- Turbo weapons. The ones who are able to outperform intellectually, socially and monetarily the women, they're the only ones that are left that are able to date. So nobody wins except for Chad. Chad fucks. Wait, wait, wait, wait, wait, wait, wait. A little side point here. As a pastor, sometimes I have to hand a mic around a conversation. There's a reason you put your mic on a stand. Because people like to gesture with their hands and if you're holding the mic, it's just he's holding this same mic I've got. He's holding this mic out of coast. See that all the time. Anyway, sorry about that. I just couldn't help but distract myself. So nobody wins except for Chad. Chad fucks. Wait, wait, wait, wait, wait, wait, wait, wait, wait. Why does it always have to be- Okay, but I was- if it's two to one, all you have to do is make it into college. As a guy. And you've got two to one odds, baby. That's it. That's not hard. Getting into Texas A&M is not hard. You and I could right now take whatever test necessary and get into Texas A&M. Sorry, I apologize to anyone. That's probably not true. I think it's actually a pretty prestigious school. Let's say like OSU. You're saying that because you live there and you don't want to be berated by them on the street. No. Okay, let's do Louisiana State. I've heard from people at OSU, you just have to sign your name on a few tests and they'll let you in. That's what I've heard from people who have gone to OSU, mind you. So what I got from this and why I was smiling while you were talking and I didn't want to interrupt, but I did at some point, was all you have to do then in 10 years from now is just go to college and the babes are going to come at you. Here's one for you, man. Okay. But see, I wanted to get through that whole college thing because now we have to ask the question because sort of with Kevin Samuels and the dating market and men want hookups and all that. They do. But how long do they want them? I mean, after they have had just saw someone come by the door, he's ready for the knock after they have had 10, 20, 30, 40, 50, 60 partners. And some women will be like, it's not unusual. After they've had dozens of partners. What do they eventually begin to want? I've talked to a number of men like this who have had huge sexual histories, and they say to me who has not had a huge sexual history at all. I'd rather have what you have. You'd rather have what I have. And they're not talking about my smoking hot wife. I've just Mark Driscoll myself. I'd rather have what you have. Wife, family, commitment, children. Why? What, what do we really want? Do we really want just one thing? Well, let's keep listening a little bit more. The difference in right swipes on Tinder for a guy with a master's degree versus a bachelor's degree is. I want to say 90% more. So you get 90% more right swipes if you've got a master's degree. I've never been on Tinder and I hope to never be. I don't think I'll ever be on Tinder. That sounds horrible to me. That sounds absolutely horrible. I. This is a bachelor's degree on Tinder. This is in John Burgess. Anyone that wants to fact check me. This is in John Burgess date dynamics. I honest to God, I'll tell you right now, I don't understand women. I just don't. Not in not in women don't understand men. Men don't understand women. It's true. Sense of like, oh, I don't understand them. They're stupid. It's like, no, no, no. Like I literally thought that I might have an inkling of an understanding of what a 90% of what a woman thinks. I don't stick about for one year. So if you've got your bachelor's degree and you think, do I want to stick about and do this masters that look, man, it's a year of your life. It's going to be a bit expensive. You're going to have to work hard. But, dude, 90% better conversions on Tinder for the rest of your life. That's what they should put on the enrollment thing. Book the course doesn't matter about the course. You get to have 90% better conversions on Tinder. Do. OK. But is that what you're really going to want? Does does that help you in the long run? Well, you might think, well, and then we're back to where we were with some of the other video that having lots of sexual partners, does that really help me? Get what I want? Well, what do I want? Well, what do I want? That is not a simple question. So another video that that folks have been sending to me is Michaela. Does she keep her last? Does she still ever? It's Michaela Peterson still, isn't it? Like I said, good for business. I don't know what her legal name is. Anyway, she's moved down to Nashville. She's getting set up in her studio. She's got a podcast going and she had an interview with her father. Father jumped in with the with the Freedom Tunes guy. This guy does it astoundingly good impression of Jordan. I watched a couple of those videos. Again, the the the political right versus left thing just just really doesn't turn me on. But Michaela, of course, has lived thanks dad for the fairly public life. At least she can get a social media career out of it. I mean, she's had her ups and downs in terms of her marriage. She's and some of you know all that way more than I just hear what I just hear what a lot of you folks tell me and what they tell me at the meetup. But she's married. She has a child. She's moved to Nashville. She's getting her career. But in this video talking to this this guy who's Roman Catholic and raised Catholic and then had years of wandering and then came back, et cetera, et cetera. She's been reading the Bible every day, exploring God. And her story is very common in terms of the motivational structures. I was having trouble in my life. I thought maybe I'd give God a try. I started reading the Bible. I started praying. And and suddenly in ways that to me felt like the hand of God, things started things started straightening out in my life. Now, as a pastor, I have a lot to say about that dynamic, but this is not the video for that. And I actually don't want to meddle in individuals lives in this way right now in something like this, because that that is how many, many people begin their exploration of the Christian life and many other many other lives. Many other. So she's looking for divine help with troubles. And again, very, very common. Well, what does she want? Well, she's got a husband. I mean, she mentioned in the video that her father and mother are doing better than they have for years. And I, you know, that his performance on that telegraph video was just I thought I thought he looks good. He sounds good. He sounds healthy. This is wonderful. This is wonderful. But as Jordan Peterson often says, people are always working multiple hierarchies and climbing those hierarchies. And so these these strugglings with things that she's opening her her life up to God for help with. There's lots of different hierarchy she's working on. I mean, she's already married. So she's so now she's got a child who is I don't know. I don't know how old the child is probably late preschooler or whatever. It's probably a very old child. Good. But she has a child, her father's doing better, her mother's doing better, but she's got a business. She's got a career. easy things too and many people have ups and downs in their marriages and again if you've got your career, she's got her career, etc. etc. She's climbing multiple hierarchies, it's intensely meaningful, it's also risky and so she feels anxiety and so you look to God and so you read the Bible and you develop a life of prayer and you begin a relationship with the church and that's usually how it starts now. As you go deeper into the life of faith you sort of get off the okay the God of fixing things now track and you get into okay I'm going to trust you and love you and be faithful to you even if you don't fix this thing and then you just get into deeper and deeper and deeper registers of Christian commitment and Christian life into Christian faith and many of you know that. Marriage doesn't end the climbing so you're so okay so you got your master's degree and you're getting all the attention you want. You know for someone like me who was not a dater in high school at all, very unsuccessful in college for the most part, finally you know landed a relationship with an amazing woman later in my college career and then eventually we married, we've had five children together. That little part of the Tinder part and finding each other that's a tiny tiny little part. Now it's hugely consequential because mate selection, boy that's a big deal and you hardly know the person you marry when you marry them and now being the father of five young adult children you know parents picking spouses if you're wise you'd ask me a look for a little bit of more wisdom but the way the culture is right now parents have to be very careful and very sly about how we impart wisdom to our children and a lot of it you know people will often ask me well how about advice for parenting? Well be the person you want your children to become. Don't just start there because they will, whatever they're talking, they will, you are imprinting on them their first draft, their first mapping is very much from you and your relationship with your spouse for better and for worse usually but marriage doesn't end the climbing because marriage is sort of in some ways just a relief there's this great scene and Harry met Sally when of course Harry and Sally go on a double date with his best friend and her friend and and and then the two friends Bruno Kirby and oh it's Princess Leia, can't think of her name right now but you know they and Harry and Sally are going up and they're ups and downs and they're ups and downs and they're ups and downs and those two just fall back in bed oh isn't it wonderful we're married. Such a relief to be out of the dating market and I will trade sex with strangers for stability and a little bit more of a boring sex life if I must but again that whole issue of sex within commitment is a whole other big conversation so but that but what do we really want? Truth is we want it all because once we secure the spouse we learn the upsides and the downsides and we start working those angles and then the children come along and then the career and what do we really want well the truth is we want everything because once we actually secure some things we go on to other hierarchies and we start working up those and we do that our whole life long. Now the video that I made a while ago that I keep coming back to mentally even though I haven't rewatched it your God is your frame of frames because here's the thing about a frame a frame is the one thing you won't deconstruct and the reason that works is because you can't deconstruct everything and see anything because there's nothing to compare it by it's again like trying to take a picture of a sprinting cheetah when you're in a jeep moving 50 miles an hour in an open field and the cameras going like this you'll never stop you need a frame something needs to stop so you can see and focus and consciousness can do its thing and memory can do its thing so you need a frame and this of course is something that they've discovered with artificial intelligence so on and so forth Benjamin Boyce's conversation with James Lindsay about you know just realized in that that you know it's the one thing that you won't deconstruct maybe it's your experience of oppression maybe it's your your agenda for feminism whatever it is that becomes your God your religion that becomes your frame it becomes the one thing that you won't change and what people do over life is for a long time especially if they're single especially I mean part of how it worked for me as a young Christian who at least had the community celebrated and supported aspiration of trying to reserve at least sexual intercourse and high degrees of sexual intimacy for marriage is all another conversation you know boy there's a lot of pressure on getting married and getting married is like you know having being able to get sex regularly and so that becomes a huge motivational factor to get married within the context of that community get that that whole thing is just gone and and I'm amazed you know I've made this point before again if you watch the Bachelor of those shows and some would comment that yeah the one time they had a virgin on the Bachelor he wound up to be gay not a great point for team virgin but anyway I mean there's been just total collapse in many Christian communities with respect to this and and in some ways all the finger pointing at the weird purity people on the other side well fair enough yeah that's that's plenty weird and I certainly don't recommend it but you know clowns to the left of me jokers to the right it's a mess and you need a frame and so once people sort of tackle the frame of okay I've I'm married I've got a partner we're starting from here we're gonna try to make it work and then boy you've got all those other things and and children and career and your sexual needs and her sexual needs and your emotional needs and her emotional needs and housework and money and I mean it's it's a big big deal but ideally you would like a frame that actually scales and works for all of these things and that's really where God comes in very handy every frame within creation is subject to idolatry for example if you make getting married the the quest of your life you're either gonna succeed and then it's gonna be passe and you're gonna look on for another one but if you make it your organizing principle you're gonna have problems because even if you're unmarried and want to get married you have to navigate that frame amongst other frames because they're they're seldom univariable and so part of the reason the God frame works so well even just in theory is it is so global and this is again why I think Christianity with God number one and God number two really works well because it's it's God is everything God covers all of the frames and and so as you're actually working that frame you switch down and you seek God's will and you seek God's heart and you practice the Christian life and you read the Bible and you go to church and you develop Christian relationships and I mean you just keep working all of those problems and I think over time that's part of the reason why the religious people outperform secular people in many respects it simply works you need a frame that encompasses all and that is not subject to decay or corruption or idolatry you need something outside the system and and got that's why the God frame doesn't really go away it's just so enormously useful and even when people throw it away then they just start bringing in other words that usually work less well because you don't have anywhere near the resources available to work that frame like universe you're gonna talk to universe now okay universe great spirit you know okay but the advantage of having God and especially if you are practicing Christian or even another religion you at least have a wisdom community around you that you can appropriate there's just so many more resources it's sort of like deciding I'm gonna build a computer myself but I'm not gonna order a motherboard from Newegg and I'm not gonna use an Intel processor I'm gonna go out to the beach and design my own chip and make my own motherboard and I'm gonna build the thing from scratch wow well good luck it's a whole lot easier taking stuff off the shelf rather than having to design it all yourself it's just true part of the seat of some forms of feminism is that women believe heightened masculine types of status will give them all that it gives to men it does not just by virtue of masculinity and femininity and male and female and the way culture is and society is men gain things from masculine status that women don't hey guess what here's the other side women gain things from men from feminine status that men don't these things aren't going away they're too deep and so women want it all huh guess what so do men they will have biases and strengths so will men they won't compete in masculinity neither will men compete in femininity generally speaking overlapping bell curves etc etc so what does that mean well you're gonna have decisions to make about your life you're gonna look for resources you're gonna look for help you're gonna look for wisdom go find it go do it and of course I'm a Christian minister so ask God to help you let me know what you think in the comments can't wait to read the comments for this one