https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=R7WuFS48tls

 Here we go. Yeah, definitely. There we go. Well, yeah, the sharing thing, we'll have to cross that bridge later. But yeah, recording is good. That's fine. That's fine. Well, you look like you're in a truck or at work or something. That's right. I'm in a work truck. My content lends itself to listening while driving. Yeah, I'm not driving. I'm not driving. I'm just sitting here. Oh, that's good. Well, tell me a little bit about yourself. Okay. Where would you, I kind of thought about this. Once I pressed, you know, start the meeting, I thought, I don't really have anything to say, so Paul's going to have to guide me on this. Well, tell me about the home you grew up in. Okay, so I'm from Kentucky. I guess to describe the home and have to describe my parents and their background. So they met in college. My dad is from a nominally Catholic background, but nominal at best. Pretty rough family, actually. A lot of premature dying on that side, drug overdoses, etc. My mom is from a much more conservative background. I think in college, I believe, is when she sort of went from a nominal safe, Protestant safe, to being really all in on it, probably by the influence of her older sister. My mom is the second of six girls. And she sort of converted my dad, I guess, as a precondition to their marriage. So I am the youngest of four. And my dad probably had a factory job for most of our upbringing. He wasn't very present, and that might be an understatement. He, I found out later, whenever he left, eventually he left. I think he kind of had some affairs in the background, which he had been repentant of. And then eventually he wasn't repentant and it just took off. So I was probably in eighth grade at that time. Yeah, that was a big hit. I mean, if all of that didn't play out the way it had, I wouldn't have come across Peterson and I wouldn't be talking to you right now, that's for sure. So, yeah, what else do you want to ask about that? Well, how do you think? Well, okay, so you go to high school. Well, did you go to church growing up with your mom? There you go. Yeah, so I went to a denomination you've probably heard of. They're kind of notorious for their legalism, probably, the Church of Christ. So I went, you know, twice on Sunday, once on Wednesday, the kind of church where I love the acapella singing, but they seem to imply that if you weren't singing acapella, you might be bound for hell. So that was kind of the nature of that. Well, needless to say, with that kind of conditioning, we'll call it, I definitely believed that I believed. I was maybe a little bit of a zealot, but in a way that was more superficial than I understood until around the time that dad left and then a series of events within the family that were equally traumatic for me at the time. Sort of, it kind of shattered my, it was a really deep trauma for me is what it was. Now part of that trauma externally was that my, my personality, I would say, changed a lot at that time, got a lot darker maybe. Around that age, I began to have some questions about whether life was worth it or not, let's say. And that was finally, that was finally evident to our church of probably 85 people. But what happened in my experience was that from my peers at school to the elders in the church. Everyone's disposition toward me kind of went a little bit aloof around that time, which you would expect from your middle school peers. I didn't, but you would now in hindsight, but I didn't expect it from the church family. So that was really disillusioning for me. And ultimately that led to me by the time I was probably 17, I think, is when I got a letter, like an ex-communication style letter from the elders there, which amounted to not much more than I had kind of been skipping out on church service too frequently. So I basically got written off by them at the time, which of course was probably the opposite of what I needed. So, I know we have a time limit here, so to sort of fast forward past all that, we can go back to that part of my life if you want. You know, I had developed an interest in songwriting, playing music, playing car, singing. And of course, other interests that would come with teenage rebellion. So a lot of pot in a lot of those circles. And I wound up moving to Nashville at a young age. And I went really deeply into the spiritual but not religious kind of perspective, really deep, which happened actually with some sort of bizarre mystical experiences that occurred around the time of my family life first holding a card. And then that led into a really deep and earnest interest in Taoism. And then I would get into aspects of Hinduism and a lot of meditative stuff, which of course entailed some profound spiritual experiences in that state. And that was my 20s, basically. I got married in my 20s. I would call that a nominal marriage. My sense of marriage is much different than it was at the time. At the time, it was just kind of a default into what she said she wanted. So it happened. And a few years ago, I moved around a lot. I lived in Maine, sorry, I lived in Rhode Island, Ohio, Tennessee, Florida, etc. And it's kind of my wandering. And I was in Florida a few years ago, right before COVID hit. And for reasons unbeknownst to me, I prayed more of a Christian style prayer than I would have before that. I specifically became really fixated on revisiting the idea of Jesus as a literal truth. And I prayed specifically about Jesus, kind of as if to say, you know, if you'll show me that this is true, then I'll follow you, basically. And then that prayer was answered. And things have not been the same since. So all of that seeking and all of that prayer, all that spiritualism that I was involved in, all the existential intensity that I had, it all got channeled directly into a very flawed but earnest discipleship that I'm still on. Wow. That's a story. And I left out most of the details. It's years compacted into a story. That's why stories are compression engines. What else about your life changed after you prayed that prayer? Everything. I mean, I guess I'm going to talk in particular. So in terms of, you know, of course, as you know, most of it is, well, I should say most of it is, but it comes from an internal place. It's hard to articulate for anyone. But externally, I was probably three and a half years or so into the most stable relationship, intimate relationship of my life at that time. We had an apartment in Florida together. And, you know, I guess the long and short of it is as I was wrestling spiritually and I began for the first time ever, really, to actually care about a sense of right and wrong. I sort of just went with comfort. You know, I tried to have conversation with the gal that I was with, and we had had talks about getting married around that time. And I started to realize that we had no direction. We had no objective moral values or sense of why we would get married, other than it was a pretty smooth, easygoing relationship. And I just, you know, the sounds, but I began to, to my surprise, feel really convicted about how wrong it was for us to be living together out of wedlock. And, you know, that's not really as legalistic or purpose level as it sounds. It was just kind of a deeper conviction that what we were doing wasn't true, if I can say that. It wasn't intentional. It wasn't. We didn't answer to anything higher. It was just we were just appeasing ourselves. And that simultaneous with my conversion experience, my relationship with God was sort of convicting me that it had to go. So how did she respond to that? Not well. So I mentioned that the relationship was really easygoing. And a lot of that is because of her personality. She was very, very passive. You know, wasn't much of a communicator, just really laid back. And at that time, I finally found out that that wasn't necessarily only a positive trait. So whenever I try to open up conversation about this sort of deeper sense of meaning or purpose or direction for what we were doing, there just there was no argumentation. It wasn't it wasn't tense or conflicted. It was just nothing there. So I don't know. I felt that I had to leave, which was tough for me because at the time I had nowhere to go. I've gotten myself into a situation. I essentially followed her career before. And I was for the first time kind of waking up out of the stupor I've been in since I was a teenager. Wow. Credit to God for that, because I didn't realize I was walking. And kind of started trying to follow the Peterson admonitions to kind of get it together. But I was basically flat broke and I had nowhere to go. So I went to Arkansas because that's where my sister is with her family. And that was humiliating. And I slept in the spare bedroom and it was a short term thing. I tried to start a long care company down there. Well, I did actually. We have a great relationship. But at the time, some things came up where it wasn't really going to be a long term fit for any of us. So then I wind up in Kentucky on a friend's couch. And all of this, you know, mind you, this is me coming into my own as a man in his younger thirties. So I really felt like what I was experiencing as a consequence of trying to do the right thing and follow Christ, really, which is where it was coming from. Externally, it felt like I was only being punished for that basically because I was I didn't really have anywhere to belong anymore. Here you do the right thing and everything gets worse. Yeah. Yeah. And, you know, we all hear the testimonies where it kind of goes the other way and people become wealthier and happier and all that. But, yeah, it was it was it was tough. But of course, I'm still living out that story of things have stabilized in some ways, some ways they haven't. But, you know, as you understand as a pastor, the goal has simply been to not compromise on the truth any more than, you know, my fleshly fallen self is probably bound to anyway. But in the more fundamental choices in terms of what I do and why and what what informs the nature of the relationships that I'm in, you know, I'm trying to. I'm trying to follow the Lord. Wow, that's a powerful story. What's so so you're working a job now. Are you in a relationship? Are you alone? Yeah, so I'm working a job which I was right there on the edge of moving to Nashville or saying in Kentucky. I've been in contact with this Orthodox priest that was like my gateway back into Christianity, Christianity proper, firstly organized religion side of it. And I prayed with him on the phone about kind of that that fork in the road. What what should happen? And right when we get off the phone, I got a text message from an old friend I hadn't heard from in years. And she was basically offering me this job that I have. So that was a little over three years ago. So I'm here and this is its own saga. But I was in a relationship for a solid two and a half years that came about in a way that was very unexpected. I wasn't looking for it per se, but I had been in prayer about something that seemed to very much parallel with this relationship and this girl. She was a little more woke adjacent at the time that I met her. And I felt it was weird for me to be a Christian. That was all very strange to me still. And it was even weirder for me to enter into a relationship and do my best. I wasn't perfect, but I did my best to try to lead with the gospel, to try to lead with the truth and to try to say, look, if we're going to do this, you know, I wanted to kind of have the tell-off. I wanted to be something pertaining to marriage. And we'll have to learn together kind of what that's all about and why we would even be in each other's lives as a romantic couple. So that was a long saga with a lot of really, really intense ups and downs, again, with the intensity exacerbated by the fact that I'm feeling this existential pressure. Because now I'm a man who's woken up and I'm in my late thirties and it's like I've got a lot of catching up to do. So I would like to not just sort of fool around with various females in a way that I probably would have in my twenties. So if I weren't currently in a bit of a dark chapter in terms of processing some of that fallout, because it ultimately didn't result in marriage. And in a word, that would be because she ultimately wasn't quite ready herself. Now she's 25 and even newer to sort of attempt at a Christian walk than I am. So it's understandable. And I'm not a man of, you can probably tell by the work that or the attire. I don't know, but I'm not a man of high status. And, you know, it's hard in this world, I think more than ever, probably economically for a lot of us. So yeah, she had her reasons for being a little bit lukewarm, I think, which it's a strange paradox to contend with because you've got the apparent depth and profundity of your relationship and your history and your chemistry and all this. But then you've got, you know, certain boxes that you kind of want to have checked regardless of all that sense of mentality. Right. There's certain realities that are there for both of you. Yeah, yeah. So anyway, so that's currently not a thing. And, you know, I tried my best not to make it an idol, right. But also part of my conversion, my post conversion life has been for the first time ever. I was genuinely interested in marriage. I genuinely feel called for what it's worth to be a father. And I think in some sense, and this might be laughable in a way, but in some sense, I think I'm uniquely equipped to be a good father based on I've had 15 years plus to study all the ways not to do it based on my dad. Yeah. And I don't think there's a more. I think that's true. The. I mean, in some ways, you're looking to redeem the story of your father, you're not looking to redeem your father you're looking to redeem the story. Because, you know, being just even from the, the brief version of it that you shared with me. You know, our actions have consequences and his actions had consequences his actions had consequences for you for your mother for your siblings. And those consequences reverberated through your life. And, you know, it's it's taken a while to, to sort of, you know, get steady and get in a good place and get your head in the game and figure out and you've done all that now so you're ready to sort of say, Okay, time to begin but you're beginning in your late 30s instead of your 20s and that's harder. Yeah, it's been a lot harder. But yeah, what can you do. So maybe I thought somewhere on this zoom call you could. I've been following you for years on and off. And I know you, you have conversations like these with a lot of people and seeing people in my position and hopefully I can glean some, some wisdom, some course correction words from you. Well, it sounds like you've already done a lot of the course correcting. Yeah, well I'm trying, trying. You know, I bought a house, which was felt like a seat, but it was a square the details but it was a calculated risk it's it's not a flattering home to walk into. As a matter of fact it's so unflattering I live in a camper adjacent to the house. So it's basically, it's a work site. It's the second job site that I have every day. And, of course, as, as money allows I can sort of gradually bring it up to a place where you might call it a home but the idea behind that was the studio apartment in the city wasn't really going to facilitate a family. I was with my cousin for a while to try to save some money and prepare myself to be able to get a house. And that was going to be a big, very good place for a family. So I thought if I get a house, I'm doing my due diligence to set the stage for me and at the time, this girl, I was dating, to start a family. I was trying to find myself in the dead of winter by myself in a camper, and it kind of feels like the, the, the momentum I was trying to build is a bit of a mockery field now that's a little bit, maybe too well with me and subjective but that is something I grapple with actively right now. But, you know, I couldn't even be persisting in it. If it weren't for the sort of intervention of God in my life a few years ago. You mentioned an Orthodox priest Are you going to an Orthodox church or what's your church life like. Yeah, so I'm pretty sure that probably came from page, oh, somewhere in the little triangle was like Peterson and page, oh and you, I think for a while with my main mainstays. And so through page, oh, I think I was introduced to orthodoxy. I started reading some stuff, how them off and beyond. And it really represented something that the kind of church I was in was sorely lacking, which essentially is a acknowledgement of an embrace of the mystery and the beauty. And that was important for me. So I'm ashamed to admit kind of that. So the Christ came first. My sort of identity as a Christian came with that. But then my relationship to what I guess I could call churchy entity that has been a little more strenuous and spotty. And, you know, I've gone to some liturgies. I've gone with my cousin to some Catholic mass. I've gone to a whole different array of Protestant evangelical churches, and I continue to have been maybe maybe a little bit of a paralysis by analysis. But I've been doing a lot of research. You know, that's what you do. You try to learn all the different nuances of theology and what separates the different denominations. So you can try to make a good choice. Because again, the idea would be that I can commit to it. It can represent stability in my life and be something that, again, I'm offering essentially as the head of a home should God ever will that for me. I'm offering that to my family. So I want to take the choice very seriously about, you know, placing membership in the congregation. And so all that to say, I don't currently have a congregation. It's still a weekly thing where I'll. And I've heard you say that I agree with it. At least I think I agree with it. This sort of consumerist approach to which church you join is maybe a little overplayed and not the best path. But I also think it's of consequence. And ultimately, I have I've weeded out the the Orthodox and the Catholic from my options, regrettably, because frankly, I just can't I just cannot profess to believe in the way that they do regarding the Eucharist. And it's really important for me to be authentic and really be able to believe in what I'm doing, especially in the context of being in a church service. So that kind of whittles it down to Protestantism, which doesn't really whittle it down that far. So. Well, in Kentucky, there are probably more choices. Right. That's probably true. Yeah. Lately, I've kind of been delving into some of the high church stuff or I don't know if I'm using that word correctly with regard to Anglicans and Lutherans. You know, trying to find that middle ground where there's still some like liturgical sense of reverence in the building as opposed to just like, you know, pop rock music and, you know, yoga pants or whatever. So, I'm trying to. Trying to figure that out. Oh, God bless you. God bless you. God bless you. I totally. I totally get it. I totally get it. I totally get it. Yeah, it's tough, man. But but it's you know, but God's been. I mean, God's been clearly working in your life. For sure. And it has been, I mean, I. I don't know. Maybe it's I'm always if everything just flows too quickly and too smoothly, I'm always a little suspicious because. Right. Generally speaking, it's not how it goes. You know, there'll be a there'll be a moment where things sort of click and then you get on the right track and then you'll get going. And then just your story with the house is so true where all right, well, let's get this house. Let's OK. I'll live in the trail and I'll fix up the house and you know, maybe this woman and then and then and then and then you're still. And that's to me that just rings so true of of life, but I also I also believe that that God uses these strange crooked paths again and again in people's lives and and I you know, I think. Yeah, I'll just because again, I think the. I think the goal. I mean, it's a it's a beautiful goal, you know, a house and a family and it's a beautiful goal and it's something worthy to aspire to. And maybe maybe God will give it to you. Who knows? And I hope that I wish that for you. But the the part of the main thing that he's building is, of course, you. And the the perfection of your soul. And the the you know, the fullness of your story, and he's already given you an interesting story, not necessarily an easy one. But an interesting one and what you build, what you build along the way is wisdom and, you know, it seems that the first few decades of your life are about. Having to learn wisdom and then the last decades of your life are probably sharing whatever you've learned with those who are coming after you. So I hope so. Yeah, it's funny you mentioned that I actually had this thought today. It haunts me a little bit. It's silly, but it was just a funny thing to say. But when I was I was probably six or seven, I remember walking out of the church and my preacher greeted me and he was kind of asking me what my favorite book of the Bible was. I remember saying to him, Proverbs. And I said, I'm a big fan of wisdom. And he kind of chuckled at me because I don't know what I was talking about. I had some sense of that being a value. And likewise, I've always had a really, it might have been my grandpa's presence or something, but I've always had a real affinity for the elderly. And so somewhere on that spectrum, I guess, yeah, there's a bit of a wisdom calling in my early synthesis and in my approach. But that's only a reflection of how foolish I've been probably. So I probably needed more than most. Well, there's a there's a funny dynamic with wisdom that in a certain way, only the foolish can gain a certain kind of wisdom. You have to have been foolish to understand the value of wisdom often. And, you know, there's another funny thing in life, which is that if you live long enough, you will have been old longer than you will have been young. And you don't really realize that until you get up in years. And so now I turned 60 this year and I pastor a church with a bunch of 80 and now 90 year olds. And you begin to realize, you know, if I live to 90, I'll have another 30 years. I mean, I think back to when I turned 30, that seems like a lifetime ago. I mean, I've had let's see, how old was I when I had my second? It was 94. So I had when I when I turned 30, I had one kid and one wife and I had been married five years. And now I have five kids and one wife. I will have been married 30 and I've been married 35 years. And so if I'm not if I be if I live to 90. Oh, you know, Lord willing, grandchildren, you know, this this YouTube thing, this big turn in my life that happened, this happened at 55. So no, there's life is a very strange thing because those those early decades when you don't know anything and you really can't know anything, they're so chock full of both potential and. And. And and and consequence, consequence. I mean, the decisions you make in your 20s and the decisions that are made by your parents when you're little, those are those are hugely consequential. And then you have very little control over them. And, you know, yeah, and yet they set the pattern and they set so much for so much of what happens later in life. Life is a very strange thing. Yeah, and I think that the gravity of what you're saying, again, not to make an idol of it, but I listened to your first conversation with with Graham Graham Grizz. And that was a great conversation. You touched on a lot of things and somewhere in there. I've lost the thread now, but somewhere in there it was it was a reminder of how significant it is for. For fathers to to influence their children for for the better, including what he talked about. He brought up, you know, people getting all worked up about the next presidential election, But there's no real sense of embodied civic duty and men and churches being sort of encouraged necessarily to be involved in their local communities. And of course, that starts at the home and and everything you're saying and all the consequences. I'm saying this, you know, from experience as we all can, I guess. But, man, your dad has a lot to do with it and your dad's dad. I can look back at my dad and my dad's dad and what I've heard about the father before him. And that tells me to not be surprised about anything that happened in my life, really. And I can look at just the lesser influence that my mom's dad had on us. And the majority of it's not be an overstatement, but I think the majority of the redemptive qualities that we have and choices that we've made, the values that we hold are mostly a credit to him being present for his six daughters and being, you know, a strong but also supportive and loving masculine figure in their life. You know, this is this is all spoken about ad nauseum, but, you know, it's something that I couldn't feel as passionate about. God or Jesus, if I didn't sense in them. An important like a really, really important model for what it means to be a father, basically. I think that's so true. It's so true. Reality is also life is also funny in that things like fatherhood. I mean, when you talk about them, you can you almost you almost fear just, you know, falling into cliche. But at the same time, it's really hard to sell on the one of the videos I released two videos this morning, one of the videos that I did was a video about the Christian Form Church. I played a long segment of a of a synod interview with Matthew Tuning. And part of what I really loved about that was he, you know, we talked about his father, his his family name was kind of notorious in the Christian Form Church, the way his grandfather and his father left the denomination. And then he comes back into it. But fatherhood is and this takes nothing against nothing away from motherhood, because, I mean, we could go on that too. But again, in terms of for men. I mean, because we we will have a chance to perhaps embody fatherhood and take our crack at it in the way that we want with motherhood. It's reality. And it's so weighty and so consequential yet it's also so. You know, for me, I've I've seen men and fathers who are very intentional and I've always admired that they're very intentional and they're very explicit. But yeah, that's not at all how I saw my father or my grandfather. They seemed far more implicit and far less intentional. And yet the older I get, the more I see that even even though perhaps they weren't terribly aware of a number of things, yet these first drafts that had been written into them by the generations of fathers, you know, there's not a there's not a as far as I can tell. There's not a divorce in terms of my family going in terms of say my lineage, my father to grandfather to great. I can't find a divorce going back six, seven generations. Yeah, now there's a death, my great grandfather lost his wife and childbirth with their sixth child and he married. Strangely, he married sort of a sister-in-law. But, but that was, you know, that's the 19th, early 20th century, these things happened. But there wasn't a divorce. And, you know, part of what, you know, part of what we're wrestling with is this. The painful legacy of broken marriages, something, something happens. I mean, how many of these conversations do I have where this comes up? I mean, it's, it's very unusual that it doesn't. Yeah, yeah. You know, a little bit of a sidetrack, but I wanted to ask you about this because I think it's related to this to me is in terms of, you know, spiritual trends that we're experiencing as a people. But you mentioned in your talk with Griswold there, CS Lewis cosmology, which I'm not, I love CS Lewis. I'm not familiar with that, but you were specifically pointing out this notion that like our plane of existence here is really just one level up from some pretty deep and dark stuff. So I don't know if you kind of see a connection there and why I'm trying to bring that out right now. But can you say a little bit more about your description of it because that doesn't, I'm not quite tracking with you. Well, I'm trying to remember exactly the context in which you all discussed it, but the point that you are making and bringing it up is basically that our life here on earth as humans and the grand scheme of all the, you know, celestial spheres or dimensions or whatever you want to say is we are, we're playing with the fire of hell a lot more than maybe a lot of us realize. And I just think that that sort of informed some of, I bring it up to say that I think my visceral awareness of that kind of informs my zeal and the sense of mission about, and I'm not even a father, I might be a terrible father if I ever were one, but I feel so convicted about this being something that needs to be spoken about more often because of how many, you know, cultural influences per se are actively working to undermine that and have been for decades and like everybody knows it, but I don't think that we should be afraid of sounding like a broken record and going into that topic. I mean, obviously that is why I think Peterson rose to prominence in the way that he did. You could break it down a lot of ways, but for me personally as a viewer who was entranced whenever I came across his videos, yeah, the content was important, but he's so earnest and he so genuinely cares and moved to tears often for his audience basically and for the human condition that he's in. You know, that is a fatherly, I mean, who can say right, I guess virtues can be in the fathers and the mothers, but to have that come from a male figure in that way, it definitely has been really endearing and really captivating and I think, of course, I'm sure you've talked about it a million times on our channel, but there's a deficit of that. And of course, like you mentioned, divorce is one of the, whether it's the, you know, the wife's fault or the husband's fault, regardless, the removal of the father from the home or in my case, just the half-hearted presence at best of the father in the home is destructive. I don't think that's hyperbole. No, no, you're right and I'm tracking with you now. Part of what I've learned to see about our participation in this life is that our aperture is so small. We just take in a little bit. Now what that means is so often we try to balance because balance is a way to try to be fair about what we take in, but the impulse to balance is also an impulse to truncate. And so on one hand, we've got, you know, I was listening to Luke Thompson this morning in his little morning live stream and on one hand you have universalists out there that say, finally, God is going to redeem all. Okay. I'm not convinced of that. Because part of what I see on the other side is exactly what you're pointing to and CS Lewis talked about that too. We also know that all of our consequences, all of our life choices have consequences. And now some of the consequences of good life choices are difficult. Some of the consequences of our rebellious life choices can sometimes be redeemable. Yeah, there you're exactly right in that. We. It was very interesting to me listening to Peterson when he was first talking about PTSD, that he noted that, you know, it wasn't, it wasn't necessarily the. What caused the deep trauma and hence the deep disruption of people's lives in the future wasn't so much simply witnessing evil and violence and chaos. It was the person's willing. Willful participation in that. That really caused the trauma, because it's one thing to have been a victim of evil and malice. It's another thing to have been a perpetrator of it. And that realization. Which is. You know, it's this whole our whole current status, our whole current culture of. Celebrating victimhood. Is it is so. Convenient to us, because what it does is it's an implicit declaration of innocence. When the reality is, we are not that innocent. And, you know, part of, you know, the. One thing in the Bible that comes through again and again, vengeance is mine, saith the Lord, I will repay. And. We, we, in our unbelieving age were skeptical about that will God really repay I mean did now did now really get his just rewards that Hitler get his just rewards did Stalin, but but those are of course names that are in the public view there's. There are fathers and husbands and mothers and grandmothers and people outside of family systems who have done just just terrible things in this world. And we feel vindicated and righteous and self righteous when we have a hand in vengeance or retribution, but that command vengeance. Vengeance is mine says says the Lord, I will repay that's that's to our benefit because basically what he's saying is, I don't want you with blood on your hands. And, and now, usually off sometimes not always, I don't believe in this is why I'm not a universalist that the justice comes and the retribution comes. You know, maybe in after death and in the next in the age to come I don't know the Lord, the Lord can manage that I did. But sometimes it happens in this world and this is also sort of part of the reason why we have this really interesting phase thing where we have sort of civilians and then the state or the king, or you know where, you know, a legal execution is very different from a murder. And in our, in our system, you know, justice is blind, which is a very interesting metaphor. So, but but I think you're exactly right that part of part of part of sort of the collective lie that we continue to perpetrate is you can do what you want and there won't be consequences. It's not true. It's not true. And it's, it's, and this is again one of Peterson's Peterson keeps saying, you're not going to get away with anything. He keeps saying that we listen and we think, Oh, really. And he's very deadly serious about that. But now, you know, again, the aperture issue. That reality also sets up this that that reality makes the grace of God. Even more profound and this was what Bonhoeffer talked about with respect to cheap grace. If you're living in a consequence free realm. Grace is very cheap because consequences aren't terribly costly. So, no, I think that's right. And, and, you know, what I appreciate about your story and you know what I appreciate about what grim gris does is at least, at least there's honesty about the consequences of our choices. Especially the bad choices. Because we don't own up to that. If you're not and if we as a culture aren't honest about that. We're just lying to each other. And, and, and we're just perpetuating more misery down the line and where we're not giving people the, the kind of warning that should be given. So that's a great point. Yeah, I think that's really well said. That's one thing I've always enjoyed about listening to you is you have a way of expanding and kind of getting me out of my little rut that I get into. But, you know, and I know we're towards the end of the conversation. So maybe we can steer it towards a gospel message a little bit because so many things are coming up for me when you talk about that subject. You know, consequences are so implicit because of how intrinsically inescapably relational everything is. And of course, this is a big thing that sold me on Christianity is because when I developed or come when I came to understand sort of the Trinitarian concept and the relationality being so essential and inseparable from God. And now I'm just going to grab thoughts as they come. But it reminded me when you were talking as well of the passage where Jesus, you can correct me. I think he was called good teacher and he almost rebukes the man and in his own paradoxical way he says, you know, why do you call me good? There's just something really, really radical, subtle, radical that happened to my spirit, if I can say that without sounding too woo woo around the time of my conversion. And it had everything to do with what we're talking about, which is really, I'm not a Calvinist. I'm not sure how far this extends across the Christian spectrum. But the utter depravity thing is very real in my experience. But I also catch myself bouncing back and forth playing the victim. It was synchronistic when he brought that up because earlier today I actually came across a note that I'd written for myself because I do that. And in that I was essentially, I was like comforting myself with a sense of feeling vindicated against someone else and thinking that if I can just get smarter, then my way of dealing with that person in the future will exact vengeance in some way. Not in a way that was malicious, just in a way that sort of I felt would protect my boundaries or something. But when I looked at that note, that came to mind, that verse you're saying, vengeance is the Lord's. It's just, it's everything to me now. That's, you know, as of whatever, four years ago, it's a constant call to, like you said, to recognize. And it's so hard to do, it's impossible to do, which is why we need grace. But I'm always trying to find my feet. I'm always trying to make up for lost time. I'm always trying to become a better man and maybe get the status I need or whatever to get through this life. But then I'm always, always having to contend with the fact that the real work of the kingdom or whatever is really about God sanctifying you, let's say. And that is usually not a flattering process or experience. And yet there is this, you know, he chastises those and he loves whatever that verse is. It's humiliating and it's terrible. But also, if you embrace it, if you embrace that relationship and trust and obedience and all this, you find the grace and you find the personal love that an infinite, unfathomable creator finds a way to, with like detail and precision and utter meekness, like he presents these blessings and the comforts. He presents these blessings and encouragements to you on your path as you submit to him. And it's just, it's such an all consuming sort of life to live once you enter into relationship with him. That everything before it and in my life and everything that the world could offer me in my life, you know, ultimately, it does pale in comparison despite the temptations that arise contrary. So, yeah, no, it's a great way to say it. That's a great way to say it. Wow, it's and it's so true. I mean, we tend to strive for all kinds of things in this world. And, you know, if the Christian story is true, and I believe it is what we take out of this world, you know, we have this cliche, you can't take it with you, you know, you can't take the money, you can't take the house, you can't take the dog, maybe you take the dog, I don't know. I'm a little on the fence with respect to that. I think maybe the Lord will let us take our dogs. But, you know, but what what he does is, and the New Testament is clear on this, he refines us, but he refines us with fire. And that's and that's that's so often that's that's the way he does it. So, no, it's so true. Jacob, I've so enjoyed this. I'm going to send it. I'm going to send you the recording so that you can look it over. I, I, I'm not going to put any pressure on you to share this. There are sort of three levels, you know, either we can, you know, you can just keep the recording or can destroy the recording. If you'd write me to reach destroy the recording, I would happily do that too. That's no problem at all. Another level would be to share it in the sort of the randos area in the channel. And part of the reason why I'm really growing to like that area is not everybody needs their story on the open Internet. And I'm usually careful about names and things on a file so that people couldn't necessarily Google you and find this conversation. Or then some some people would rather have their shared on the full channel, which is which is fine too, if it's appropriate. And this one I think would be appropriate. You were, I mean, you shared your life, but you didn't, you know, go too badly into the private sins of others. But but but look at it and think about it because I know, you know, and often on some Mondays I have to decide whether or not to open up slots. And and part of me loves these conversations just for exactly the reasons that I've loved this conversation. It's it's so good to have the just the common reminding of the the way that God moves in our lives and all of the complexities that are there. But it's always it's part of me just always, you know, should I should I can I can I can I do it again today? Do it again today because part of it is also so waiting because it's yeah, yeah, it's it's another it's another life. And and part of what's so cool about these is like, oh, man, I really, really enjoyed listening to your story. And it's it's frustrating to know that I might, you know, I might only talk to you once or twice for the rest of my life. We may never meet in person. You never know. Or something something different could happen. But I've so I've shown it so enjoyed this conversation. I've so enjoyed hearing your story and hearing God's grace in your story. And, you know, I pray for, you know, I pray that God gives you the desires of your heart. I pray that God, you know, gives you the strength to rebuild this house and that he puts an amazing life in it and that children can follow and that you can be. You can be the kind of father that, you know, some, you know, 100 years from now or 50 years from now, some somebody or 25 years from now, somebody else will be talking to some other pastor and say, yeah, my father. And then he'll tell little bits of your story. And then, you know, and he married my mom and we had, you know, I had two brothers and sisters and. And, you know, and the truth is that that son will probably have some things, but then there'll be some hard things that they'll they will have made a wrong turn or some tragic tragedy will happen to them and it gets them derailed and God's grace kind of comes down through that and begins to, you know, afford a wisdom that somehow might not have come if the wound hadn't happened. I mean, that's just the mystery. God's grace. So, yeah. Well, yeah, thank you. Thank you for that prayer. Those are encouraging words that I need right now. And yeah, I kind of I knew that I might bring some some weightiness and heaviness to the conversation. But, yeah, I'm glad I'm glad you've had it as well. And yeah, I'll happily watch this and, and I don't know if it's through email or whatever method I'll try to give you. I'll send it. I'll send the link to it to it through email and it'll be it'll be an unlisted link so only someone with the link can listen to it so that you can you can listen to it like you listen to anything else on YouTube and then you can just write me back and say, Now let's keep it between us or destroy the file or you can share it but keep it in the limited section of the behind the paywall or do with it what you want. And if you do you read decide later on, which, which sometimes happens like you got to take it down I'm interviewing for a job. Yeah, well, find the video and link it to me and I'll take it down. Okay, yeah, that sounds good. Paul it's been super unexpected and a blessing to talk to you so I appreciate it. It's been a pleasure, Jacob. God bless you. You too. Thank you. Yep. Bye bye.