https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=6EdxnnSdDzQ

 and he was an upper class English person and his mother became a Christian, who was a vicar's daughter, became a Christian scientist because it was the high upper class alternative was to become a Christian scientist. And he, and I, and you've taught me quite a bit indirectly about what Christian science is by the way, but um. I know almost nothing about it, so. But anyway, so he said that, you know, you just went to Sunday school and you know, you went to a Christian scientist practitioner rather than going to a doctor and life continued. And he went to Eaton, famous English school, and he was very successful. And he was, he loved sports and he was going to go to Cambridge and he was the main player person playing squash and he was in some big competition out there and he couldn't play because he had a knee injury. And his mother said, well, phone up this man called John Doley. And he had a 20 minute phone conversation and never had a knee problem again in his life. Wow. So as a 19 year old, this was just around the outbreak of the Second World War. This this caught his attention and so he became one of this man's students. And John Doley was an Englishman who at one point was the head of the Christian Science Organization sometime between the two wars. And then he came back to England and he carried on studying and deepening his understanding. And the thing I know very little about Christian science, but the idea of Christian science was there was a science to Jesus's healing. And you want the silent, the science, the process, then you could do the healings. At one point, Christian science had lots of healings and those have all disappeared now. But that's not. That's fascinating. I know nothing about Christian science, so this is interesting. Keep going. And and so anyway, John Doley was tried by post for heresy, you know, for going beyond the founder's teachings. And he was found guilty and his students, including my dad, were circulated and said, it's not your fault your teacher has gone off the rails. You can remain a remember, but you must not have anything more to do with this man. And dad said, how could you possibly not engage with someone who was showing you deeper and deeper truths in the Bible and was doing extraordinary healings at the same time? So he found himself that group found themselves excommunicated. And I think my dad was this man's favorite student, I'm not quite sure. But anyway, at some point, dad found my mom, who was also one of the students, and he decided it was the time for him to go off and study the Bible and sort of get back to basics for himself. And and then my mom tried to have a child and lost the first baby with spina bifida. And I was, and she said, apparently, David, my husband gives me everything and I can't even give him a child. And so I think I might have spent nine months in a state of high anxiety before I was born. So that was that that was my that was my beginning. And but that didn't. I suppose he believed I have a younger brother who I would say after a year and a half, my life was ruined. It was great. And then the things got wrong. My mom had postnatal depression and stuff. But he didn't force his Christian science or his I mean, he ended up just calling himself a student of the Bible. He didn't he I think he felt that we should find our own way. And so you go to school and there was bits of chapel and then when I went to eat and you would go to church or chapel every day and beautiful stained glass windows and and the beautiful teachings of Jesus. And then the rest of the time you were living in a sort of tyranny with the elder boys, you know, having a very harsh regime on the younger boys. You look down on the servants, you look down on the people in the village, the eatness was spread through. So it was just a complete sort of contradiction of you know, so by the time I was 16, I become very cynical and so nihilistic and didn't believe in God didn't believe in any of that stuff. And of course, 16 and 17, you know, everything and it's so