https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=TSm719HdswU

 Hi, this is Paul and this is Rough Draft for Sunday where I run through the current status of my Sunday sermon. I've been in the book of 1 Peter for a number of weeks and will be in there until Ascension Sunday and Pentecost. What do people want for their children? Well, if you ask someone, often you'll hear the answer to be happy. It's not a great answer, it's a low resolution answer and there's a sense of it sort of being a consolation prize. Well, what does it matter as long as they're happy? I think what they more deeply want often is that their children would have significance in life, meaning, impact, importance. It's really fun to look at the social security website that keeps track of top five baby names for females and males for the last hundred years. Very interesting. Liam is on the rise, Noah, biblical name, William, monarchical name, James, monarchical name, Oliver, monarchical name. How many kings and Bible figures there are in the boys category? Now in the girls category, Emma's made a comeback, Sophia's been big, Isabella, she's a queen, Emily, big, Madison, Hannah, Ashley. If you get way back into the 60s, well, Mary is a biggie. Mary, Mary, Mary, Mary, Mary, Mary, Mary, Mary, Mary, Mary. Helen, Helen of Troy, Margaret, Royal, but the boys especially. You can just see the status running through Noah. Jacob, patriarch, William, again, a king, Jacob, lots of Jacobs, Michael, archangel, Joshua from the Bible, the Hebrew name for Jesus, Matthew, another biblical name, Michael, Michael, Matthew, Christopher, Christ, Matthew, Joshua, Andrew, more royal names, David, another royal name, James, more royal names, Michael, Michael, Michael, Michael, David, David, James, John, Robert, my name's Paul. We name children because of sort of what we want them to become, John, Robert, William, James, Charles, 1923. There's a lot going on here. It's sort of again like my Google zeitgeist figure. Now fame is a funny thing. We gather in the name of the most famous influential person of all of human history. That's what the church does. And Jesus is obviously the most famous person probably in the history of the world. And I think 100 years from now when I had my talk with John Sokhe, he said Confucius, pretty influential, Muhammad, pretty influential. I suspect 100 years from now Jesus' fame only continues to grow and Jesus' influence only continues to grow. His symbol, the cross, is the most ironic and iconic symbol in all of human history. Part of why I like Tom Holland's book, Dominion, is because he points this out. Because the cross did not take on that iconic symbol at first. First it was people understood what crosses were for, for them to really actually celebrate it. It took 400 years to get past the stigma. Only centuries after Jesus' death, by which time astonishingly even the Caesars had been brought to acknowledge him as Christ, Messiah, Christ is Greek, Messiah is Hebrew, did his execution at last start to emerge as an acceptable theme for artists. By 8400 the cross was ceasing to be viewed as something shameful. Banned as punishment decades earlier by Constantine, the first Christian emperor, crucifixion had come to serve the Roman people as an emblem of triumph over sin and death. An artist carving the scene out of ivory might represent Jesus in the skimpy loincloth as an athlete, no less muscled than any of the ancient gods, think Fabio and a cross. Now all of this has a lot to do with humanity's deep attempt to deal with death. And fame is in many ways one of the oldest means of attempting to transcend death. This came out in the hit song in the 70s from the musical movie, fame, Irene Cara's song, baby, look at me and tell me what you see. You ain't seen the best of me yet. Give me time. I'll make you forget the rest. I got more in me. You can set it free. I can catch the moon in my hand. Don't you know who I am? Remember my name, fame. I'm going to live forever. I'm going to learn how to fly high. I feel it coming together. People will see me and cry. Fame. I'm going to make it to heaven. Light up the sky like a flame. Fame. I'm going to live forever. Baby remember my name. Remember remember remember remember. This is right from the Greeks because for the Greeks, death was transcended by fame, taking a name for yourself, doing deeds of renown that will never be forgotten. Homer was a big piece of this, obviously. Achilles, Odysseus, the great battle around Troy, Helen, have a name that endures through the centuries. This is how you beat death. Renowned for some heroic or renowned deed. It's only rivaled by childbirth in the ancient world, which is the other way of beating death, by sending yourself into the future. This gets picked up, obviously, in modern times by, I was listening to Brett Weinstein talk about the coronavirus. What viruses want to do is get into the future and they hitch a ride via human beings. This happens in the two levels of humanity, both the DNA level, the DNA track, which was the basically the Genghis Khan approach to try to beating death, and Jesus Christ. Fame, teaching, it's sort of like a virus. You don't have to actually physically co-opt the body. You just take over its belief and most importantly, its actions. Now, a friend of mine was a, before he was a missionary in the Dominican Republic, was an elementary school teacher. He always had this story that he used to tell, which was parents would come in and they have this precious child that they have just, the woman has put her life at risk to bring into the world and the man and the woman are doing their very best to give the child everything they can. And then he would sit down as a teacher and say, your child's just fine. And they'd look at him like, what do you mean just fine? This is the brightest, most amazing creature the world has ever seen. And the teacher would say, no, your child's normal. Hmm, I just want my child to be happy? No, I want my child to go to heaven, to light up the sky for everyone to remember my child's name. Now, we've been talking about the resurrection as beating the age of decay and from the beginning of the book of 1 Peter, we've seen this. Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who according to his great mercy has caused us to be born again into a living hope through the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead, into an inheritance imperishable and undefiled and unfading reserved for you in heaven, who are being protected by the power of God through faith for salvation already revealed in the last time in which you rejoice. We finally get to the verb if you remember the other sermons. And last week's sermon, the practice of resurrection is holiness. You will be holy because I am holy. If you call him, if you call him, on him was Father who judges impartially according to each person's work, conduct yourselves with fear during the time of your temporary residence, because you know that you were redeemed, were redeemed, past tense, indicative, you're not redeeming yourself, you were redeemed, this is done for you by Jesus Christ from your feudal way of life. And we talked about Homer Simpson and his feudal way of life. Homer Simpson can't see future Homer, he only sees present Homer and what we see in the resurrection is our future self in the resurrected body and person of Jesus Christ. And so Peter says, lean into that holiness, that's the way you actually lean into your future because that is what you were made for, that holiness. Now chapter two ends, having purified your souls by your obedience to the truth for sincere brotherly love, love one another. So okay, so we lean in to that holiness and the really the goal of that then becomes love because that's the value there at the center, it's love. Not a feeling, not merely a feeling, feelings go along with it, but love. And one way you can think about love is your well-being at my expense. Now so love one another fervently from the heart because you have been born again, again that's, being born again, the outcome of that is love. Not from perishable seed but from imperishable through the living and enduring word of God. For all flesh is like grass and all of its glory like the flowers of the grass. The grass withers and the flowers fall off but the word of the Lord endures forever. So this process, this word of God who is Jesus, the logos, he comes into the world and all of this stuff starts and he is the seed, out of him it grows, he's the seed in us, this is the work that he does and this is the word that has been proclaimed to you. So Peter is reminding them this is what you know, now lean in to it and live it out. Then chapter two starts. Now one of the things that you'll notice is that in a lot of translations they put things into paragraphs and some translations have chapter one and chapter two all within the same heading. This is what the NIV does. Therefore rid yourselves of all malice and all deceit, hypocrisy, envy and slander of every kind. Like newborn babies crave pure spiritual milk so that by it you may grow up into your salvation. Now that you have tasted that the Lord is good. In other words there's something beautiful out there that we are longing for and moving towards and all of these things come into alignment. The good, the beautiful and the true. In other words lean into that holiness looking at your future and the way you do that is living this new life. Now in verse four the NIV starts a new section and it says living stone and chosen people. As you come to him the living stone rejected by humans but chosen by God and precious to him you also like living stones are being built into a spiritual house to be a holy priesthood offering spiritual sacrifices acceptable to God through Jesus Christ. Well what are those spiritual sacrifices? That is the obedience that you do, the costly love shaped obedience. For in scripture it says see I lay a stone in Zion, a chosen and precious cornerstone. The one who trusts in him will never be put to shame. Now to you who believe this stone is precious but to those who do not believe the stone the builders rejected has become the cornerstone and a stone that causes people to stumble a rock that makes them fall. So right here we begin to again feel the irony. So on one hand Jesus is the living stone, he is the model and we living stones are basically come from him. He is the model, we lean towards him into the future, he is by him we see our future reality. Now Jesus in this sense is also temple. Well that's difficult for us to appreciate because unlike the ancients we don't have a real sense of what temple is and what temple is for. A lot of this could be seen in Jesus triumphal entry. He purifies the temple when he comes into Jerusalem that's the cleansing of the temple driving out the money changers but also if you look at those triumphal entry passages you'll also notice that he curses the fig tree and it withers and a lot of people feel concerned about that. Isn't Jesus nice to nature? The point of that story is that Jesus is talking about the temple. He destroys and replaces the temple in himself and you hear this in his accusers because Jesus says and it's very interesting in the synoptics we don't get the direct quote of this from Jesus we get it from his accusers. You will destroy this temple and three days raise it up. Now reading it post hoc it's very clear to see that Jesus is talking about his body but in this way we begin to understand that Jesus himself is not only the seed, is not only the word of God, Jesus himself is also the new temple and so the living stone plus the living stones become a new temple. Now to understand what temples are it's helpful again to read the Old Testament you'll get a lot of history from that. One of the things that you'll figure out in Genesis 1 is that Genesis 1 is in fact a temple text. What does that mean? Temples are places where Gods rest. Now again we have to work on that word too because when we think about rest we think about leaning into our chair at the end of the day being exhausted. That's not what it means. Rest or Sabbath is the commencement of what has been worked for, anticipated, the ideal future. Now commencement is always a funny word when it comes to commencement exercises many of whom many of which have been lamentably cancelled in this spring season. Commencement we feel like it's the end of high school or college or degree program but it's called commencement because the Sabbath rest is about to begin because the degree has been earned and has been put together, the tassel has been turned, the person now has a new status and the commencing of the Sabbath rest has begun. That's what all of this is pointing to. Now I've been reading from the NIV I want to switch to the Lexham English Bible which is this translation that I'm using to show how the Greek words are functioning in the text and again if you're looking at the video the Greek indicative verbs are blue with a double box around them and the Greek imperative verbs those are commands have the double box around them. A lot of what gets translated as indicatives in the NIV are often participles and those have a double line under them. They are helping verbs that continue to make the case for the main verbs which are the indicative and the infinitives. So we follow the verbs through the text. Therefore we'll go back to the beginning of chapter 2. Therefore ridding ourselves of all malice and all deceit and hypocrisy and envy and all slander these are things we get rid of because these are the things inhibiting and stopping us from realizing the life that Jesus has already purchased for us. Like newborn infants now you might think of Augustine's confession of a if you've ever people are nursing again today and if you've ever seen a child that has been laying in the crib crying they're hungry they're hungry they're hungry and the mother comes and begins baby just latches on and sucks and sucks and sucks and Augustine talks about that how greedily I attached myself to the nurses breast. That's the image here like newborn infants long for the unadulterated spiritual milk. This should be our motivation. This should be what moves us. What is this milk? This milk is what Peter has been talking about. So that by it you may grow up into salvation. So it's not just where you're going it's who you're becoming. If you have tasted that the Lord is kind to whom you are drawing near the living stone rejected by men but chosen and precious in the sight of God and we begin to get this contrast between what we're all wanting and what God values and you yourselves as living stones being built up as a spiritual house for a holy priesthood to offer up spiritual sacrifices acceptable to God through Jesus Christ. So what he's saying is that just like Jesus replaces the temple the church becomes the temple in which God dwells and rests and commences the activities for which the world was created. For it stands in for it stands in scripture behold I am laying in Zion a stone a precious cornerstone and the one who believes in him will never be put to shame. Therefore the honor is for you who believe for those of you who refute but for those who refuse to believe the stone that the builder has rejected the builders rejected those of the ones who didn't understand true temple building has become the cornerstone of the true temple and a stone of stumbling in a kind of offense and right here we begin to see the dual nature of what is happening. And so Peter is saying you should long for the good and run away from the bad. So we're also paying attention to the also rands here those who failed to meet the challenge those who failed to make the goal. Jordan Peterson has his future authoring program which is always too two sided look for that desirable future and long for it like infants suckling at the breast but run away from the future you don't want which is the future that you used to be living in. And we see this exactly from what we saw in the previous chapter. You are a chosen race a royal priesthood a holy nation a people for God's possession so that you may proclaim the virtues of the one who called you out of darkness into his marvelous light. You who were not a people you had no people you were just individuals out there but now are a people of God the ones who were not shown mercy but now are shown mercy. Dear friends I urge you as foreigners and temporary residents to abstain from fleshly desires we talked about epithumia last week which wage war against your soul. In other words there is a fight going on. Approach the good flee from the bad maintaining your good conduct among the Gentiles that's among the people who don't believe so that the things in which they slander you as evil doers by seeing your good deeds they may glorify God on the day of the visitation. What does that mean? Well now we have a little hint into at this point in time Christians were a very small part of the population they were slandered because they didn't for a variety of reasons because they didn't participate for one reason in the cult of the emperor and they didn't participate in the normal pagan temple life and they didn't build temples and they didn't have statues they were called atheists people wondered what they were doing they themselves were the temple they themselves as a body became the instantiation of their goal who was Christ and if you read the New Testament all of this language in there they didn't have a statue because they themselves together became the body of their God. Now I've done all of this teaching of the first part of the chapter two to tell you something you very much don't want to hear and I fully expect to get a lot of negative comments I fully expect that a whole lot more people will hear what I'm about to say and get really angry and not want to hear anymore but if you can understand it if you can make your way through it you might begin to see something that is potentially enormously helpful for all of us who we imagine and our parents hoped we would be impactful and important and live meaningful lives and by that we thought in a lot of Greek terms that people would know us we would be famous. You see the Bible was written for you but not to you it is the most universal salient book of human history that's why it's called the word of God because it's the broadest of all books. Now the book finds both beauty and offense within its pages and you can you can listen to a guy like Sam Harris a celebrity atheist who has nothing good to say about Christianity or the Bible and he'll say you can pick and choose and find beautiful places of the Bible like 1st Corinthians 1st 13 that lovely chapter about love and Psalm 23 that's pretty too but the rest of the Bible you shouldn't read. Well the Bible is an equal opportunity offender at one point or another it will offend almost everyone and if you're a nice egalitarian 21st century North America North American or Westerner I'm about to offend you because Peter is about to offend you but I want us to see what he's saying and why he's saying it because really that's how you can begin to understand. I'm going to continue to read in the LEB so you can see where the verbs are and where the imperatives are because it begins with an imperative subject yourselves to every human authority for the sake of the Lord whether to King as having supreme authority or to governors as those sent out by him for the punishment of those who do evil and to the praise of those who do good for the will of God is as follows by doing good silent well let's hold it at verse 14 right now I want that to impact you because probably some of you listening to this in the United States don't like your president but liked your president four years ago some of you listening to me really like your president didn't like your president four years ago people living all over the world are living under regimes they either do or don't like and Peter is saying subject yourself to every human authority for the sake of the Lord now some of you might see what the Queen did recently and was rightfully applauded for it there is your monarch the Queen if you're in Canada or Great Britain or Australia or New Zealand there she is and now two thousand years later she is the defender of the Church of England and this has softened what we hear in this passage we're going to have to try to listen to this passage through the ears of the people that Peter was writing to so subject yourselves to every human authority for the sake of the Lord whether to a king is having supreme authority or to governors as to those sent out by him to punish the punishment of those who do evil and the praise of those who do good for the will of God is as follows by doing good to silence the ignorant foolish the ignorance of foolish people live as free persons and not using your freedom as a cover for evil but as slaves a lot of modern translations will say servants because that seems a little nicer doulos slaves of God honoring all people love the community of believers fear God honor the king now you might say well if it's if it's lovely Queen Elizabeth who very seldom weighs in on politics and seems you know since gives this lovely message I want to thank everyone from the NHS frontline as well as other care workers and those caring for essential roles Peter's world was far more brutal than yours in all likelihood remember Nero played while Rome burned no pretense of servant of the people really like we have today Caesars were gods who owned and used people they took beautiful women and the boys that they wanted for their own gratification they would kill or rape their political rivals that's what you did Nero would execute Paul and Peter to scapegoat the Christians for the fire this is the man Peter says these words about let that sink in because you might not like hearing it if the party that you voted for is out of power but Peter said it about a brutal man like Nero now the Apostles understood what they were asking just plucked this little news story out from not too long ago the no shame Afghan generals victory lap stuns a victim of rape instead of being taken away in handcuffs those accused of heinous crimes in this country of Afghanistan can be seen strolling the red carpet in the winter of 2016 Mr. Ishchi went on national television to accuse general Abdul Rashid Dostrom the vice president the vice president of a government bankrolled by the United States of abducting him and then punching and kicking him until a pool of blood formed under his feet general Dostrom he said next dropped his pants and tried and failed to rape him before asking his guards to sexually assault him with their guns this would not have shocked Peter it might shock you subject yourselves to every human authority Peter understood what he was saying and it sounds like crazy talk it's offensive to us half of the population of Rome were slaves now now slavery was not exactly like it was in the slavery of antebellum south in North America or in the Caribbean or in South America that slavery had a different trajectory there were commonalities and there were differences but to be a slave was to be a slave and this is what Peter says domestic slaves be subject to your masters with all respect not only to those who are good and gentle but also to those who are unjust for this finds favor if because of consciousness of God someone endures sorrows while suffering unjustly for what credit is it if when you sin and are beaten for it you endure but if you endure when you do good and suffer for it this finds favor with God for to this you were called what I was called to be a slave because Christ also suffered for you leaving you as an example so that you should follow in his footsteps who did not commit sin nor was deceit found in his mouth who when he was reviled did not revile in return when he suffered he did not threaten but entrusted himself to the one who judges justly who himself bore our sins in his body on the tree so that we may die to sins and live to righteousness by whose wounds you were healed for you were going astray like sheep but you have turned back now to the shepherd and the guardian of your soul Peter of course would be crucified Peter would be arrested and Peter declared that he should be crucified upside down because he did not consider himself worthy to share the same kind of excruciating torture and death as his Lord this passage gives us a window into the upside down world and upside down means of conquering that world that Peter lived in and preached to now I have to be very careful here because it is easy to hear more than Peter is saying Peter said what Peter says here Paul says and a number of other places this is common teaching to the Christians many of whom were slaves onissimus runs away from Philemon read the book of Philemon sometime and look at the way that Paul navigates the very difficult issue of slavery Peter basically says the road out is the road through not by killing your master but by winning him over but you might not win him over you might be killed by it but again the resurrection now Paul makes this clear in first Corinthians he notes that each person should live as a believer in whatever situation the Lord has assigned them just as God has called them this is the rule I lay down in all the churches was a man already circumcised when he was called he should not become uncircumcised was a man uncircumcised when he was called he should not become circumcised circumcision is nothing uncircumcision is nothing keeping God's commandments is what counts each person should remain in the situation you were in when God called them were you a slave when you were called don't let it trouble you although if you can gain your freedom do so now pay attention here Paul just spent a paragraph saying remain in the circumstance and then he says but if you can't get out of it well what does Paul mean well understand that the first paragraph is not a command to say you must stay in your situation Paul is saying you may make an upgrade and that's fine but do so in obedience to God now and I'm not going to treat the question of abolitionism versus slavery in American history that's a complex question and in many ways the abolitionists were some of the most faithful Christians the argument here is not can you change your situation for the better the argument is what is the means by which you actually will change another person's heart that is the argument that is the witness and it has everything to do with the life of Jesus because again what everyone expects Jesus to do would say well are the Romans unjust yes what should we do about it let's gather an army let's gather swords and we will bring in our kingdom by the bloodshed of the Romans and that's how we can win the war and every revolution goes that way except Jesus Jesus becomes Rome's victim and rises from the dead Peter knows this Peter gets this and what Peter is doing is saying to his listeners are you a slave be the best slave you can be what why because what you may deliver your master from is slave owning again read the book of Philemon here's the problem now thanks be to God none of us are the kinds of slaves either that were in the American south or that was in the Roman Empire but most of us live someplace between average and atrocity that's the way this world works most of us don't have great status we're not outrageously beautiful there might be one or two special thing about us that gives us a little bit of status in a particular little area over other people but fame no one will remember our name do we have any hope yes the living stone and Paul in this song which lightly wasn't from Paul puts it perfectly your relationship with one another have the mindset of Christ Jesus who being in very nature God did not consider equality with God as something to be used for his own advantage rather he made himself nothing by taking the very nature of a servant being made in human likeness and being found in appearance as a man he humbled himself by becoming obedient to death even death on a cross therefore God exalted him to the highest place and gave him the name that is above every name that at the name of Jesus every knee shall bow in heaven and on earth and under the earth and every tongue acknowledged that Jesus Christ is Lord to the glory of God the Father and what is laid down there is the path of redemption not just for your soul but for the entire world and Jesus is the living stone and we become like him that is the deliverance and that means sometimes suffering because of the station we are born to can you improve it by all means Paul says get free but following the Lord's commands take first priority now what does that look like what does that mean because here's the thing even in America where we have all this choice when people come because they have to talk to me what do they talk to me about they talk to me about the stuff they can't change it might be the illness that they can't heal diabetes heart disease it might be a uncomfortable marriage or another relationship that they are stuck in it might be a job that they have to keep in order to put food on the table for the rest of the family but it's a terrible job and nothing better has opened up now maybe it will someday and it's fine to leave and go for that better job but you're stuck in one way or another you're living between average and atrocity and what Peter is saying is you might very well die there is there any hope for you now the secular age says our hope can only be found here and now but that's not what Peter believes that's not what Jesus believes that's not what Paul believes and it's not what I believe it's not what C.S. Lewis believes in his book the great divorce one of the most touching places is about a woman that he gives the most plain and ordinary name you can imagine in the middle of the 20th century in England but I have forgotten and only partly do I remember the unbearable beauty of her face when you listen to the rest of the story she probably wasn't beautiful in this world is it is it I whispered to my guide no not at all he was probably thinking maybe it's Mary who in the early 20th century everybody named their children after no not at all he said it's someone you've never heard of her name on earth was Sarah Smith you can't get a more average and ordinary name in 1940s England than Sarah Smith that's why Lewis picked it no doubt and she lived in Golders Green I have no idea where that is part of what makes the great divorce difficult book to read is that mainly the references I'm unfamiliar with she seems to be well a person of particular importance I this is George McDonald his guide I Scotty I she's one of the great ones ye have heard that fame in this country and fame on earth are two quite different things and who are these gigantic people look they're like emeralds who are dancing and and throwing flowers before her I haven't you heard your milk haven't you learned your Milton a thousand liveryed angels lackey her and are all those young women and men on each side I they are her sons and daughters ah she must have had a very large family sir ah every young man or boy that met her became her son even if it were only the boy that brought the meat to her at her back door every girl that met her became her daughter isn't that a bit hard on their own parents no they are there are those who steal other people's children but her motherhood was of a different kind those on whom it fell went back to their natural parents loving them more few men looked on her without becoming in a certain fashion her lover but it was the kind of love that made them not less true to their wives but truer to their own wives and how but but hello what are all these animals a cat two cats dozens of cats was Sarah a cat lady and all these dogs no she loved dogs too and and and why I can't count them and the birds and the horses all nature is surrounding Sarah Smith ah they are her beasts did she keep a sort of zoo I mean this is a bit too much ah every bird that came near her had its place in her love and her they became themselves and now the abundance of life she has in Christ from the father flows into them I looked at my teacher in amazement yes he said it is like when you throw a stone into a pool who knows where it will end redeemed humanity is still young it has hardly come to full strength but already there is joy enough in the little finger of a great saint such as yonder lady to waken all the dead things of the universe to life if that doesn't grab you but you say well what does that do with being stuck in a miserable job or being stuck in a dead-end relationship or being stuck in a in a in a body that isn't functioning Peter says once you get a sense of this you'll be like that that hungry infant who spent the whole night in the crib latching on to mother's milk and you begin to realize that obedience is gratitude it's joy it's it's something that gives us just in a tiny sense a taste of of what this little picture of plain Sarah Smith now bound in glory looks like the celebration and you'd say well well how can I get that will I get it through plastic surgery or climbing the corporate ladder will I get it by becoming famous and having sharp elbows and win elections elbows and win elections no there's no line to it you get it by loving the people that aren't necessarily terribly nice to you and serving the people that irritate you and being kind to people who don't deserve it in other words you get it by growing up into Christ himself and you actually start to become like him and that like a seed begins now but in the age to come grows far larger and far more powerful now the world looks at power in a certain way the amount of change you can enact through money politics fear intimidation bullying coercion we make change by these things and our status is created but by our capacity to do so hence raping arrival but not in Jesus kingdom you may not be very smart you may not be very beautiful your body might not work well you may have no money you may even be a slave but you lack no opportunity to pursue that journey that ends in something like that little image of Sarah Smith but I would dare say CS Lewis himself would say even that little image is nothing like the reality that has been purchased for you anywhere you are you can begin the path to eternal greatness you can literally get there from anywhere even a slave any station in life are you still offended about why Peter says about slaves what he says there should give you hope because most of us by virtue of the sacrifices made of people like Peter and the slaves he spoke to no longer are slaves abolition has come we've tasted some first fruits but these are only first fruits and you have your own stuckness somewhere between average and atrocity but this is yours too it's a gift but you get to participate how do we begin this is my body broken for you this is my blood poured out for you you fame fame fame I'm gonna live forever remember remember remember Jesus says there's a lot of people shooting for fame any way they can get it remember how I work this is your