https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=CVfzXgBvu90

 Hi, my name is Paul. I'm doing a commentary series on Jordan Peterson's biblical series, and this is the first of a three-part little sub-series of it, all on chaos. Chaos is such an integral piece of Jordan Peterson's vision. I think it's an integral piece of why he sees the Bible as relevant, why he finds the Bible compelling, and it's integral in terms of his entire maps of meaning structure. Now, this first piece I'm going to get into some of my own story, because I'm going to get into the question of how, as a pastor, Jordan Peterson changed how I read the Bible. Now, some of you who are atheists or agnostics who are Jordan Peterson fans probably have to defend yourself against your atheist and agnostic friends who like Sam Harris or some of the other prominent atheists right now, because they're a little worried about the state of your agnostic consciousness for listening to Jordan Peterson and going to lectures about the Bible and maybe even contemplating getting involved in a church or listening to a video by a pastor. I have similar problems. There are friends of mine that are worried about, they're not worried about the state of my conscious atheist heart, they're worried about the state of my believer's soul, because Jordan Peterson does not have credentials as a Christian. He's not a church leader. His answers about whether or not he's a Christian are sufficiently complicated that they cause many Christian conservatives to worry. His stance on Darwin and evolution and science causes many Christian conservatives to worry. And so some of his other ideas, his affinity to Jung, his going into other ancient mythologies, the way he answers some of his questions, these things cause Christians anxiety. And I talked about that in the video that I did on the office. And so in this video, before I delve deep, and I'm going to go deep into this issue of chaos because it's a really big deal and it's been integral, as you'll see in this video for me, before I go deep into this, I need to do a little bit of biography and whereas maybe some of you atheists are looking over your shoulder to the left, in this video I'm going to be looking over my shoulder to the right because there are, I already have friends who are asking questions to me. Why are you doing this? How can you do this? There are commenters that say, how can you as a Christian minister promote Jordan Peterson? I don't know that I'm promoting him as much as I'm in dialogue with him. And as hopefully I develop this series, you'll see some of the places that I agree with him, that I appreciate him, that he's helped me. That's in fact the point of this video, to explain some of the ways he's really helped me, especially with respect to this idea of chaos. But then in the third of this series, I'm going to get into some of the critique that I have and some of the points that I think he missed. So let's begin. A little bit of biography about myself, as I mentioned before, I'm a third generation minister in the Christian Reformed Church in North America. I grew up in a small, multiracial, mostly African American church and this was a church that my father planted. And I, like some of you who have written in the comment section, grew up wearing bath robes for Christmas pageants and well-meaning, but slightly eccentric Sunday school teachers and lots of really crazy things. And so in many ways, because my father's church was very much in an African American community during the great migration up from the American South, and we lived just outside of New York City, this was my growing up and so this was what was normal to me. And so I grew up with the Bible. I grew up memorizing the Bible. I grew up singing Sunday school songs. I grew up learning all of these stories in the Bible and so I've known the Bible since I have any memory at all. Now when I went to seminary, I went to the same seminary, this is my grandfather and my father, both have passed away. My grandfather went to Calvin Seminary in the 20s, my father went to Calvin Seminary in the 50s, and I went to Calvin Seminary in the 80s. And all of us had to learn some Greek and Hebrew. They had dropped the Latin and Dutch requirements by the time I went through. Part of me is a little disappointed they did because I really wish I knew Latin and Dutch, but we did have to study Greek and Hebrew and systematic theology and a whole bunch of theology. Now one of the things that you learn when you go to seminary is that you begin to read the Bible at different resolutions. For example, this is, I will be commenting on Jordan Peterson's treatment of Genesis 1, and this is going to take me a while because Genesis 1 is a pretty important passage. But many of us begin reading the Bible, in the beginning God created the heavens and the earth. Now the earth was formless and empty, darkness was over the surface of the deep and the Spirit of God hovering over the waters. Now there's a lot of mysterious stuff that doesn't even get covered over in contemporary translations. That's the, that's a trans, the top one is translation from the NIV 2011. Now the one just below it to the, for you I'm dyslexic so I never know right and left, but the one just below it is from Tanakh. Now Tanakh is a translation of the Bible for the Jewish community. And so part of the complaint that a lot of Jewish scholars and even Jewish lay people have against Christian translations of the Bible is that Christians translate back into the Old Testament things from their New Testament. Now for Christians there are theological reasons why they do that and I think I'll probably get into that in some subsequent videos. But obviously Jewish communities and Jewish scholars find that habit annoying and so they have contemporary and modern translations of the Bible themselves. And if you read for example their translation of Genesis 1 verses 1 and 2 it goes like this. When God began to create, when God began to create the heavens and the earth, now that gets into a lot which I'm not going to get into in terms of the, is verse 1 a preface? Is verse 1 the beginning of the story? Did God create ex nihilo? That's Latin for basically out of nothing. Or as I think the Genesis 1 text talks about in this particular text that God begins with this tohu wawohu. God begins with this formless and void. Now in subsequent videos I'm going to get into John Walton and get into these things in more detail, but this is where it begins. So the Tanakh again, the Jewish translation of the Bible. When God began to create the heaven and the earth, the earth being unformed and void with darkness over the surface of the deep and a wind from God sweeping over the water. Now again notice Spirit of God in the NIV which is in capital letters, very Christian. The Jews obviously don't have a doctrine of the Trinity and so they just have, they just have ruach in the Hebrew as wind. So and down below is the contemporary Masoretic text which is the foundation for most of the translation for the Old Testament. And so if you want to look at how the Old Testament is put together often if you had at least some seminary training or maybe a little bit of training in how to use contemporary software like Logos. You know you get used to playing around with the Hebrew text and now with computer software like Logos which is what I took this out of, which is the software I use when I do my job. You can do a great deal of work on individual words and we're going to get into some of that a little bit later in the video. I want to go through a little bit of history of theology for those of you who are unfamiliar with theology. I know a number of commenters commented that you've never been to church or you're not familiar with church and so obviously for those of you not and even for many Christian lay people who aren't familiar with the formal discipline of theology. The theology has a history just like all of our other disciplines. And what I wanted to distinguish between was biblical theology and systematic theology. Now biblical theology basically answers the question what does the Bible say and it focuses on the theology of the Bible as such and attempts in many ways to try to summarize the message of the Bible. Biblical theology really roared into being in the 20th century and is pretty strong right now. Systematic theology in some more conservative groups especially some conservative reform groups systematic theology continues to be worked and focused upon but nothing like it was in the 19th and 20th century. Systematic theology approaches the Bible in a different way. The systematic theology in a sense brings to the Bible our question and attempts to address it in a formal way. And so systematic theology have the Bible answer the questions we bring to it and systematic theology was often constructed around what were called the loci or basically the points is kind of the logic of theology. Prolegomena I talked about that in the first videos. Doctrine of God or theology proper. Anthropology which is the doctor of humanity getting into who we are and what we are. And I think as I mentioned part of what attracted me to Jordan Peterson in these videos when his description of human beings as chimps filled with snakes I thought that was rather Augustinian and Calvinist in terms of his viewpoint of that. Christology which is the study of Christ. So to reality which is the study of salvation. Ecclesiology which is the study of the church and eschatology which is the study of the last things. And so in the 19th and 20th century systematic theology really had its heyday. And this man named Louis Burkoff was was probably the most famous maybe Gerhardis Voss will give him a run for his money but Louis Burkoff probably the most famous theologian in the world. This theologian of the middle of the century of the Christian Reformed Church wrote a significant volume and some smaller volumes for use in the church. He was both a scholar and a churchman and very much kind of systematized theology and this dominated the Christian Reformed Church as it dominated many other conservative denominations in the middle of the 20th century. But while all that was going on during the 19th century there were a lot of movements in terms of the Old Testament. One of the things I picked up in Peterson's biblical series was the well-housed thesis the documentary hypothesis and Peterson talked a little bit about J and P and E. This gets into the hypothesis that the Old Testament was a compilation of texts which I think it's quite clear that the Old Testament is. I also think that that became a very big deal in the 19th century and a lot of work got into form criticism, source criticism, trying to kind of get behind the text at what was behind the text. And that kind of gets into again as I talked about in previous videos the quest after the Protestant Reformation after the enlightenment to root truth in our view of history. And so the contemporary or the 19th century project was to we need to know the history of the Bible and so we take it apart. It also tried to answer the question of why if you read the Hebrew Scriptures or as Christians call it the Old Testament why there's so much repetition. Why the language is funny? Why sometimes it's stilted? And so part of the answer for that was well it's stilted because it's kind of a hodgepodge of all these documents being put together. And so that's why the Bible is in the form that it's in. Now we're going to address this in a minute so hold on. Well in the 20th century after working this hypothesis and this way of approaching the scripture for a long time scholars and biblical studies and biblical theology really came out and said this is okay so we can talk about J and P and E and we can fight which text belongs to which. And we can speculate about the background of the story but what's really important is the story that not the forms of the text before we received what we have but how the story itself is and how the text is put together. And a scholar named Brevard Childs came onto the scene and really pushed introduction to the Old Testament as scripture and began saying we ought not to spend all of our time in commentaries and as scholars arguing about the sources and the forms of scripture. We should read the Bible how it is and work at it from there. Now also along in the late 20th century came an amazing Jewish scholar. I believe he teaches at Berkeley just down the road from me. Well a little ways down the road. I'm in Sacramento. He's in San Francisco. But you know Robert Alter and I remember so to back up you know this was the stuff that we cut our eye teeth on at seminary systematic theology but you could already tell it was in some ways fading although we had just a terrific theologian and Christian Neil Plantinga the brother actually the brother of Al Plantinga was my professor of systematics at Calvin Seminary and his lectures were just amazing and thrilling. But but I was I really enjoyed when I was in seminary study of the Bible. And so then I found Childs to be you know enlightening and you know such a relief in terms of OK let's let's look at the stories these stories that I learned as a child. Let's let's read the the the let's read the canon as scripture and go from there. And then when you know one in in my Old Testament studies classes we started to read Robert Alter. That was just thrilling because because Alter comes along and says you know all of this all of this repetition and playing with names and this this is not this is not the the seams of hurried clumsy scribes patching text together. This is actually literary structure of an ancient culture and if you want to understand what the text is saying you have to read it within the culture and you have to read it within the literary paradigm of the culture. And and Robert Alter suddenly made the Bible come alive and and and talked about that you know the art of biblical narrative. This is a small book and it's a it's a very accessible book. And so if this is if you're interested in trying to figure out how the Old Testament communicates why you have these type scenes that get repeated. For example why in the book of Genesis everyone meets their wife at a well and and why it's important to pay attention to what the first words a character says when he's being introduced. All of this is literary stuff and what what Robert Alter again a Jewish scholar not a Christian but a but a Jewish scholar makes the point he says you know all of this is intentional and all of this is in fact not a hodgepodge but all of this is amazing literature. And this in fact gets picked up by by a guy like Eric Auerbach in in his you know magnificent book Mimesis and and I one of my Old Testament and one of my Old Testament classes we read the first we read some of the first chapter on Odysseus's scar from Mimesis and and I remember reading that in seminary and just lights went on because because here he was contrasting Homer with the Bible and and he was recognizing the subtlety and the nuance and the understatement and the economy of the bit of the biblical text and and contrasting Yahweh with with Zeus and and so if you're if you're looking for something if you enjoy Jordan Peterson's biblical studies read you know go to the library it's a big I got my copy around here somewhere it's a it's a big fat book but read read the first chapter and you will get a sense for the artistry of the literature of the Bible and and for me that's what really helped me fall in love with studying the Bible and reading the Bible you know not just in a religious sense but but also in an artistic sense and to appreciate the the literary quality of the book and and you know if you know if you want to read a small book one of the one of the earliest books we read when we learned Hebrew was we read the book of Jonah which is a nice short four chapters and the the vocabulary in Hebrew is not that expansive but but reading a whole book of the Bible in Hebrew for the first time was just like going from a black and white TV to a color TV and and now I know almost all of you and my Hebrew is very rusty but but almost all of you will never have the chance to learn Hebrew some of you who are from Jewish backgrounds I'm sure you know learned it right away but it's it's there's there's no there's if you're going to seriously study the Bible and you're young get pay you know do the hard work of learning the original languages because it will pay off later on and Peterson Peterson mentions that in his quote when he says you know you know too bad for me I don't I don't know Hebrew and so there are you know the rest of us have to work from work from other sources and so again in this little three-part series I'm going to bring in Dr. John Walton not physically because again I'm you know I'm not if Paul Vanderklay calls nobody's going to return my call so you know I don't get a chance to have Jordan Peterson here and John Walton there I would love to have a you know it's funny listening to listening to everyone talk about who they want to hear Jordan Peterson talk to and and I've got my list I'd like to hear Jordan Peterson talk to Tim Keller I'd like to hear Jordan Peterson talk to John Walton Jordan Peterson and John Walton would have an amazing conversation I'd like to have Jordan Peterson talk to CS Lewis but you know CS Lewis has passed so that isn't going to happen so again part of what I want to do with these videos is in a virtual way I'm going to bring in the word of in this little three-part series the work of John Walton in and have him converse with some of the stuff that Jordan Peterson has done in his lectures so so then you know we'll fast forward to the blogosphere and the internet and one of one of the most popular blogs on the internet for I'd say moderate Christians you know part of the difficulty for non-Christians is understanding this tremendously diverse ecosystem that Christians are a part of there's there's the Orthodox there's the Roman Catholics and just amongst American Protestants you've got all kinds of flavors and variations you've got the mainline you've got the fundamentalist you've got the evangelicals you got the reformed well Scott McKnight who's who's part of at least one of the branches of the emergent movement New Testament scholar somewhere in I don't know North Park Seminary someplace I don't know where he is but anyway he he writes Jesus he writes a number of good books Jesus Creed is one of the most popular blogs and he has a he has a scientist that he often has on his blog and I've never I don't know her name I think it's I think she tries to stay rather anonymous because again when you start crossing these lines if you're a scientist and you're studying the Bible other scientists are going to look at you and say I don't know if you're so hot if you're a Christian and you're studying science some of that some Christians are going to say hey I don't know if you're so hot so so this scientist Scott McKnight often has on his blog and and you know write some wonderful stuff about you know hard science and questions of origin and she's obviously you know both a professional scientist and a very articulate well read lay Christian and she's always working these angles and for me I find that very helpful bio logos bio logos was founded Francis Collins now I can't forget now I can't remember the title of his book but I have his book and I've read at least some of his book Francis Collins worked on the human genome project and and then became a Christian he writes about it in in his book he and actually some some people from Calvin College my alma mater and and some other good people to establish bio logos that's bio logos dot org that works on trying to to figure out this connection between the Bible and science and Christianity and how this all fits together and and that is a a very controversial enterprise for for a lot of Christians because of course there are other Christians that say no this is a this is not only an error this is a betrayal of your service to your God and so this is this is all hot button stuff well so so I've always been interested in these kinds of issues and and eventually I bumped into a scholar named John Walton and John Walton this is his the Wikipedia thing born in nineteen fifty two professor of Old Testament at Wheaton College now Wheaton and Moody pretty solid conservative evangelical credentials Moody you know you're really barking over there into fundamentalist land I think a little bit I don't know I gotta watch those throwaway phrases maybe that's a bias I don't know a lot about Moody Bible Institute I know they're conservative Christians his primary focuses and areas of comparison between the Old Testament and the ancient Near East particularly Genesis and he's written a number of very interesting books and actually again because this is YouTube if you're interested in John Walton go out and just search for John Walton on YouTube and you'll find lots of things from him where he's trying to to figure out again what this Old Testament text is and so in the second of this three part series I'm going to have quite a bit more from John Walton and I'm going to engage some of Peterson's stuff from biblical series to in with some of the things from John Walton but if you're interested in him also the top one there is from the Veritas forum and for many of you who are who are not Christians who are atheists and agnostics you might be very interested in some of these Veritas forum videos because these are lectures given on university campuses and they'll often have a skeptical or a skeptic or a nonbeliever and let's say a Christian could be a philosopher could be a scientist could be a theologian and they will just have a very calm reasonable thoughtful intellectual conversation about issues of faith and contemporary life well John Walton is on one of these where he sits down with an Old Testament scholar who is more liberal than he is and they're going to talk about the kinds of the kinds of issues that are at hand so one of the things so I was you know again I'm going all through I'm going all through my history here and all through my story here and one of the things as a kid that always bothered me was the question why does God let the serpent in the garden? You know there's all these questions which naturally arise when I don't want to jump too far into Genesis 2 and 3 but there's all these questions that arise when you read Genesis 2 and 3 why does God let a tree in the garden? And as a child I would I would often reflect now again I grew up in church I grew up in a Christian reformed church this is the reformed community I would always wrestle with the question why did God let people fall because again my vision of life prelapsarian there's a theologically technical term prelapsarian life was there was no death and everything was wonderful and well the naked part you know as a kid that sounds a little embarrassing but okay why on earth did God let evil into the world and I think the text is written in a way that we would in fact ask these questions now one of the things that I caught as I was going through John Walton's lost world of Genesis 1 lost world of Adam and Eve John Walton shows up on the Phil Vischer podcast which I usually keep up with That's all also kind of evangelical camp Phil Vischer the creator of Veggie Tales Sky Jatani who I think is a wonderful is a wonderful Christian writer and you know pastor slash theologian slash speaker John Walton makes the comment that the serpent is a chaos creature and I remember hearing that and thinking Now wait a minute I grew up always thinking about good and evil again this is this low resolution dualism that I think is a function of consciousness which I spoke about in previous videos you know there's good and evil there's right and wrong there's good and bad and when John Walton starts talking about chaos right away that almost introduces a third category so here like in my office video we've kind of got a triangle we've got good, evil, good, evil, good, evil, good, evil, good, evil, good, evil, good, evil, good, evil, good, evil, good, evil, good, evil, good, evil, good, evil, good, evil, good, evil, good, evil, good, evil, good, evil, good, evil, good, evil, good, evil, good, evil, good, evil, good, evil, good, evil, good, evil, good, evil, good, evil, good, evil, good, evil, good, evil, good, evil, good, evil, good, evil, and chaos and and so then the question well is is chaos really evil well it gets into questions you know something like natural disasters when there's a natural disaster did you know like the tsunami that came through a number of years ago and hundreds of thousands of people died and the theological question immediately rises up where was God when the tsunami hit so so you have good evil and chaos um let's say if you were living in in an area that still had wild beasts if okay so let's I love to camp in Yosemite let's say I'm camping in Yosemite or let's say I go up to Montana where there's real bears let's say I'm camping in Yellowstone where there's grizzlies and I'm incautious with my food and in the middle of the night a grizzly comes in and you know hurts me or hurts my family well is the grizzly evil or is there another category there's good there's evil and there's chaos and and how are we to regard chaos and kind of in this triangle chaos is kind of a a switch hitter sometimes you look at the power of a grizzly bear and you say wow there's glory there and I'm like oh my gosh I'm going to die. And at some point when I get into more theology later on we're going to have to talk a lot about glory but but there's a you know a grizzly bear is is chaotic it's powerful it's it's glorious and that you can't help but be in awe of it yet if a grizzly bear mauls my family or even just you know tears open my car I'm going to describe that bear as evil and and that wouldn't be out of place and so you know when when John Walton began to you know talk about chaos and and Walton didn't emphasize this much and in fact I got nearly zero of this idea of chaos when you know again I learned in seminary there's tohu wavohu at the beginning in Genesis 1 and and it's chaotic but but they just left it there and and so chaos as a category in terms of my own biblical theology or my practical theology a practical theology is the theology that that I use as a pastor and pray and and pastoral care and engaging people with their questions chaos wasn't really functional and and so well I'm a Protestant now what does that mean well so there's the Orthodox so so the church was one huge community and then the great schism that happens in the 11th century a D between the Western Latin Church and the Eastern Greek Church I'm not going to go into that whole history but that's that's really that the difference between the Orthodox Church and the Roman Catholic Church and of course in the West the Latin Church continues to go and then the Protestant Reformation the church just kind of splays and one of the issues in the Protestant Reformation was and I talked about this a little bit in previous videos this idea of the scripture or the Bible is the is our foundation of authority and so as a Protestant as I listen to John Walton and I hear about chaos and it's kind of shaking up my systematic theology well what what do I need to do well as a Protestant as a minister in the Christian Reform Church which I have in fact taken vows to to theological allegiance to my denomination part of those vows are that my theological matrix is always subject to the Bible so you know along comes chaos and chaos brings chaos into my theological world and so what do I do with it I have to go to the Bible and I have to look at the Bible and study the Bible and ask the question well where is chaos in the Bible and and how does this work in my world so I'm processing all of this and chaos really isn't a big deal every now and then I come to it and I think about it and it kind of seeps into some lessons and categories and then of course I come across Jordan Peterson and I'm taking his maps and not taking I'm going through his maps of meaning videos and chaos is right there in the beginning and chaos is this foundational instrumental piece of his of his entire matrix and suddenly lights start to come on and I start to say okay I not only am now more motivated to delve deeper into scripture on the subject of chaos but but I am but Jordan Peterson has has helped me see chaos in a whole new light for example one of the one of the points he makes in maps of meaning is that when you you know when you get for this is old PC world when you get something in the mail is it a piece of paper or is it an envelope let's say from the IRS or from a long lost family member or from your ex wife or from something that this is not a piece this is chaos this is a world in and it can be a word or a letter or a statement or a look and suddenly chaos comes out and it's chaos and chaos is chaos and chaos is chaos and chaos is chaos and chaos is chaos and chaos is chaos and chaos is chaos and chaos is chaos and chaos is chaos and chaos is chaos and chaos is chaos and chaos is chaos and chaos is chaos and chaos is chaos and chaos is chaos and chaos is chaos and chaos is chaos and chaos is chaos and chaos is chaos and chaos is chaos and chaos is chaos and chaos is chaos and chaos is chaos and chaos is chaos and chaos is chaos and chaos is chaos and chaos is chaos and chaos is chaos and chaos is chaos and chaos is chaos and chaos is chaos and chaos is chaos and chaos is chaos and chaos is chaos and chaos comes in and and so well you know I think all of us have our stories about when we started watching Jordan Peterson and a light came on or chaos came flooding in or or something in our world moved and and so it's like huh I'm going to have to look a lot more at this chaos business so One of the one of the I don't know I'm thinking about maybe having two versions of this video one where I include the one where I include the talk one where I don't it comes in at minute one hour one minute 11 seconds of the Joe Rogan Experience show with with Peterson and Weinstein and there's there's a there's just a tremendous from that point on for a fairly long time there's a really good conversation about Weinstein's idea of metaphorical truth versus what Weinstein says is the top level I'm going to say physical truth because let's say it's governed by physics and I'd spoken the last one that I I think that's wrong because you know our as human beings we're not going to be able to do that but as human beings are our apprehension of physical truth can must always be nested within story of the story realm the story world and and so if you know this this part of the video Peterson says there's this pattern and then he gets right into chaos and he says this this pattern of chaos is all over the place and you know actually once I saw that once I began thinking about it I saw very much where you know there is a lot of use pastorally for this I'm gonna pause here for a second so just in case I decide to interject the video I can't I'm just gonna mute the mic and that's gonna signal my computer and leave a message so I know where to put this okay pauses over and and so I began to understand the pastoral value of understanding chaos and and one of that one of the ideas I've had for a long time about theology and about Christianity is is that it's got to be scalable and and actually I found this in CS Lewis to and I've got way more projects and the further I go on this the more projects I can imagine but I'm going to go back to the pastoral but here's the thing Jesus stands again I use this before Jesus stands at the end of the gospel of Matthew he stands on a mountaintop on a mountaintop this is an example of how Jordan Peterson has affected me when I see Jesus on a mountaintop in the Bible I am always thinking of archetypes why is on a mountain what does a mountain mean and I don't mean you know the mountain is a great hill of dirt CS Lewis' comment some people say a star is a flaming ball of gas well that's not just what a star is a star is so much more so in the Bible so often and I knew this somewhat beforehand you find Jesus on a mountain you say okay that connects with Moses and Sinai and so on and so forth but but what Peterson did was connect okay mountains with archetypes well what is a mountain and as as we get further into Genesis one I'm going to draw the the Genesis one representation that I use and and and some of my videos and in some of my teaching where somebody asked me about astrology and we're gonna have to talk about that in terms of why in the ancient world astrology was so understood what does that say about its culture so Jesus is on a mountaintop and he says to his disciples all authority in heaven and earth has been given to him by the Lord Jesus Christ and he says to his disciples all authority in heaven and earth has been given to him by the Lord Jesus Christ and he says to his disciples all authority in heaven and earth has been given to him by the Lord Jesus Christ and he says to his disciples all authority in heaven and earth has been given to him by the Lord Jesus Christ and he says to his disciples all authority in heaven and earth has been given to him by the Lord Jesus Christ and he says to his disciples all authority in heaven and earth has been given to him by the Lord Jesus Christ and he says to his disciples all authority in heaven and earth has been given to him by the Lord Jesus Christ and he says to his disciples all authority in heaven has been given to him by the and again as I said last time this is something I use often. People say to me well I don't know about the virgin birth. I'd say well okay well think about you're in the throws of C. S. lewis's trilemma- well maybe they lied about maybe Jesus never said such a thing may be we can construct a would be terrible for someone to say such a thing. I would never say such a thing. Jordan Peterson would never say such a thing. Most sane, credible, normal people would never say such a thing. Jesus says such a thing. All authority in heaven and earth has been given to me. Have these amazing visions. He calls himself the Son of Man. And if you read Daniel 7, the Son of Man, you know, that is this enormous figure in Daniel 7 who is given an eternal kingdom. And this is the code word that Jesus uses of himself. Well, what does that mean? Well, then there's lots of layers to it. Well, so Jesus has to be a savior big enough to save the cosmos from decay and rebellion. And he's got to be a savior who scales small enough, and I actually talked about this in my Sunday sermon last week, that when Zachariah gets the message, he interprets the salvation of God within his own frame of reference. And when Mary gets the message from the angel, she interprets the message from the angel within her own frame of reference. And so that when, for example, you know, if a homeless man is sleeping outside my door, when he thinks about Jesus, he's thinking about praying for his daily bread. He's thinking about praying that he not be beat up at night, or he's, you know, some of the friends I have who sleep on the street, they're praying for finding pot and beer and whatever, you know, and you might think, well, you shouldn't pray for that, but they do. And, yeah, and so Jesus has to be scalable. He has to save me from my enemies, and he has to save me from myself. And he's got to save me from principalities and powers. And if we ever get all the way into somebody asked a question about Paul, which I would really love to get to, and maybe I will sometime, but principalities and powers, which if you're on the supernaturalist side of things, you know, you can think of, you know, you're a man who's got to be a savior. You know, you can think of a Paredes, this present darkness and angels and demons all around and, you know, Pentecostal Christians like to imagine the world like that. Now, if you're a secularist, and really there's no middle, even if you're a theist or maybe you're an ardent secularist living within the iron box of empiricism, principalities and powers can be governments and cultures and histories that limit us and mold us and shape us. It can be sociology of knowledge. So Jesus needs to save us from all of these things, and he needs to save us from things in our past, things in our present, and things in our future. And again, this ties into Jordan Peterson's Maps of Meaning course where he's talking about the constraint of, you know, kind of the critique of postmodernism he gives that says, you know, not anything can be interpreted in any way. Things in my life have to work for my past, they have to work for my present, they have to work for various situations, they have to work for my future. And so if Jesus is any kind of savior, he's got to address all those levels. And so then this language of chaos as a pastor, well, you'll pick it up in the sermon I preached two Sundays ago when, yeah, I used exactly this language in terms of, you know, your spouse says to you, I want a divorce. Or the police show up at your door and say, there's been a car accident. Or the doctor sits down and says, you have cancer. Or your boss comes to work and says, pack up your office. Or, you know, collect your tools. Well, in this moment, chaos comes in. And now suddenly we've got logos and light and Genesis 1. And so as a pastor, you know, the journey I was on, which I walked through here, following John Walton, Jordan Peterson comes in, and I'd already been, you know, reading more Gilgamesh and reading more ancient mythology and doing all of this. Then suddenly Jordan Peterson comes in and lights just start going on. And I begin to say, oh, well, isn't this interesting? Well, how is this going to change how I read the Bible? I can't read mountains again. I can't understand darkness again. I can't understand what happens at Jesus' crucifixion when the sun is darkened and the earthquakes. Well, what are all those things? Those are all archetypal chaos motifs. And they're through the Bible. And I knew that before, but now I know it more and I'm going to get to this. I know it with a new edge. Now, in Reformed theology, some people ask me, well, what does Reformed mean? Well, the Reformed is a branch of the Protestant Reformation that follows John Calvin to a degree, kind of his inheritance. And John Calvin was a second generation reformer. Luther was a first generation reformer. John Calvin was by training a lawyer. He was a Frenchman and he was living in Geneva with a whole bunch of other French refugees in Geneva. And John Calvin tried to organize the city and, you know, Google John Calvin. He's a hot topic and still is even after all these years. But John Calvin makes the point in his Institutes that God speaks to us in a sense as we speak to children. And this is called divine accommodation. And what this means is that, and I think Peterson is dead on right here, that and having been a missionary, having in a sense been a third culture person because as I mentioned, I grew up in an African American community, but also in a Dutch CRC community. And then I went overseas and worked with Haitians in the Dominican Republic. So working cultural matrices has always been a part of my life. And so I understand the fact that if God wanted to enter into this story, he needed to do so in a way that engaged and inhabited culture. And so God comes into the story and if he's going to deal with, you know, according to Christians, he came in and called Abraham and developed Israel. That's how the whole story goes. And now again, I know a lot of you say, and it's a big discussion, is that literal history? Is that mythological? Is that figurative? We'll see what we do with this word literal at some point. We're going to talk about it a little bit when we talk about John Walton. But John Calvin basically says what the scriptures do is they put lenses on us. Now a lot of non-religious people are going to say, yeah, that's the problem. You've got those lenses on. You've got to take them off. Well, this is part of the point of what post-modernity gets right. And I think Peterson agrees with this. I've listened to him carefully on this topic that we all do see the world through our filters. There is no view of the world without filters. And actually I was taught this as a young man in Christian school. I went to a conservative Christian Reformed Church is known for doing their Christian schools. And I was taught this that, you know, we all have presuppositions. We all have assumptions we bring to the world. In Jordan Peterson talking about Immanuel Kant, we already have a framework through which we take in all of this information. And so Calvin, in a sense, says, well, if you're going to have filters, if you're going to have lenses, why don't you try these on and see how the world looks? And in many ways, C.S. Lewis makes a very similar statement about that when he talks about, when C.S. Lewis talks about how Christianity is, in a sense, the light that helps me see the rest of the world. And C.S. Lewis was a pretty determined Platonist in some ways. And so you can see some of that drifting through there. So, you know, divine accommodation and John Calvin. And then the second point, which again Peterson really helped me with, is that there must be a common language between the ancient world cultures and rooted more deeply within us. And that's where Peterson and his ideas of evolution and his ideas of circuitry doing two different things and some of the stuff he gets through Jung, that somehow Christianity, or not Christianity, but somehow these motifs are deeper. And that, and again, when we get into Walton, because Walton is working the same, the same area, these motifs are deeper. And this began to help explain some things for me. You know, for example, Peterson makes the point, and I think he's dead on right, we, you know, you can have a relationship with a pet dog a lot better than you can have with a pet lizard and a lot better than you can have with ants. Why? Well, there's a, you know, dogs can almost read our minds in some ways. They kind of look like that. And I have a dog and, you know, I love dogs. But, you know, dogs, there's a reason we get along with dogs. And then, you know, one of the questions I've always had is, why do so many ancient peoples get the Bible so well? And if you read, you know, a lot of, say, 19th century history of missions, it's often the case that missionaries come into a place and yeah, there's the Poisonwood Bible and sometimes they make a huge mess of things. But sometimes they come into a place and usually, like in China, once the missionaries get kicked out and they stop mucking it up, they kind of leave the Bible, maybe even a translation of the Bible, like Wycliffe does, in the hands of a people and they start frogging around with the Bible. And, you know, according to maybe some in the church in the West, they do some crazy and wrong and heretical and immoral things with the Bible, but they start mucking around with it and they start appropriating it and it starts coming to life for them. And so I wondered, why is this book so transcultural? And so when I listened to Peterson, he doesn't necessarily give me an answer or the answer for that, but he begins to give me interesting ideas of why perhaps the Bible is so transcultural. Now, as I mentioned before, I was a missionary in the Dominican Republic and so, you know, all of these issues of culture. One of the books I read early on in my time in the Dominican Republic was a missionary classic called Missionary Methods, St. Paul's or Ours and there's another companion book by an early 20th century missionary named Roland Allen. And, you know, he has all these stories about, you know, he was a missionary who was set out to try and help this national church and, you know, he very quickly learned that there were what has sometimes been called rice Christians, that there's these kinds of Christians that basically were hanging on to the mission because they could get status or money or other goodies from it. And Roland Allen pretty quickly figured out that there was no point in that. These people didn't really have a lot of interest in what Roland Allen was interested in. They were just kind of interested in getting a connection to North America or getting money or something like that. And then, you know, there's all these stories about missionaries who couldn't make the rounds because of there's all kinds of chaos, especially in the 19th century. Couldn't make the rounds and so, you know, wasn't able to get out to some of these far-reaching communities and then to begin to discover that the communities the missionary spent less time in became more Christian and grew better. And now looking at, you know, at it from the perspective of the early 21st century, the answer was quite obvious that the missionary wasn't mucking up the people he was trying to engage with, with his own culture. That the missionary's own culture became a tremendous stumbling block. And so, for example, I met a missionary in kind of this missionary boot camp that I was in and he was teaching in the boot camp and he basically was one of more of these Wycliffe-style missions where he would translate the Bible and learn the language and give the Bible to the people and say, here you go, have at it. And people would look at it and they would, again, they would do some stuff that looked pretty crazy to us, but it was this process of cultural appropriation that always made me ask the question, why do ancient peoples get the Bible? Well, maybe there's this ancient, and at least according to Peterson, evolutionary, genetic, you know, epigenetic perhaps too, commonality within us that, well, why do all of us when we go up on top of a mountain say, why do people from diverse places of the world go to Yosemite National Park? Again, I don't live too far from Yosemite. It's about three and a half hours away. But when I go there, it's full of tourists from Germany, from China, from Japan, from all over the world. They all go to Yosemite National Park. Something is happening when you walk in that park and you see, this gets into this other, you see the glory of the park. Well, why should a big hole in the ground carved by glaciers give us a sense of glory? Well, there's a psychological element to that. Why do mountains mean what they mean in so many places? Why does sacrifice, why is sacrifice so ubiquitous around the world? Why is marriage such a universal institution through human history? And you look at all of these histories. Now, a few months ago I finished reading Jared Diamond's Guns, Germs, and Steel, fascinating book. And again, I'm reading 1493 now. I'm working my way through that if I can, you know, cut loose some more time to read. But what's with all of these connections? And again, this is what Peterson helps me with. And so this is part of the reason that I'm interested because, you know, again, this great Jungian cloud of witnesses that composes me, not just the conscious piece of me up front here in my face, it's saying, you know, there's something to this. There's something to this. And there had to be because there was a common culture in which there were a family of cultures where the Israelites and the Philistines and the Moabites and the Amorites and the Egyptians and the Babylonians and the Assyrians and the Hittites. There was a common family of cultures that was going through all of this and there's something we can learn from that. And I wanted to give you a little example. Genesis 1.21. And I'm going to listen, I'm going to have to listen again to Peterson's second biblical series to see if he picks up on this. But it's very interesting in verse 21 of Genesis 1, I'll begin in verse 20, and God said, Let the waters bring forth swarms of living creatures. Now notice, let the waters bring forth. And John Walton deals with this in his book, The Lost World of Genesis 1. Barah, create, is used at certain times and then other verbs are used at other times and John Walton makes a big deal of what this verb means. John Walton thinks this is functional creation. And again, I'll get into that more in the next video. But so verse 20 says, Let the waters bring forth swarms of living creatures and let birds fly above the earth across the dome of the sky. Okay. So God created the great sea monsters and every living creature that moves. Now, the word create hasn't been used for quite a few verses and here it's dropped in here and it's dropped in with what in English is translated here, this is the new revised standard version, as sea monsters. And I remember as a kid, you know, I hadn't noticed this in this verse. Why suddenly does the word create pop up again in Genesis 1? And why is it associated with the sea monsters? Well, these sea monsters are chaos creatures. We are working this theme of chaos again. And so the Tanin here in the Hebrew, these are the sea monsters. Well, who are the sea monsters? Well, so here's what you do as a, you know, here's what you do if you're interested in the Bible. So you start digging around in it and you start looking at well, where is this word used? Tanin. You know, Brown Driver Briggs, the 19th century dictionary lexicon of the Hebrew language that you can look up online because it's been in public domain forever. You know, they translate, you know, Hanin as serpent, dragon or sea monster. Oh, so wait a minute. You can translate verse 21, the great God creates the dragon? Oh, now we're, so some of you who know theology, a lot of bells are going off and some of those bells are anxiety because, you know, if you looked at this, I probably in a little way threw you into a little bit of chaos. Well, what's going on in that verse? Why did we go back to this word create? Why are we pointing to, well, the sea monsters, serpents, dragons? So then if you look at say how this word is translated in the NIV, that's what that little chart is. You see serpent, serpents, snake, creatures, sea monsters, great sea creatures, monsters. What is the Bible talking about? Now one of the things that you'll figure out is that, you know, the Bible, just like the English language, you have snake and serpent. The Bible will use two different words for a thing that we have as the same. That's when you get into this idea in biblical studies of a semantic range. And then you pay attention, well, which word gets chosen for which context? And this is where we're going to get back into Robert Alter, the art of biblical narrative and also historical literary working of the Bible. And then, okay, so then you do a little bit more research and you find that in Isaiah 13, this word is used as a subject and it's used as a subject. And it gets translated as jackals. And you say, now wait a minute, you said serpent, serpent, dragon, sea monster, those I can keep together. But jackal? Jackal's a little dog-like creature. Well, and jackals inhabit the wilderness. Oh. Now light should be going on. The sea, the great sea, the great primordial sea in Genesis 1, out of which God speaks order from chaos, well that's water. Well, in the Old Testament, wilderness is also chaos. Now this is going to be tremendously important when we get to Exodus. And actually I'll be dealing with this in the third of these series where I play out this theme with respect to temple. Because, and I'll tip my hand here a little bit, one of the things that Jordan Peterson makes no mention of in Genesis 1, quite reasonably so, almost everybody misses it in Genesis 1. I never saw it until John Walton that Genesis 1 is a temple text. And you say, what do you mean it's a temple text? There's no temple in Genesis 1 in the early part of Genesis 2. Ah. And there's no altar in Genesis 2 and 3 and we're going to have to talk about that too. So jackals and sea monsters are coming from the same root word in Hebrew. Why? Well, and then lights went on. Because again, of course, I read Metaphysical Club because Jordan Peterson mentioned it in one of his videos. And that's where I got this nice tidbit about what really the origin of the species was in that context. And then this great paragraph, Darwin regretted the word selection, suggested an intention. Because Darwin was really focused on a naturalistic explanation of the differentiation of the species that doesn't have intentionality or a divine plan behind it. But now read the rest of this paragraph because it's critical. Natural selection is a blind process. Now remember blind is a metaphor. Blind process because the conditions to which the organism must adapt in order to survive are never the same. In periods of drought when seeds are hard to find, finches that happen to have long narrow beaks good for foraging. Now I would assert that drought is in a sense a chaos creature, if you will. And we're going to talk about that with respect to temple in the third video. In periods of drought when seeds are hard to find, finches that happen to have long narrow beaks good for foraging will be favored over finches with broad powerful beaks. More of their offspring will survive and reproduce in periods of abundance. When seeds are large and their shells are hard, the broad beaked finches will hold the adaptive advantages. Finch-ness is a variable, not a constant. Why does this have to do with jackals and sea monsters? In the Hebrew language, you might look at a jackal and a sea monster or a dragon and say, well they're completely different creatures. One looks like a dog and the other is this mythological creature. Ah, but how do they function in the world? Jackal is to wilderness as sea monster is to great deep. And this is in the language and it is in the text. And my great cloud of witnesses that is reading the Bible along with me, absorbing it even as a child, is picking up these things and it's all sitting there in my mind until something comes along and bang! The pieces come together. The penny drops, as Tim Keller says. And suddenly I begin to understand the relationship of jackal and desert to sea monster and great deep and the relationship of creation and the desert wanderings of Israel and Sinai and tabernacle. And then eventually we're going to get to the book of Revelation, which is an amazing book, one of my favorite books of the Bible. And you might say, well I'm not going to listen to you anymore because of that. Well, there's a good reason why the book of Revelation is amazing and it's not for all the reasons all of the Christians that are running around saying, you know, the world's about to end tomorrow. That's not any of the reasons. The reason is because the book of Revelation in so many ways symbolically ties the rest of the Bible together and brings it to a conclusion. It's an incredible book. So let's finish with our sea monsters. So, okay, so then you do a little search through the Hebrew text because you want to search it in Hebrew. But I'll put the English right next to it and you pick an English text. English translations are every translation is interpretation and so you've got to watch it. This is the value of working in the original language if you're going to use the Bible. So God created the great sea monsters, Genesis 1, 2. Now pay attention, Exodus 7, 9. When Pharaoh says to you, this is the Lord talking to Moses, giving him his marching orders to go to Pharaoh, perform a wonder. Then you shall say to, when Pharaoh says to you, perform a wonder because hey, if Moses is going to have authority, he's going to have to show that he has divine authority from the gods and divine power because Pharaoh is a god. Pharaoh is, and again, Peterson will grab onto this, Pharaoh is the instantiation of the divine. He's the top of the hierarchy. But in that world order, they locate it in a person. And so Pharaoh says basically, hey, don't come into here talking like this. You're going to have to show me that you can stand up to a god. The Lord knows this. So when Pharaoh says to you, perform a wonder, then you will say to Aaron, take your staff, throw it down before arrow and it will become a tannin. Now in your English Bible, you read a snake and you think, well, it's a snake. That's a neat trick. Ah. But now you've got the association with a monster, with a chaos creature. In other words, when Moses and Aaron march into Pharaoh and Pharaoh's like, show me what you got. Moses says, you see this stick? In my stick, there's chaos. What are you going to have to do with that? Pharaoh's like, eh, my guys can do chaos too. But then if you remember the story, the serpent from the staff of Moses and Aaron eats the serpents that Pharaoh's magicians make. Well, what does that mean? Well, we all know what it means. It's mythological. It's archetypal. It gets down into the, you know, people who get a Wycliffe translations in a jungle in Central America or South America. When they read this story, they all know what it means. Well, what does that mean? So Moses and Aaron went to Pharaoh and did as the Lord has commanded. Aaron threw down his staff before Pharaoh and his officials and it became a tannin, a sea monster. Now, Isaiah, you'll find these sea monsters all over the Bible. Awake, awake, put to strength. O arm of the Lord, awake as in days of old, the generations long ago. Was it not you who cut Rahab to pieces? I'm going to have to get into that. And who pierced the dragon? Hmm. This is in the book of Isaiah. This is in the Bible. So to my Christian brothers and sisters who love the Bible and have pledged that, you know, this is your authority, this is in the Bible. What does Isaiah 51.9 mean? It's a good question. Look it up. Jeremiah 51. King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon has devoured me. He has crushed me. He has made an empty vessel. He has swallowed me like a monster. Nebuchadnezzar is a chaos creature. He's brought chaos upon Jerusalem and he's devoured God's people. He has his belly. He has filled his belly with my delicacies. He has spewed me out. He not only ate me, he threw me up and I'm lying discarded on the ground, not even worth digestion. Again, why do I love the Bible? Read it. It's an amazing book. The difficulty that we have is it's a foreign book. It's a strange book. And so I think part of what Jordan Peterson is doing for a lot of people is helping them see the Bible through new eyes and lights are coming on. Ezekiel 29. I'm in the book of Ezekiel right now with my adult Sunday school class and loving it. Thus says the Lord, I am against you Pharaoh, King of Egypt, the great dragon sprawling in the midst of its channel saying, the Nile is mine own. I made it for myself. In other words, Pharaoh is a usurping sea monster. Now if you get into the book of Daniel, you'll notice all of these monsters coming up out of the sea. Again, this is all the same story and the Hebrews would get it and the Babylonians would get it and the Egyptians would get it and the aboriginal living in some rainforest somewhere where missionaries stumble and say, oh, here's a book in your trade language. They read it and they get it. Now what's with that? Can we answer that question? If we can't answer that question, can we at least acknowledge the reality of the question? And this is my favorite, sea monsters at worship in the Psalms. Now the Old Testament is Torah, the first five books, the prophets, which is just about everything else. And at the end, in terms of how the Hebrews have the structure of the Old Testament, Christians put the writings in the middle. The Jews put the writings at the end and they're called the writings and that's Job, Psalms, Prophets, Ecclesiastes, Song of Solomon. They're the writings and they have a little different status. But these Psalms, you divided the sea by your might. You know, what does it mean when God lets them walk through the dry land in the Red Sea? I can't wait till Jordan Peterson gets into Exodus. That's going to be great fun. You broke the heads of the dragons in the waters. Well this is the Lord as victor over the great sea creatures. Now again, we're going to have to get into this when we get into probably the next one when I have John Walton virtually talking to Jordan Peterson and reading some stuff out of John Walton and engaging some of what Peterson is doing. This is my favorite one, Psalm 148. Oh, you tread on the lion and the adder, the young lion and the serpent. Well what does a lion and a serpent have in common? They're both dangers. If you're living in an area that has lions and serpents, these are chaos creatures because they can take your life or the life of a loved one like this. And this is my favorite one, Psalm 148. The Christian Reformed Church has a long history of psalm singing. In fact, that's one of the reasons the Christian Reformed Church split from the Reformed Church of America. And I remember there's a great hymn based on Psalm 148 and I remember the sea monsters in the hymn and as a little boy I used to love singing about the sea monsters. And again, there's something deep in us that ties to this. Why do little boys love sea monsters? Well, it's built into us. Well, praise the Lord from the earth, you sea monsters and all the deep. Here the psalmist is calling to chaos, to bow its knee and worship the Lord. Now if you watch Tolkien, think about for example when Aragorn goes and demands the fealty of the former traders who are now dead and uses the army of the sea monsters. Well, in a sense, what's happening there in Tolkien where the army of the dead has to pledge allegiance and pay homage to their king. Well, this is Psalm 148. The sea monsters finally bow. Well, look at C.S. Lewis and Narnia. I mean this is all through Narnia because of course C.S. Lewis loved this. stuff and wrote about this stuff and part of the complaint that Tolkien had of Lewis, they were friends, they had a falling out later in life and that's a very tragic thing and I think both grieved it deeply. But one of the things that Tolkien never liked about Lewis's Narnia was it was a hodgepodge and Lewis's Narnia was a hodgepodge. And Lewis just kind of threw the whole menagerie in and in a sense like Psalm 148 had all of them bow before Aslan. So you know this is, the book of Job has lots of this stuff. Job being a book, a non-Hebrew book that's part of the thing with the wisdom literature. The scholars and the sages of Israel drew in the wisdom of the other cultures and a lot of that is found in the writings. But you know this is built into the Bible and part of the difficulty that we have is we have these filters and we expect to see the This is built into the Bible and part of the difficulty that we have is we have these filters and we exclude it or we can't see it or we don't see it until the light comes on and suddenly we realize, oh Psalm 148 is calling all of the earth to bow before him. See as the hymn says, see monsters all. Now my next video I'm going to have Jordan, you know John Walton virtually talks with Jordan B. Peterson and engage some of those things because there's some stuff in the biblical series two lecture that I want to deal with. And then in the second of this three part series I want to engage in the big non-obvious at least to moderns element of Genesis 1 that Jordan B. Peterson completely missed. But which ties the chaos theme through the Bible and connects seemingly disparate elements like Israel, worship and sacrifice. So there's a teaser and I'll be getting that into the third video. So again thanks for watching. This has been great fun. I love the comments. I enjoy reading the comments. I hope I can keep up with them. At the beginning I was worried about all these subscribers. I'm getting my head around it so always room for one more. And if this is helping you, if this is enjoying it, leave a comment. Even if you just say hey this was great keep doing it. That encourages me. If you can tell me how this helps you, that is even more helpful to me because it helps me figure out what I should talk about to be helpful for you. So thanks for watching.