https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=JCKkl30voa4

 And to these unstated assumptions like that. I have a hard time. Back to the last conversation, the comment about psychology, you know, is to the West is Islam is to the Middle East. If you look at all of the ethical guidelines and code of ethics for every psychological group, be it the APA CPA, looking at the state level, the provincial level. What is at the very top of that hierarchy of values. It is always patient autonomy. You know, no matter what is going on, you do not violate patient autonomy unless it is directly going to lead to someone being killed or them being killed. And there was this this quote. This was like in the 70s when there was a lot more thought in psychology about implicit values. I can't remember the psychologist name, but he was criticizing his own field saying, basically, in a nutshell, psychologists and psychiatrists really need to be thoughtful about their assumptions because they go unstated because otherwise, we are being crypto missionaries for a particular worldview. And when we're we're not clear about that because you know so much of early psychology was about being completely neutral. And so it's what what does the client want? What is what is the patient want? That there's a whole worldview that's that, you know, in that. And so you'll be in crypto missionaries I'm like, well, it happened. Because our law is based around that. What do you think about relationships is based around that we have a hierarchy that's at the top. And what do we have? We have a culture that's very heavily influenced by psychology and psychotherapy. What do you what are you taught? Well, what do you want? You should be free to do what you like. And that then informs marriage therapy, couples therapy, individual therapy, and you can't get away from it. And but yet there isn't a lot of consciousness, I think, even amongst a lot of psychologists about how that operates. There's a reason why, unfortunately, his name eludes me at the moment, why he had felt like he needed to write that and say, look, we are we are shaping things. We are shaping law, we are shaping people and values. And this will have downstream effects. So, you know, are we are we going to be self conscious about that? Because we are missionaries. And I think, yeah, we we are in and out here we are 50 years later. And, of course, that's being played out with with marriages and male female relationships and families to and my last point, I'll step aside that that being free to leave at any moment. If you know about attachment theory, what is that going to create a really, really deeply insecure attachment style? If you can leave at any moment? How can I not be anything but either the two or the three manifestations of of attachment style that's not secure? It's either I'm going to cling to you. I'm going to pretend I'm not interested in you and keep you away, or I'm going to oscillate between the two. I'm going to cling to you and then push you away. And that is what I see in marriages. And we have set this the stage for the insecure attachment to to reign supreme we're we're enticing it we're calling it forth into relationships with that. One last thought there is where it's pretty well established that your family of origins going to affect you. And ideally, as a child, your, your parents marriage is very secure. And that's how you go you explore you explore from the secure base that you know it's going to be there. You can try things maybe get hurt you get beat up, but you come back to home base and you know that it's there. And we're now a few generations on into children growing up in homes where their parents are primed for insecure attachment, because there's, like you were saying, You know, you were saying what you have to maintain being enticing, or else they're going to leave you. And for people who are even you know a little bit neurotic. You're going to be thinking about that. You know, am I still a good deal because he or she could leave at, at any moment. And, and then that's, that's, that is home base for those kids who then now carry that from from their family of origin into that environment that is is going to create that negative feedback loop of insecurity. And, and away we go. Right. I think it's so strongly that this is. It's like, we're trying to talk about marriage, and we're saying how hard that is to get our arms around. And you just pointed to what this is really about, I think, which is secure attachment, right and human beings are social creatures were were. We need to be touched, we need to be seen and heard we need to belong, we need to know we need to be able to find our place within a community. And the most irreducible unit of value and all of those things has been is, I think, a family. Right. So we just took a very hard subject and just made it way harder because now we have to go upstream, we have to, we have to find the sort of emotional headwaters of the you know the cascading multi generational effect that you're describing. And if you want this to get better, you're going to have to figure out a way to create stable secure homes where children grow up, you know modeling healthy relationships and secure attachments, and where they get their emotional needs met, and they come into the with with healthy expectations of the opposite sex and so forth. I mean that there's so much I mean how on earth do you fix that right but I agree with you, this is inevitably where you end up in this conversation. You have to at least wrestle with the, the, the multi generational trauma of abandonment and separation. And as you say, you know, the intermittent, the clinging and abandoning. Sometimes I think the, this kind of existential anger that you hear so often coming from women. My first reaction to it is, I have a huge amount of empathy for so many of them, because there's obviously pain underneath this. And you can almost, you can almost picture that the child standing in the driveway, as dad drives off for the last time. And just the, just the raw pain and emptiness and anger, and you want to just pound on his chest and tell him how much you hate him and you want him to stay and hold you and hug you tighter, not leap, right. And yet, there's just so many people who have been so traumatized by this, anybody's free to go at any time. I don't know what you do about that exactly but I do think that a public conversation about it is, is long is long overdue.