https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=W1EP6uXXGIc

 There we go. Yes. All right, Tim, tell me a little bit about yourself. Well, first of all, I just want to say thank you for doing this. It's quite exciting for me, especially seeing you so big on the screen. Normally you're just this tiny window. That's true. Yeah, so my name is Tim. I'm 26 years old. I'm married. I live in Germany. I'm a student of philosophy and English literature. I'm currently doing my master's degree in Heidelberg. Yes, I thought you might enjoy that, seeing that you sometimes mention the Heidelberg catechism. Catechism, that's right. Never been there, but the word I've said many times. Yes. And yeah, so I grew up in a Christian family. And I wrote to you, it was in a YWAM context. I think you're aware of the organization. And it was a very positive experience for me over the years, speaking to other so-called, I don't know, missionary kids or something like that. I feel that sometimes people have difficult experiences. But for me, it was a very positive one and one that influenced my faith and my standing in life. What did your parents do? How long were your parents in YWAM? Career? So, yes, full time. And I think now it's probably close to 30 years. So my mom is still in YWAM. My dad left a couple of years ago, was just the base situation here changed a bit. And then he does video editing work. Yeah. But I always went to public school. I think that's also quite a normal thing in Germany. We don't really, I think homeschooling is illegal even. Really? Wow. Yeah. I think we had like one family, not associated with YWAM, but in my village, and they just did homeschooling. I think like someday the police showed up to pick up the kids. You know, it's a very, it's an important thing here to do public school. Yeah. And one thing I haven't mentioned, I grew up bilingual, so speaking English and German. My dad's from New Zealand. Came here to Germany to do YWAM and missions work. My mom was born in Africa, in Angola, and came to Germany when she was in her teens. And so my parents met in this small village. It's like 10,000 people live here. And that's where they met. That's where they fell in love. And that's where I was born and raised essentially. Wow. Wow. You are a world citizen. Yes, definitely. Definitely. And yeah, privileged, I think as well to have the two passports as well. So I can always pick and choose wherever I go, which one is more useful. Yeah. Yes. And I think like trying to describe also my faith and also, I guess, the way that I was in school, I think I would probably like describe myself as a late bloomer in a sense. I didn't really enjoy school that much. It was always like so many things, so many different people demanding so many different things of me. And I was more, had my own interests, did a lot of music and that kind of stuff. And it was after school when I was 18 years old, I had a period of three years where I worked in various factories. I also did a DTS, which is like a discipleship training school with YWAM in Scotland. And then after three years, I started studying. And to me, like these three years where I didn't have any intellectual stimulation or not as much really helped me because then there was like organic hunger that started to evolve and that which completely changed my approach to school and to learning as well, because it was me who actually wanted to learn compared to back in school when I had the feeling it was like laid on me somehow. And I had a great experience at university, so it was something that quite surprised me as well. So, I wanted to do, I started with theology and English. I originally wanted to do mathematics, but I couldn't due to because it only started at a certain point in the year, but I wanted to start anyway. And then it was in the first literature class because I thought, well, I might as well do English for one semester at least. But then I sat in the first English Introduction to Literary Studies and somehow it was a it was just the first session and we had and the teacher had put up a poem by William Carlos Williams and just like read it out and like something somehow clicked for me and it was like so, I don't know, moving or there was I felt there was like something there and since and it was like almost an immediate decision to say this is what I want to do. So, you know where William Carlos Williams is from? Is it Patterson, New Jersey? Yeah. Exactly. Anyway, go on, keep going. You're doing great. Yeah. And it was in an English class. It was one subject that mandatory is called Oral Communications and the lecturer was quite enamored with at least the style of Christopher Hitchens. So that started me off my intellectual YouTube journey of like discovering the new atheists and so I spent quite a lot of time listening to them and generally about my personality, I'm very high in openness but I'm very low in conscientiousness. So I did the Jordan Peterson understand myself thing. I'm like the zero percentile in conscientiousness. Oh boy. But I'm also very low in neuroticism so I don't care as much about it. Good thing you're married. That might keep you alive. You know, that's very true because my wife, she's like the 99th percentile in conscientiousness. So it's like, it's I think life-saving or it's definitely very helpful and it's a very, my marriage I think is probably one of my the most rewarding projects I'm participating in you know. How long have you been married? For four years now. Okay. Okay. So we were quite young. I was 22. She was 20, turned 21 a few months. Yeah. That's definitely one way when people at university found out that I'm married. It's like probably like the second question is like, are you a Christian? So yeah. Really? Yes. It's like, isn't that a thing in America? I feel like in Germany at least it's like a cultural thing as well. Yes. Where it's like if you're married young. Yeah. Like why are you doing this? You're a Christian. Yeah. Yeah. I've never put that together but you're exactly right. Yeah. So yeah. So that I just this personality thing I think it's kind of funny in a way but it's also very serious for me because it really my marriage and my relationship with my wife her name is Julia. I feel like we can really benefit from one another. Is she a German national? Yes. Okay. So you met her in Germany. Met her in Germany. Went to the same school, sang in the same choir. Yeah. Okay. And yeah. Yeah. Exactly. I'm just trying to figure out where I left off just now. When married young you were Christian then you then you said Julia or Julia and you were yeah I don't know where you were going. Sorry to derail you. No, no, that's fine. That's fine. I think I was just talking also about university and you know finding finding. Yeah. I think that yeah finding the new atheist. That's that that's where we're left off and I just want to yeah I wanted to mention that I'm very like high in openness as well and like open to new ideas and so I never felt I don't know threatened or it wasn't it's not difficult for me to listen to people that I disagree with. I actually quite enjoy doing that and which is I think great especially at university and also just in the YouTube world. And then I think it was like through that that I that I found Jordan Peterson then in probably 2017. I think like the first video was like a clickbait clickbait title why you're why you are you are a Nazi or something like that. Like what is that? Clicked on it and so that started like a whole new thing for me. I because what I would have found interesting is that a lot of people that I hear on your channel and also just on the web is people having maybe like D deconstruction experiences at university and then through Peterson finding a way back again to the to the church even though it might it's more like the Orthodox or maybe the Catholic mother with the focus sacramental the symbolic aspects of Christianity. And for me I I also came in contact with a lot of like postmodern deconstruction theory and all that kind of stuff at university and I was enjoyed it. But but it but it because in a way I'm I'm trying to put it right. It's not that I didn't take it seriously but that it's like in a way it didn't really affect me deep down like I didn't take it seriously as a way of life and way of like truly thinking about things. I was more trying to trying to integrate maybe things like how what what what can I learn from these these these theories and apply it to my Christian faith. So it was it was more like that. I never felt like a complete I don't know deconstruction and like losing you already had a solid worldview down there. And so it's something that you could you could engage it you could deal with it. It was there it wasn't threatening you could handle it but it didn't colonize you. Would that be a way to say it. Yes probably. But I would still say that it like took up some territory in my world you know and it definitely changed my my my way of thinking about Christianity as well. So so it's it's it's not that I just like remain unchanged or something because they to me it often feels like it's like a shaking of my I don't know tree of faith or something and I and I accept that because to me it's a rewarding experience and I want the in Petersonian language the deadwood to to to burn down. You know I want a faith that is strong and that can withhold serious considerations of people who have other perspectives which is one thing I I love about your channel as well and your discussions with the Vicky especially. Thank you. Yeah I I I I'm with you on that value because yeah hot house and at least here in the States we call them hot house tomatoes there you know they're available in the supermarket all year but they're not like what you grow in your backyard and pluck from the vine there. They're weak. They're weak because they haven't actually engaged. They haven't actually engaged the world. So I agree with you completely. Hmm. Yeah, I think that's a good thought actually. It's quite funny because like my my BTS it's the discipleship training school with why that I did right. It was a very positive experience for me as well and the picture that was often used. I'm not sure if it was me if it I don't know where it came from but it's like this idea that that this school is is like a greenhouse essentially. Yeah, you know you are you are essentially totally shielded from that's right any other world using you very like focusing in on you and your relationship with God and and and I found it very very helpful like it was it was a great experience. Although now I probably like re-evaluating things. I still look at it differently, but it but the fundamental impact it had for me and with my relationship with God definitely something that has stayed with me. So Peterson didn't like bring me back to Christianity instead. It was almost like a counter movement for me because listening to his his biblical series and the psychological significance. It it changed like to me it almost offered like an alternative way of looking at the Bible and it looking at at faith and which which which which did stand in contrast at least in a few ways to the way I understood and conceptualized Christianity and belief and I know in in his in his introduction, you know, he he says and I believe that and I understand him that way as well that he leaves the door open, you know for for the womb anyway. Yeah, yeah. But he but he still restricts himself to the scientific somehow and so for me it was like a process of like re-evaluating my whole like all the all the all the practices and like like what and it's like I'm not sure if that's a if that's the word or if it is but it's like a psychologization of Christianity and of practices, you know in his talks with Sam Harris, but even generally when he talks about prayer, for example, you know, it's like prayer becomes a thing of self-examination and much much more than stepping into contact with a deity. Although maybe, you know, it's and like I was thinking about like worship like what is what is worship to Peterson then like what are we doing and then I was still like trying to like fit worship into a Petersonian framework. We say, okay, and then I'm also influenced by by Peugeot and just a recent talk that he did where he said, you know, we worship what unites us, right and like like we gather around what unites us and that and that worship is like a like a collective participatory celebration of the highest ideal like something like that and so I was to some degree I think I'm able to somehow like say to put it into a psychological framework and the one point where I'm somehow unable to do it and that was one question that I had for you as well. What to do with intercession? Like who like I can pinpoint a bit like who is intercession for well, does it change the intercessor or does it change the one interceded for? The classic modernist prayer question. Does prayer change God or does prayer change you and you see I see I see the to me I don't have and this of course won't come as any surprise to you. Of course, I have zero I have zero. I have zero hesitation relating to God personally. I have zero hesitation relating to God personally. I have zero hesitation relating to God personally. And I mean, of course you that's why Wham I mean that's that's that's what you learn in DTS. That's that's what the program is. Now the question then is can I can that be translated into a Petersonian framework and I think it's I think it's right there that his his Jungian I think it's right there that his Jungian credentials really show because you know when I talk about the iron box of secularism that is a you know few few weeks ago I was talking about this quite a bit more in terms of the manifest image and the scientific image. Okay, the manifest image is life of agency of relationships of the stuff that we're the stuff that we are deeply programmed. It is really the default way that we live in the world scientific image, you know strips out strips out agency strips out normativity strips out all of those things and tries to see the world through sort of a monarchical vision where it's a world of objects. It's a world of cause and effect and you try and continually dissolve and strip everything down just to these little these little sequences causal relationships. No human being can work in that world and we are not designed to work in that world. And when we do decide to work in that world, it's sort of like trying to play a trying to play a first-person shooter computer game without a GPU. You're going to be doing all kinds of computations, but all of the high horsepower graphics computation that you need to move the picture along is just not going to be there and that's an So when we look at when we look at people imagining they're being scientific, that's why they can never really pull it off because you can't live in the world that way. Now in the in the sub-cultures, the sub-cultures, the sub-cultures are all going to be in the world and the sub-cultures will be the world of the sub-cultures. And so you know, if you look at the, the, the, the sub-cultures, they are all going to be in the world of the sub-cultures. Now, in the, in the Peters in Vancouver one, which I thought was the best of the four speeches, the interchange about intercessory prayer, I think was instrumental to this, because both Peterson, and I think critically Brett Weinstein said, I can imagine how prayer works. Because Peterson easily via I think a lot of his Jungian constructs, but even Brett Weinstein could, has enough of an understanding of what has become depth psychology to imagine that in some weird ways, even if it's only our perception, we change the world with practices like these, because and even Sam Harris in that moment would admit that something's talking back to you. Now, again, and I think you phrased it exactly right. It's sort of a psychologist, it's a psychologization of the interaction. And so at some deep level, you're talking, you're only talking to yourself. Or you're, you're talking to yourself in such a way that we can take it a step down that somehow in a deeply unconscious level, you will be communicating and even in a shallow way, colonizing the people around you to create a, to create a context in which the truth that you are pursuing in intercession is somehow co-opting the people around you to participate in. When I, when I talked to John Vervecki and the miracles conversation, he mentioned this story, which I really have to look up about this miracle horse that people were amazed that this horse that could do math, and then they discovered that the horse could do math only when the horse's owner was there in the room. And let's, let's assume for a moment that the horse's owner was innocent of communicating to the horse at a deep level, the owner didn't realize he was doing it. And of course, the horse doesn't have the same kind of full consciousness Congress that we have, where a horse could, in a sense, lie. Because that lying requires a certain ability for us to stand outside ourselves, to be double-minded. And to the best of our knowledge, a horse doesn't have that capacity. But what we know of horses is that they are tremendously sensitive animals, even to things within a human being that the human being is not conscious of. And for that reason, there's all these horse therapies where, you know, people have to come to terms with themselves before they'll be able to get along with a very sensitive horse. And so we know that we know that horses have an amazing capacity to read us at levels we that are below the conscious line. And so in that sense, one could construct a purely psychological argument for intercessory prayer, that that prayer doesn't just change us, but prayer even changes the people that we are around, whether those other people know it or not, at levels that none of us are conscious of. So, so I think just from a quote unquote scientific perspective, or at least a secular perspective within the box, you could say that intercessory prayer has that kind of power, potentially. But now, where Sam Harris will protest will be that, again, this gets into some of the biases of the celebrity atheists that in the language that I've been using lately, that there is a super thing in the sky. And that what the picture that we have of intercessory prayer is somehow a relational connection between us and a super thing, and that super thing that acts on our behalf in a way in the world. Now, again, I can see the way you can almost get there with a Petersonian framework, or a Jungian framework, because we are always immersed and contributing to a level of person to person networking and interaction that is both beneath the conscious level and more deeply impactful in the human shaping of our world than we can know. And Peterson gets at this whenever he talks about sacrifice. So if you listen to It's in 12 Rules for Life, it's in the Easter talk that he did in 2018. And I remember that because that was just after my conversation with him that he released that Easter talk. And in those five, in the transcripts that he has on his website of them, Peterson, I think rightly notes that when we participate in sacrifice, and even sacrifice says, you know, animals on ancient barbecue pits. When we participate in that, we create the future and change the world and create community. And I think this is really what's amazing about Jordan's project, which is just how far you can go with this psychologically. And that really disturbs, I think, the celebrity atheists, because the bulk of their argument is that all of this stuff is just bullshit. And what Peterson is showing is that, no, this stuff is working. Now, again, from a Christian point of view, Peterson's arguments, just because he is demonstrating psychological connections, they don't debunk Christianity as such, because Christians have always known that Christian religious and spiritual practices are good for us. There have been ample validations of that at many, many different levels. And Christians have built within their theological cosmology that the God of creation is the God of redemption, and this is a relational God. And maybe I'm going too long on this. Stop me if I am, because you basically triggered exactly what I've been working on for a while now and feel like I'm making progress lately, because basically what I'm wrestling with is the Cartesian dualism that has set into that frame that Christianity has sort of acclimated itself within. But there are some weak points of that dualism that I think the celebrity atheists exploited. And why I think we find the likes of Peterson and Vervecky helpful with more of their, the nomenclature gets tricky, because I rightfully get called on some of this stuff, because I am not an academic. This is not my area of expertise, because this is much more philosophy than it is theology, at least within the conservative frameworks that I've been working. But the nondual materialism tries to establish a unified system by which all of this can happen. And what the celebrity atheists do is sort of chop it off at the head. And that's what I think is the most important and what the celebrity atheists do is sort of chop it off at the head and say, no, no, we're not going to allow any intercessory. We're not going to allow any of that. We're not going to allow a super thing. And so when Jordan Peterson comes along and sort of reinvigorates our imagination with respect to God number one, he begins to illuminate how our religious practice is coherent from below. And we don't know how far up. And part of the difficulty that we have in our culture is where we're always sort of looking from the bottom up. Now, it's exactly at this moment of relationality, when the GPU comes online, that and this is why that all of the the the exaptation of all of the really powerful things in our minds really come online. And I think it's for that reason that atheism will never carry the field because you are you basically have for your atheists, very high CPU people, people who are really smart in certain kinds of left brain, systematized, rationalized thinking, they are doing extraordinary work on that. But the real powerhouse of our brain that we use to navigate a marriage and navigate a room full of people and navigate real politics, not purified politics as as some egghead thinks the world should be, but actual interchange with real people in the manifest image that requires this enormous GPU intuitive, fuzzy thinking, right side of the brain that Gilchrist has pointed out and says, you know, people are people have both of these lobes of the brain. And to the degree that the celebrity atheists keep trying to slice the brain in half and get rid of half of it, they will always lose. And this is why religion is going nowhere. And the left side with its systems will always finally lose not just to the woowish people, because there's a degree of bullshit in those systems that the left side of the brain calls them on reliably, but they will always lose because everybody else is engaging their full mind and is bringing all of the machinery to bear to actually engaging the world from top to bottom. And that's why people talk to their cars when it won't start and they cuss at their computers when they crash. We're not going to stop. And basically, we've had we've had almost 100 years of trying to shame it out of people. And by using all kinds of status, leveraging technology, leveraging the academy, we've had 100 years of trying to shaming out of people. And shame is a powerful thing. But the limitations of shame are when you stop watching and policing, they are going to go back and do it again. And as a pastor, that's what I see, is that even even in a church with a fairly old, rigorous theological religious system, you never shame out of people the things that come naturally, which is why folk religions persist and are not going anywhere. And why any finally credible and fully rounded religion will use the GPU and the exeptation and the intercession and the personal relationship with God. It is always going to eat the lunch of the rationalists. So there's I'm gonna have to make that a clip because for me that was I mean, you asked just the right question to sort of give me the opportunity to kind of lay all this stuff in a much more concise format than I usually do in my two hour videos. I hope that was what we were asking. You know, I coming back to one of the things you said, you also mentioned like, Peterson building this bridge, you know, starting at the bottom and moving his way upwards, like building a natural theology. And to me, it's like still an open question somehow, like how high can he build this thing? You know, like how high, how far will it take him? Or like take us or take me if I go up these stairs, you know? Or is there like, where is the point where you have to somehow like jump or like make a leap or so that's and to me intercession still is like, at least only partially, I don't know, explained or at least, you know, I feel like you, like don't you lose something though, if you only look at it from a psychological perspective. And I'm wondering how much, probably how much that is? I don't know. Well, that's my point about the CPU and the GPU. If you look at your wife from a purely psychological perspective, you're not going to stay married. It's no fun. Yeah. Because what you have done is you have reduced her to, you have taken the personhood out of her and you have reduced her to a process. And you want to be in love. You want to be in a real relationship with something that is not something that is more than, you know, more than anything that you can wield. And that's why it's a, it's kind of an interesting thing to see just how far can Jordan Peterson build his tower of Babel. But the tower of Babel always ends the same way, because if you actually could succeed in it, you would destroy yourself. And that's exactly the story that happens in the tower of Babel is what undermines the tower of Babel. Well, their languages are confused. Well, what does that mean? Well, so what their languages are confused. Why couldn't they keep building? No, because they couldn't cooperate because not only did they just abandon the tower, they had to move away from each other because they suddenly became enemies with all of the other builders. And that's what happens. And in fact, you see that playing out in Jordan's project, the higher Jordan builds. Well, you know, sort of at the base, you might have Catholics and Orthodox and Protestants and, and new ageist people and political conservatives, you might have a coalition there at the bottom. But the higher you get in your project, the more they're going to be peeling off. And the reason is because that project is all about wielding. I mean, implicit in the project of the tower of Babel is us trying to, trying to Voltron ourselves up to be able to look God in the eye and, and pull him out of the heavens. And the story says, never going to get there. Your arms are too short to box with God. So I mean, you're, you're exactly right. And, and the minute you try to, you know, the minute you try to reduce your wife to psychology, oh, you will have a rude awakening because she will not like it. And she has ways of punishing you that just in the four years of marriage, you have not begun to contemplate because they are painful and they are robust. And you have the same thing, same power with her. But what you want to do is be loved and to love. And because part of you knows deep down, that's what you were made for. Yes, I, I, I think that like that is also encapsulated in the later third of, of what you said before with like the new atheist failure to like look beyond that, you know, to like, to look beyond the material or scientific probably. And I mean, I am a, I did my bachelor's degree in, in philosophy as well, although it was my minor. So it's, but nevertheless, I still spent some time with philosophy and I really, really enjoyed it. Like, especially in the beginning, I did a lot of like analytic philosophy and it, it's like, to me, somehow when you, when like trying to define truth or like trying to, trying to get at like certain, certain aspects or like even like moral philosophy, it always felt somehow, it felt weird to me because it felt like you are trying to, it's like when you, maybe I can use it like Jonathan Haidt's Rider and the Elephant, you're like, you are just the rider and you're like trying to explain how the elephant feels or like, or trying to explain something about the elephant. But, but you're like doing it from the, from the top down and you're like not, like you're only using like a specific tool for a question that requires something much bigger, you know? So that is something that I, I wouldn't say that I got frustrated with it, but it's maybe more something like disillusioned, although I never thought that philosophy would be able to answer the deepest questions somehow, and especially like analytic philosophy. So, the next thing is, I'm going to talk about the text reading. I just, you know, we, we're in a seminar and we read a really short text and it's just like one and a half pages and it's like super close reading, and then we, we sit in the seminar and we talk about the text and the biggest part of the session is like trying to even figure out so it's like, it's not even about what, what, what is the argument and what do we do with it? Do we agree? Do we disagree? And then discuss the argument. It's like talking about nobody's met this and then we talked about, he uses this word and what does this word even mean? And you like, you, you zoom in sometimes like so much that you don't, I don't know, see the bigger picture or contend with the arguments, but even like not using, I don't know, like your, like your experience or like what you, what you feel, where you participate in, that's, I mean, I'm, you know, I'm so grateful to you and to Viveki, to, to Peugeot with all these ideas and like with Viveki's, the, the four P's, it's just like, it's amazing. Yeah. Yeah. I'm just, I'm so thankful to, to, to just have it like served on a silver platter for free. It's, it's crazy. Thank you. Yes. Well, and it's, well, and it's, it's cause we're, I mean, we're, we're all participating in the same thing. Yeah. As you said earlier, we're trying to figure out this world. Yes. We're trying to do. Yeah. And what I'm, what I'm trying to say is like the, in the, with analytic philosophy and especially analytic philosophy, you, you remain in the realm of the propositional and you try to reach into the participatory and into the procedural and, and it doesn't work. Like you, it, it just doesn't work. And so, yeah, I think that that was just a point that I wanted to make, I guess. Well, and I think that's connected to the other point that you were making about how high can Peterson build his tower. There are limits to, you know, again, this, this gets into the story of the Bible, what we are, we are small, we are limited and there are limits to what we will do. And again, the Tower of Babel story goes straight to that. We are going to build a tower to the heavens. Well, again, you have to think culturally what that meant in those cultures, because heaven is the control room of earth. And it's, it's, you know, in Peugeotian terms, it's humanity trying to basically take over the world. This is in Genesis three, this is in Genesis 11, you find this, this is in the census and Peugeot, you know, for me just really opened my eyes to this and how often this comes through. And it's even in the crucifixion, because Jesus is a man. Jesus is a man. And, you know, he's, he's a man with more power than any other human being who had ever lived. Yeah. On the cross, he cries Psalm 22, my God, my God, why have you forsaken me? This, this, I mean, that's why has Christianity endured? And, you know, I, there was a somebody on Twitter, you know, posted that, you know, it was Sam Harris to Jordan Peterson to John Verbecky and Paul VanderKley and Jonathan Peugeot. And now he's, you know, exploring Christianity. I blame Sam Harris. I mean, you can't even, even by fighting it, you engage it. And that was C.S. Lewis's point that, you know, an atheist can't be too careful in what he reads if he wants to maintain himself as an atheist, because, okay, well, I want to dig. I want to, I want to see how high I can build this tower. Well, at some point in that rarefied air, you're going to realize the limits and you're going to see that there's stuff above you. And you're going to have to say, how did that get up there? And in order to maintain your atheism, you're going to have to, okay, I have to answer how that got up there. And the more you pursue that project, if you do so with discipline and intelligence and perseverance and honesty, you're going to discover our limits and there's still stuff up there. So then try to maintain the, then try to maintain the, the story that all that is, is built by us. And then we dig something up. It's like, how do I account for this? There's a reason, there's a reason atheists are a small portion of the population. And I think always will be now, maybe that looks differently in Europe, but because I know Europe is far more secular, but I don't know. Yeah. I'm not sure what the, what the numbers are, but I think at least in a lot of, also in the Nordic countries, I think there's a lot of atheists, or at least there's a, there's not many people who like still go to church. And if you go, you know, it's like maybe for Christmas or it's, it's yeah, Easter, maybe probably Christmas. But I think part of the problem I just finished, have you been on the discord server at all? I haven't, I, I not, not really. I can, I can talk about that as well in a, in a second, but yeah. Yeah. So, but it's, you know, I was just talking to Topher from the discord server right before you and, you know, he was, he didn't grow up in church. And I thought that conversation really went well, because, you know, we, we got to talking about why don't people go to church? And, and I think in, in our, in the secular frame, in some ways, for many people, they just didn't see the point. I, we love to tell time on the frame of human lifetimes. I think any in-depth reading of human history suggests that's not really an apt clock speed for finding out truth for human beings, that it's probably two, three, four generations that you can really begin to see what human beings can live with or live without. And actually be productive and flourish. So, you know, it's just because someone, just because one, just because for a hundred years, a family says, well, we don't go to church. We don't need any of that religion stuff, you know, in the, in the, in the mythological view of, of Peterson, they're, you know, they continue to feed off the, you know, off the preserved carcass of their, of their dead, you know, ancestors. So, yeah. Yeah. But I also think that it's, it's quite complicated to, to, to, to talk about that, especially also with Tom Holland's dominion and just how permeated we are in a, in a Christian framework. And you also talked about this, that like the, that the, I'm not sure what the video title was, like the, the key difference between atheists and Christians is, is, is not belief in God. No, no. Something like, like that was the, was the title. And so, you know, because it, like, what, what are our tests or like, what, how, how do we conceptualize that? Yeah, Christian or not. Like, you go, you go to church and you don't, but it's like so in our culture as well, and in our ethical framework and our worldview, it's so deep somehow that it's like hard to even find true secularism, although they probably wouldn't let me say that, but I'm quite persuaded by Holland's argument. And yeah, so, you know, I, and so that complicates to me the matter of like speaking about Christian and non-Christian, because I think if you just look at the numbers also in Europe, at least compared to America, where you have a much higher, I think, population or a much higher percentage of Christians, and it's much more like tied up with politics as well. Yeah. That is in, in Europe. So it's nevertheless, it's not easy to then make, I don't know, claims if a country is Christian or not, you know? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. How do you, and you know, I'd bump into that all the time. So we use Christian as an adjective. What kind of an adjective is it? It's really hard because when you listen to Sam Harris just excoriating Christians, because the Bible doesn't seem to meet his ethical standards, but when you look at his ethical standards and they're just Christendom warmed over with a few, with a few libertine, you know, a few anti-Puritan elements. I mean, that could be fundamentally what Sam Harris is, is an anti-Puritan, but he's a sort of a, he's a sort of a moderate Christian who, you know, who has some weird ideas about getting rid of the Bible and hating the super thing and skepticism about intercession. So, but in terms of how he lives, and I've seen this again and again with a lot of these people, these are, these are not Christian, some Christian pastors have remarkably far more chaotic lives than some of these celebrity atheists. You know, the celebrity atheists are dramatically faithful to their wives. It's like, where does that come from? At least to the best of our knowledge. Oh, I shouldn't be so, I shouldn't pick out those poor people like that. I don't know. I just see it, I think it, and I say it. Not enough of a filter. That's probably why I have a YouTube channel. Yeah, yeah. I, and like this, I think it also translates to just the, like, talking about even just like the term God as well. I mean, you talk about that a lot. Um, if it now, I can't remember. Is it, is it Fudgy or is it slushy? I don't know. Fudgy, Fudgy is motivated. Slushy is beyond us. So when you fudge an answer on your chemistry experiment, it's because, well, here's the answer and I've got to hit it. So I'm going to fudge the, fudge the math so I can get the right answer. That's Fudgy. Slushy is, it's like trying to grasp something, but it's liquid. And so it's, so you have it in a container, but it's, you know, spilling out. And so that's slot, the difference between slushy and Fudgy. And I'm, you know, it's, it just shows what physical creatures we are because these, you know, I don't exactly have words to say this stuff. There's probably some highfalutin word in a dictionary somewhere that says it better, but sludgy and, or Fudgy and slushy. If it gets the point across, I mean, that's what words are for. Yeah. Yeah. But what I, what I wanted to say is, you know, just thinking about that and, and, and the term God, and also the various conceptual, conceptualizations of God. And I think it was really helpful, even though some people may have found it, I don't know, infuriating that Peterson always like dodged the question, like, yeah, what do you mean by God when he was asked? But I came across the quote by Eisenhower today, and he was the one in America who I think under his administration, the in God we trust was put on the one, one dollar bill. Yes. Let me just find a quote because he said, in other words, our form of government has no sense unless it is founded in a deeply felt religion or religious faith. And I don't care what it is. And to me, that's how I really fit together with like, in God we trust and you can think God this, you can think God that and it's like just, I'm not fudgy enough because at least fudgy in the sense from Eisenhower that it's motivated then to unite, you know, it's like open to interpretation. Yeah, David Brooks, you know who David Brooks is, he's a columnist for the New York Times. He's got a book, he's got a book, The Road to Character and there's a lot of little vignettes in that book and one of them is on Eisenhower. Eisenhower's mother was a deeply religious woman and Eisenhower was not. And I think Eisenhower is a terrific illustration of what we were talking about that the span of one human being's life is insufficient to actually look for outcomes of world views. And so Eisenhower in terms of his own life sort of rejected the faith that his mother held, but those values that were in his mother that she put in him, those values played out in his life even to the degree of you know one of the you know many of the many presidents of the United States were not deeply religious people. But they almost all came they were almost all deeply religious adjacent and they manifested a certain religiosity in their lives. Now I should say almost all. The book is still open on the Donald to see where we come down with him, but I'm glad I can laugh about Donald Trump because I know so many people who can't and that's a problem. So anyway well we're about out of time. Any final things you wanted to get in here but didn't get a chance to? Probably it should have been said at the beginning or at least at least for me I wanted to communicate my motivation for actually doing this. Oh yes. This talk because you know I've been a listener and a viewer of your channel also for quite a few years and I'm what you would call a lurker so not really engaging in comments or I don't think I ever commented under any one of your videos although I've at least in the past few months listened to a lot of your content and for me and so part of this conversation for me of course I wanted to talk to you and that's interesting to me and like trying to make this thing that is always like distant and where I'm just a receiver to make it more real and like to step in. Yes. And and because I always have like some I don't know like a skepticism towards platforms and like online platforms and I've hardly have ever seen like a productive YouTube comment section like oh you really changed my mind or that's a really good point or like something like that. It's like if you see it you have to point it out and you have to like revel at this amazing thing that you just witnessed because it's this doesn't really happen. Yeah. Again with a quick caveat your comment section is probably something that also I don't know gave me hope or at least some at least I see quite a difference to other communities and I so essentially I already thank you but I just want to thank you again for for like creating this space and somehow and also like doing these conversations because for someone like me it is very you know I am interested in in authenticity and truly dialoguing and I don't really feel that I can get that in a YouTube comment section and so having this conversation is almost for me like a starting point or like somehow like a stepping into the into participating and that's like also part of my motivation and I just want to. Well thank you. I feel you know a lot of people are grateful to me and I appreciate that because it has been work and it has been in some intentionality on my part but I'm also very indebted to you and people like you who have because I couldn't make a comment section on my own and it is you and people like you who have you know supported this channel by subscribing, by watching, people have supported me on Patreon, supported my local church and you know I would say I mean the discord server is not everyone's cup of tea but I would recommend going there and giving it a try because there are more people out there like you and you see them in my conversations but there it is you know where these these electronic tools are not perfect by any means and they skew and they distort but there is capacity there and you know especially for some people I think I think people who have struggled to sort of find and build a community or at least the assemblance of a community it's I'm I'm really I'm really surprised how far we've gotten so far. I really am. I more expected things to sort of crash around us but it hasn't yet and there are stumbles sometimes and you know people sin is real and people are people so yeah so no I appreciate it and I this has been a wonderful conversation. Is this something that you would do you want to see it before I share it or you want to give me permission to share it? What do you think? I think you can you can share it if you want to. Oh I do I do this was a this was a this was a wonderful conversation and again I'm just I mean I'm a Calvinist so I'm supposed to have a dour perspective on human nature but it is it is it is surprising to me how a how I can just kind of put links out there and have people I don't know sign up and how many wonderful people like yourself that I meet. It's it's it's fun on your side but it's at least as much fun on my side it really is and the channel has been a a labor of love and probably one of the most stimulating and gratifying things I've ever done in my life. It's crazy but yeah who would have thought you could do something like this on YouTube but here we are and maybe it won't last you know. You know I believe that the age of decay is a real thing and everything that we build decays and we corrupt and I mean that's part of what's built into the story of the Tower of Babel but even but at least while we're while we're enjoying the fruits of our labors let's enjoy them so so thank you Tim and thank you very much for this conversation I really enjoyed it. What time is it where you're at right now? Now it's probably some way around 9 p.m. Okay so not too crazy late so well thank thank your thank your wife for for sharing your time with me probably evenings are often spent with her and no children yet? No children yet. Oh you've got um that one of the and I I look at our culture and I think people don't know the riches they are passing by because um it is oh it's it's sacrificial I don't know if you saw my conversation with Po that I did a couple days ago but um only like the first 10 minutes yeah yeah so children are a um if if I feel for those who haven't had the opportunity to participate in that one of the most amazing aspects of being a human being so anyway yeah I yeah I mean yeah fast it's it's quite a big topic as well at the moment and I think it's funny if it maybe was with because of the conversation with with with with Paul because just in the beginning talk being about anti-natalism as well suddenly all my youtube recommendations are like anti-natalists groups and like worldwide communities that like come together and it was it's quite surprising that that I was that that existed like communities coming together in for that uh philosophy like world view organizing events and I don't know they have to they have nothing to do they have no children what you have a child you don't have time for that yeah thank you Tim this has been a delight thanks for signing up thank you so much all right take care bye bye have a good day