https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=f-Ea7zO4Ilg

 Hi, this is Paul. Um, whole bunch of stuff to talk about this week, and I'm afraid it's week I'm not going to have that much time to talk about things. Last week, Jonathan Peugeot, towards the end of the week, just there's a whole flurry of really terrific Jonathan Peugeot content. And this is all stuff that I want to deal with. And then also an amazing video from Rubble Wisdom with an interview with John Vervecki, which I think is perhaps my favorite interview with him so far. I think we have potential for a lot of connections and maybe even breakthroughs that seem to be coming down the pike in this little corner of the internet. Now one of the big ones that came down was Jonathan Peugeot's conversation with Brett Weinstein. And I've been making my way through it. I'm not, I'm not completely finished with it. It's on Spotify, which is sort of a pain. I know that YouTube demonetized Brett Weinstein's channel, so he's probably prioritizing his content on Spotify where he can get some ad revenue because this has become a significant source of income for him along with book writing for him and his wife. So seeing that he's not teaching in a university anywhere. So I'm going to start there and go into a bunch of other things and not yet dive into the some of the rich content that is out there. So let's, let's begin with a substack. Now most of you probably know at this point that I do have a substack and part of the reason I have a substack is because I'm also on Twitter and often I write my tweets. I write a big tweet thread and I'd like to see them as a blog post. So I started doing that on substack. And then I also realized that for many of you who are subscribed to the channel, probably a bunch of you who are not watching this video at all, but I'll take a risk to catch some of you that I put out so many videos and there's so many hours of content and many people don't have the interest or availability to keep up with it all. And so semi-regularly I will do a video summary or at least the next thought on a video in a tweet thread that will become a substack. And so some of you have been watching my videos lately can find, I did a substack on my Batman video, a little substack on the Will Smith Chris Rock video, a little substack on the beta cools and naughty boys of Angelicalism. So I did a substack on a whole variety of things and this morning I did a substack on initial thoughts on the Jonathan Pigeot, Brett Weinstein video, which our conversation, which I think is excellent. A big struggle with all of these big conversations and that includes the Benjamin Boyce, James Lindsay conversation is to ask the question, what are they doing? Oh, they're having a conversation. What are they trying to answer? Where's Pigeot coming from? What does Pigeot want? Where's Lindsay coming from? What does Lindsay want? Where's Benjamin coming from? What does Benjamin want? Where is Brett Weinstein coming from? What does he want? And in this there's sort of a need to summarize and distill something of, again, an enormously complex human being. Now all human beings are enormously complex, but many of these individuals are, they're highly intelligent. They've got a fair amount of thought out there. They intersect with what we're doing. So to try to distill things down into manageable chunks and bytes and frameworks that are productive of the other complex thing, which is how to live our lives, is no small thing. So I'm going to try and do some of that. I'm probably not going to do a commentary as such on the Brett Weinstein, Jonathan Pigeot conversation until it's released on YouTube because it's just much easier to do so on YouTube. But it's on Spotify and you can hear it now and there's a link to it here. Now one of the things about Brett Weinstein that I have noted before was Sam from the Transfigured Channel very nicely summarized Brett's worldview as sort of a neo-Gnostic religion. Because he sort of, he frames reality as the product of this, he's called it a variety of things in the past, a genocidal spelling bee. We are assassin robots and there's clips that I've played, plenty of videos about that. But this sort of creates sort of a genetic demiurge from below. And this is threatening our, what exactly it's threatening is a part of the complex conversation between Pigeot and Weinstein. Because if you really understand where Pigeot is coming from, and I feel like my understanding of Jonathan has taken some leaps lately by some key videos that he's put out, his video on the book of Enoch I thought was particularly clear and helpful. And his conversation with Jordan B. Cooper was particularly clear and helpful too in terms of sort of giving a clear picture of how Jonathan is putting together his world, his symbolic world, his patterned world and how it works. So for Bret Weinstein, his religion begins with sort of a genetic demiurge from below that is responsible for our genocidal nature motivated by the genes wanting to get themselves into the future. That's a significant part of the earlier parts of the conversation. From above there's the law of love that is more or less carried to us by the Judeo-Christian traditions. And Bret Weinstein is sort of all over the map on a lot of these things. He's over here and then he's over there and then he's over there and then he's over there. And so I'm hoping with my commentary to sort of nail some of this stuff down and get a sense of who he is. Now this law of love Pigeot will pretty much mostly agree on because this is coming from Christianity. I think that Pigeot and myself are more than a little bit skeptical that you can get there from the genetic demiurge from above. Like most secular thinkers they sort of take this law of love, this love-based morality as axiomatic, which again is fine. And those of us who are Christians are happy they are doing so. Thank you for sharing some of our moral axioms that you have inherited from Christendom even though you're skeptical about the path that it actually took. Or you imagine that you can create some kind of proof for it from above. Whereas I think Pigeot and I would basically say, no this is sort of what counts for revelation. Now Pigeot wants to get at the source from above and Bret Weinstein because that's sort of left between love is self evidentially good and some hand waving about Bret's culture track. And again one of the things I like about Bret's system is his two tracks, his genetic track and his culture track. And I did a fair amount of commentary on that from his appearance on Unbelieveable with Alastair McGrath. Now Pigeot really has sort of a natural law argument by discerning patterns that isn't too far from a lot of the work that I've been doing in my Roman Sunday School class that I've been posting on my channel. That in Romans 1 Paul seems to assert that noble pagans can discern much about God by, to use Pigeotian language, observing the patterns of the world. That's what I've been talking about in my Romans class at least at this point. One of the things that I want to get at at some point, boy we'll have to see if I have time to get at all of these good Pigeot videos. What tends to happen is that new videos come along and I just keep flowing with the chain of thought and not really spending a lot of time in these Pigeot videos. But they're really good. Now the third thing that I want to bring in here though is this video by Kurt Jamungal on his Theory of Everything channel with Michael Levin. Now about six months or so ago Karen Wong was really excited about Michael Levin and was sending me videos furiously of his but in many cases, this is part of my idea about God being in charge of our calendars, I wasn't ready for it. I was working on other things and I was interested in it. Grim Grizz was also doing some stuff from Michael Levin which is very interesting, which is very interesting stuff. And so if you want to begin to see what Pigeot was talking about, I thought Levin does a nice job of distilling it into biological categories. Okay, now this video begins. The first half hour is Kurt Jamungal sort of setting this, setting up Michael Levin and then Michael Levin beginning to talk about his theory which is that in some ways all cells are working as a neuro network. The old paradigm was that, which I hear coming through Brett Weinstein, so I'd really love to see Brett Weinstein and Michael Levin engage, don't know if that'll happen. The old paradigm was that, let's talk about cancer first, was that cancer is caused by mutations in the genetic code which then causes cells to get out of whack. And what Levin has done is he's talking about the fact that that's not what he's finding, that cancer is caused by something different, which is the cells themselves don't change, but what happens in them is they stop talking to the other cells and stop working as a group. Okay, so first the cancer example. So the cancer example would look like this. One of the things about cancer, the one way to think about cancer is to ask the question, why is there ever anything but cancer? In other words, individual cells like amoebas are extremely competent on their own, they handle single cell level goals quite well. Why do they ever get together to form something like a kidney or a liver? Because when there's a cancer, what you're seeing is a defection from that process. So you're seeing cells that normally should be working on making a nice organ or upkeeping a nice organ in an adult. Instead of that, they go off and they basically revert to a single cell kind of existence. They basically become like an amoeba, they treat the rest of the body as just environment, it's like external environment. So you can think of that computational boundary between self and world can shrink. It can grow when a bunch of amoeba-like cells get together and they build something like an organ or a whole body that computational boundary grows, but it can also shrink because an individual cell can say, I'm not working on this anymore, I'm just an amoeba and I'm going to do what amoebas do. What do they do? They... Okay. Now, while you listen to him, I want you to think about what Peugeot talks about all the time. It's not exactly levels of analysis, but it's not disconnected when Jordan Peterson talks about levels of analysis. He talks about the consciousness of a person, the consciousness of a family, the consciousness of a city and the agency of these. He basically talks about this leveling up. This is deeply connected and especially as I get further into this video, you're going to see that in many ways, Michael Levin here is talking about exactly the same thing, but at a cellular level. It's also going to connect into the egregore conversation. Let's keep going with this. They become... I'm working on this anymore. I'm just an amoeba and I'm going to do what amoebas do. What do they do? They become two amoebas and two amoebas become four and so on. They overproliferate and they go where life is good. They metastasize to wherever they want to go. That's cancer. If you think about... Okay. That's cancer. You can listen to all the pre stuff of this to get into the cells and how cells differentiate and how cells differentiate not so much on their genetic code, but what they're doing talking to each other in order for them to become something where they become an eye cell or a neuron. Of course, we begin life as these two cells, the sperm and the egg, they come together and then you have this differentiation. The differentiation is coding and it's much more like, again, computer code running on hardware, but what's happening is that the software is actually remaking the hardware as it goes. This also gets into the conversation that I've been having with Sam on the Transfigured and John Vervecky about telos or goals in nature because that is also coded into this network that develops that tells the cells to differentiate and then in a normal human body without cancer has the cells actually working with each other in harmony, but then when one cell decides it wants to live on its own and to leave the network, then it basically becomes cancer. About it that way, that cancer is this like defection from multicellular cooperation. You ask yourself, okay, so what is the process that normally keeps them harnessed towards specific goals? If you ask yourself, what do we know that's a process that harnesses individual competent subunits towards larger scale goals, that's very clear. Okay, did you hear that right there? You can hear Jonathan Pujo and all of his talk about patterns right there in that little statement. I'll play it again. If you ask yourself, what do we know that's a process that harnesses individual competent subunits towards larger scale goals? That's very clear. That's the neural-like processing because you have individual neurons, which are cells, but you connect them together into a network and this amazing computation starts to take place that can do things like plan for the future and have memories and have preferences and goals on a large scale. You as an organism can have goals and memories that your individual cells don't have. The B.J. Campbell conversation about the neurons don't know what I know. Again, I'm a level up. The optic nerve isn't seeing the way I am seeing. What this does is provide for us an imaginative picture, if you will, or imaginative model of the various levels up. Yet, at the same time, these levels have agency and these levels even have perception, which you'll get into quite a bit later in the video. I doubt I'll get that all the way through. When we're going to talk about the flatworms in terms of the arrowhead or the roundhead, they're in some ways perceiving themselves. Now, they're not seeing in the way we're seeing. We're seeing in terms of perception, but you know that even in these very simple neural networks, there's perception, there's agency, and there's even goals. Now, you might say, now way down at that level of a cell or a flatworm, do they really have a goal? This is where we get into the conversation with Sam and John Vervecky about goals built into all of these systems. We know that electrical networks are really good at binding small competent subunits into larger scale computational agents. We take advantage of that in computer science. Evolution takes advantage of it in making neurons. We ask the following question. Could that be the basis of cancer? I must say that we're not the first to have this idea. Harold Burr said this in the 30s. We did three things. We said, first of all, when this process happens, can you see using the voltage dies, can you see the cells defecting from the electrical network? In fact, you can. What you can do is you, before it happens, you can inject a human oncogene, which is going to form a tumor in a tadpole. You inject that into a tadpole. They make a tumor. Even before that tumor becomes apparent, you can see with a voltage die, you can see that those cells become highly depolarized. They electrically uncouple from the rest of the tissue and they go on their way. They just treat it. To them, the rest of the animal is just external environment at that point. They become electrically uncoupled. That's the first thing that oncogenes do is electrically isolate the cell from its neighbors, from that collection of signals that normally tell the cell what to do in a larger context. That's the first thing we did. The second thing we did, we said, well, if that's a potential cause of cancer, could we cause cancer just by disrupting the electrical communication directly? No carcinogens, no DNA damage, no mutations. Nothing wrong with the cells that any molecular biology test could see. Could we cause cancer? Because remember, the standard model in the field for years has been that cancer is the cause of genetic damage, basically. That it's a genetic disruption that makes a rogue cell that has other mutations and so on. We said, fine, no, we're going to take completely normal cells, nothing wrong with them. We're going to simply prevent them from talking to other cells electrically. We're just going to manipulate that. And so we did that. And sure enough, we made metastatic melanoma in tadpoles. So that tells you that there doesn't have to be anything wrong with the hardware in order to have cancer. It can be a purely physiological phenomenon. It can be caused at the software level. That was interesting here because you're not really transforming the cell itself. You're just transforming how the cell behaves by changing how it relates to the electrical network within which it works. A lot of people who study stress-induced cancers and things like this, they kind of already knew but really the paradigm has been that there has to be a genetic defect at the root of this somewhere. And then the third thing we found, which is of course the most exciting thing, which is you can go in the opposite direction. You can inject a really powerful human oncogene, like a P53 mutation. Oncogene for those who are listening is just a gene that causes cancer? Yeah, an oncogene is a mutation in the normal gene that is thought to cause a transformation to cancer. So you can inject that. And then if you do that into a... So again, I'm no biologist. I'm no doctor. I'm certainly none of those things, as Kurt Jermungal said in his April Fool's thing. We just use fancy verveci words so we can sound scientific. But whether or not the cell gets transformed, its behavior is transformed in terms of this network. If you at the same time inject an ion channel that forces the cell to remain in an electrical state where it's connected to its neighbors and it doesn't depolarize, then even though that oncogene is blazingly strongly expressed, you won't have a tumor. Because you're overriding that there's a hardware problem, but it doesn't matter because you're overriding it and saying, yeah, I know you want to depolarize, but you can't. You have to stay connected to these neighbors and you're just going to be part of this. And we can override that way a variety of different types of oncogenes. OK, so I was just having an analogy in my head. It's almost like imagining you have these kids and they're misbehaved. So you can say, well, it's the kids who are the problem and they cause havoc in the house. But if you have an adult who's stern enough, they can override the misbehaved kids. If you leave the kids without the adult, then the house will be in shambles. In this analogy, the adult is like the electrical communication. So you can force that electrical communication, that standard adaptive electrical communication. Yeah, yeah, you can think of it that way. I mean, the thing where I think it breaks down a little bit is that we're not introducing an extra element that keeps everybody else in line, right? Where in effect, it's like you have a bunch of kids that know what to do and you've got one that's wearing dark glasses and you can't see and he's causing all kinds of trouble because you can't see what he's doing. Well, you can sort of you can put a camera on him or take the glasses off or something so that he just goes right back into the interactions with the rest of the group. It's about communication. It's about binding the individual competent subunits towards a larger goal. Your goal is not simply to grow as much as you can the way an amoeba is. Your goal is to build a hand or a liver or an eye or something else. It's really about the scale up of goals and electrical networks are great for this. OK, it's the scale up of goals. And but again, what where are these goals coming from? Does your work have any implications for what it means to have an identity? So right now you were talking about cancer as if it's dissociating from the larger cell. Yeah, and then there are gap junctions, which you've referenced in your other work, and they effectively make an equivalence class between signals that I generate as a cell or my environment or signals from connected cells. I'm unable to tell the difference between them. Yeah. Because I'm unable to tell the difference between myself and my neighbor. It's as if I'm identified with them. So it has plenty of bearing. At least I see it has plenty of bearing is for what it means for the eye or the ego in a non-pejorative manner. So what are the implications of your work for the concept of identity? Yeah, yeah, no, you've put your finger exactly on it. So so so two two years ago, I wrote this paper called On the Boundary of the Self. And it's exactly this idea. It's the way to to to define what is a self at different scales. And how does the boundary, the size of that self change over time? So this guy basically sounds, at least in this context, sort of like a a biological Peugeot in terms of his patterns. That's exactly the kind of thing that you that you're talking about. It's having having communication channels that partially wipe the metadata on information so that I no longer know whether it came from you or or whether it came from me. Right. Gives us a partial mind melt, because now it's really hard to keep an identity. If I can't tell which are my memories and which are your memories, it's really hard for us to keep to keep distinct identities. We become partially unified. And that's that's exactly the sort of process that evolution exploits to build larger selves out of small, competent ones. OK, now this is super interesting because I always say that consciousness is monofocal. When something grabs our attention. Listen, the way we talk, it grabs our attention. It's almost against our will. I use the example, if I open the door and I walk in my office and there's a crouched Bengal tiger. In my office, that crouched Bengal tiger will grab my attention. And then maybe there's the Queen of England with a gun in her hand. Well, the crouched Bengal tiger will likely still have my attention. I'll take the crouched Bengal tiger out of my office. And the Queen of England will likely have my attention, but only after I see the gun. In other words, if there's, I don't know, some other random person in my in my office, in my chair with a gun in their hand, the gun will have my attention. And then after the gun, the person in the chair. And if the person is the Queen of England or some other random person, well, the Queen of England will be over some random person because Queen of England is recognized. And why on earth is the Queen of England in my office? But again, there's a hierarchy here. So a crouched Bengal tiger or let's say a coiled, ready to strike snake. That'll grab my attention first. Even before the Queen of England and then probably next the gun. And then after that, the person in the chair. But there'll be a hierarchy in terms of the persons in the chair, in terms of my attention right there. Now, what he's talked about here. Evolution is exactly the kind of thing that you're talking about. It's having having communication channels that partially wipe the metadata on information so that I no longer know whether it came from you or or whether it came from me, right, gives us a partial mind melt, because now it's really hard to keep an identity. If I can't tell which are my memories and which are your memories, it's really hard for us to keep to keep distinct identities. We become partially unified. And that's that's exactly the sort of process that evolution exploits to build larger selves out of small, competent ones. OK, so now let's think about a worship service and let's think about attention. What do you do in a worship service? We use some kind of psycho technology to grab our attention. And a lot of Protestant churches, especially in the last couple of hundred years, it will be song. We sing together and living stones will have words on a screen and we'll have a few images behind the words, but the words on the screen, those will be powerful words that drop into they they're from Psalms or they're from the Book of Revelation. They're from something in the Bible that have sort of been put together. Or they're from religious experience or religious imagery or something that's of words on the screen. And we'll sing the songs together. And all of that just floods and takes our attention and creates us into one. Or let's say you have a a post George Floyd protest and everyone. You know, I think I thought Jonathan nicely when he talked about the the George Floyd protests in those videos back at that point, talked about how all of that sort of hijacks us. And now suddenly, whether you're you're black or white or rich or poor for a good number of people in there, they are going to be that they're there that a distributed person is going to be created out of attention in that mob. And then actions will follow and the whole group will move as one thing, not unlike starlings in the sky or fish in a school. You have a distributed organism now, in a sense, having one focus of attention. Now, if a group goes off to to burn a CVS, well, then suddenly your your attention is going to be broken up during the civil rights movement. Part of what Dr. King did was do intensive training. Of those that would be allowed to march in their marches and they would practice, you know, humiliating racial epithets to try to, you know, distract people. But no, people would be focused on the attention of nonviolent protest. Gandhi did a similar thing. And then you create a powerful. A powerful distributed organism together with one focus of attention. Sports do it all the time in basketball, in football. I mean, in football, you there's all these, you know, you you you take that. You take the hike and, you know, maybe it's a fake handoff to someone or you throw back, you're acting like you're going to throw all the attention is on the ball and everybody's trying to pay attention to the ball. But, you know, the whole organism is working as one and people have roots. And so but the attention and the focus, this is this is the same thing that he's talking about right here. And so, again, this is this is Pajowian. This is Pajowian justification for this. This main pattern or this main set of patterns that Pajow continues to sort of push out into the world and say, this is the pattern of existence. Another astounding experiment of yours. I'm unsure if I should be calling an experiment was where you took skin cells of a frog and then it has locomotion. Can you outline what the heck did you do there and why is that important? Yeah, yeah, no, it's definitely an experiment. And Grim Grizz has been has gotten gotten a lot out of this because it's it's sort of freaky and scary, but it it it proves the same point. So you're talking about our xenobots, I think. And the question was that the question that we're interested in addressing is is basically this. Where do anatomical goals come from? And in order to illustrate why that's even a good question, I want to talk about planaria for just a moment, and then and then you'll see why this this is important for the xenobots. We are we are used to the fact that each species has a specific shape that is associated with it and that frog eggs make frogs and zebrafish eggs make zebrafish and so on. So we're kind of we're kind of used to that. But the actual question of how do cellular collectives decide what they're going to build and when do they stop building? That's very much an open question. And so so one way you can see how far we are away from a good understanding of this is in a very simple, very simple experiment. There are there are so planaria, these flatworms that regenerate when you cut them into pieces, every piece builds whatever is missing and they regenerate. OK, that's that's planaria. You can cut them into pieces and they every piece regenerates to a normal planaria. So there are species of planaria that have round heads and those type those cells are really good at building a round head and then stopping. So they stop when a round head is complete. OK, then you got another species of planaria that has a very pointy head, kind of a triangular head. And those cells are very good at making a triangular head. When you cut it off, it makes a triangular head and then it stops. Now. Before I let them go any further, I want us to pause and notice how we're using language. And this comes up very much in Brett Weinstein's talk about what gene wants. Now, these cells are very good at making. They have all of this intentionality, all of this telotic, goal filled intentionality that our language is full of. And now, again, you know, back to awakening from the meeting crisis. This is the language that we've been given. This is this is the best we can do. Yet is there something in the language that should suggest to us why this is in our language and the utility of this in our language for trying to use language to gain understanding of how the world works? Just keep that in mind. So I have a simple question. If I take a bunch of the cells from the round headed guy and I stick them into the body of the triangular guy and I let them sort of get, you know, get comfortable and sit around for a while, then I cut the head off. What head shape are we going to have? Are we going to have is one of the head shapes dominant to the other? Are we going to have an intermediate shape or are we going to have a planarian that never stops regenerating because neither set of cells is ever happy about the shape. They're never that stop condition is never set. OK, so now so now look, the important thing is not the answer. The important thing is, despite all of the papers in Nature and Science about the molecular pathways of control of stem cells and planarian, all these kinds of high resolution transcriptomics and all this stuff, there is not a single model in the field that makes a prediction on this experiment. Why? Because every piece of data out there now addresses the hardware that enables individual cells to do cell things. Fine. But we have no understanding of what happens when the cells join together into a larger scale self that makes large scale decisions about head shape, head number, things like that in more space that navigates more for space by making these large scale decisions. We have absolutely no idea how those algorithms work. OK, so what he's saying is that we we we have all this. We have all this information about the hardware, which makes sense, especially given sort of the bias of our scientific model that we tend to focus on physical stuff now. Now, electrical is physical, too. And but it's a little harder for us physically to get a handle on. Then stuff that we can grab and dissect. And, you know, we're just getting into the decoding of of the genetics. And he's basically saying, hey, what about the electrical? Because that's something that can be measured and watched, too. And that seems to actually have. More to say in terms of how these things are put, the outcomes that arrive. And the fact that we know how the stem cells work and have lots of molecular biology about that really hasn't affected this other question much at all. We just have no no models for this. Because it's too computationally complex or some other in principle reason? I don't think it's well, no, I don't think it's because it's too complex. Although it is too complex to calculate out directly. I think it's because conceptually we haven't found the right we haven't found the right way to think about how cellular collectives make decisions. This is just listen to that language, how cellular cellular collectives make decisions. Now, again, we're go back to C.S. Lewis's book, Miracles. We're leveraging this language that we have and we have to. It's the only kind of language that we have. But how collectives make decisions. And earlier, when he's talking about computational complexity. You know, I've been talking about the fact that one way of one way of conceptualizing existence is sort of like a grand computational machine. Now. Why think in those terms? Well, part of what gives us to think in those terms is sort of the the simulation idea that is floating around in our collective consciousness at this point. The purpose of a simulation would be to get an answer. And maybe the question is, how long will human beings to go all the way back to Brett Weinstein's conversation with Jonathan Pigeot. How long will it take for human beings to destroy themselves, given certain parameters that the programmers put into the system? They say, well, you know, we have all these little computer based games that sort of work on those kinds of things. You can play SimCity, you can play some of the games I used to play 20, 30 years ago and much simpler computers about these world programs that would run. Well, that's nothing in terms of complexity to what we're doing. I mean, we talk about the fact that. In my office right now, there is so much complexity, even just physical complexity, that I could exhaust a lifetime simply trying to. Discover and let's say. Record. In math or physics or to record all the physical complexity. To record all the physical complexity. Now this office is itself as is his office quite clearly by the bookshelf behind. That is order only one level of complexity, because all of these books that I have. Also. Have within them code as it were, and I can, I can burn this book and the information does not evaporate because the information while encoded in the paper pages there is that the paper pages does not exhaust that information. And so. The amount of complexity that is built into our world is, is, is nearly an exhaustible, I say nearly inexhaustible because okay, with some models or conceptualization, this complexity will be exhausted at some point, which is an astounding thought, but how do these complex? How do these complex extended organisms make decisions in this case to have a round head or a pointed head? We have no idea. This is a collective intelligence problem. This is not a molecular biology problem. We've been thinking about this as a molecular biology problem. That's not what this is. This is, this is trying to read the mind of a collective intelligence. Now people think of collective intelligences as exotic things like anthills and, and, you know, B colony and agregores. These are things like this. These are collective intelligences. Um, I want to remind everybody that we are all collective intelligences. We are all bags of cells. No, there is no cognitive agent that is like this single diamond. That's, that's not made of parts. That's sort of unchanging. We're all made of parts. Any cognitive agent is made of. And so it's very easy then at that point to think about, well, a human, a family as a collective intelligence, what happens when the family has the meeting and Jordan Peterson and Tammy and, and Michaela had that video in which the three of them were talking about. And, and Jordan was saying, remember the family meetings we used to have. Now you've got different collective intelligences around the little table. So you've got the little Peterson family when Michaela and, oh shoot, what's the son's name? It's another J I think, uh, Julian, I think, uh, Michaela little Michaela and Julian are there and they're having a family meeting and Michaela doesn't like the family meeting, but, but Jordan wants it because he's, you know, he's a psychologist and Tammy wants it cause she's the mom and, and he had all this, this little collective intelligence. And. You know, that that's not anything exotic. The point he's making is that we're actually surrounded by collective intelligences that go up and go down below. And, and what, in many ways, what keeps us from seeing it is the conceptualization of exactly what we're looking at. Now, again, when you get back to the Peugeot and Weinstein conversation, that has everything to do with the, with, with, with what they're talking about. Because. Weinstein sees the challenge of humanity as a, as a, a danger in lineage. And when I listened to that conversation, I see all of these levels and what he sees as lineage and I say, well, this is sort of, this is a frame in a sense that you're looking through and you have a crisis of your frame. Now, when I finally treat that, I want to bring in the rest is history, the, the episodes that they did on oil, because that was a super nice example of understanding history through a frame over the last couple of hundred years. If you look at petroleum and our use and exploitation of petroleum, you, you almost have a window, an interpretive key that makes sense of the geopolitical struggles over the last 200 years. Just by looking at oil. And so you can talk about the spirit of oil, the spirit of petroleum. Now you can do this with mushrooms. You can do this with, there's almost limitless numbers of things that you can do this through. It becomes an interpretive lens or a frame through which to understand the relationships between a whole variety of other things that affords insight into the world. Now the frame that Brett Weinstein uses is evolutionary biology, mostly pinned by his understanding of genetics. Okay. This guy is using the electrical systems by which seems to be even a more powerful system than genetics, the electrical systems by which these cells become these cells decide what to make. But these are all levels below. And again, I think we're just starting to get a sense, at least in the, the, the thaw of, of modernity's winter, the levels up and to look for language to talk about them, that, that actually provides an interpretive key to understanding and participation. Parts. And so your goal is to ask, how do those parts bind together to make decisions as a collective? Individual cells don't know what a head is. They don't know what round, round means. They don't know what triangular means. Right. But the collective sure does. And, and, because I think, I think the way you want to use it is different than the way that I want to use it, but I think the ways may be connected and the discussions of the connection could be very interesting to unpack. Um, the, my idea, the way I have been thinking about it is like this. Um, when you get her enter into social media, be it Instagram, Facebook, YouTube, Reddit, any of these things, what you're doing is you have a feed of information that will be either articles or videos, funny cat clips or angry political, you know, diatribes or whatever, and you either ignore it, you pass it over or you like it, which amplifies its signal or you share it, which amplifies its signal more. Okay. Twitter is the most basic version of this. Facebook does basically the same thing. These things became very popular. They added them in about 10 years ago because they found out that it created more engagement. Um, everybody bitches about the algorithms, but the truth about it is that the algorithms are not necessarily what's causing everyone to tear each other apart because you still see people tear each other apart on Reddit and their algorithm is very simple. It's not, you know, fine tune to create traffic. It's just up, vote down, vote. Right. When you end this behavior, you know, people call it doom scrolling. Um, it becomes very addictive and because what you're doing in part, because you're getting a dopamine fix, but largely because you feel as if you are contributing to a, um, moving the needle a tiny bit with every interaction that you take on these systems, meaning, okay. These behaviors are completely an angle analogous to how neurons behave in a brain, except they're more binary signals instead of sending an entire idea. So the nucleus of the neuron has dendrites that stick out around it. Those dendrites collect signals. The signals come in the combination, the signal or combination of signals that it receives goes through some kind of generator function inside the neuron, which causes the axon to fire, which is a big long stick that then branches out and has connections to three or four other dendrites of other neurons. And then the way we learn is by these connections between neurons, breaking and reforming with different neurons and also by adjustments in that generator function. So that's how the brain fine tunes itself to be able to do complicated processes in this similar, but not exact same way to tuning an artificial neural network in a computer to learn, um, artificial neural networks are webs that are simple and sloppy and they take a long time to tune, but once you tune it, it can figure out one thing. You can tune it to predict the rains in Africa or to predict a college football score, right? You know, um, this behavior as we have like the social media thing, it doesn't have a tuning mechanism for it, like an artificial neural network, but it fine tunes itself. And every time you've unfriended somebody because you can't stay in their feet anymore, you are doing the same thing that a neuron does when it breaks a connection and forms a different one. Right. So the thing is set up like a brain. Um, if you step sideways into the AI or, you know, discussion, there are some, there, there are two different forms, two different fields of thought there. One of them is that there's no, you could not build an artificial neural network big enough for it to be a thinking being. And then the other one is if you make something big enough and tangled in enough for the enough processing power, it's going to become self-aware. Sorry. Now, now that is usually where we sort of freak out the self-aware part. And again, as I say back in the other video, you know, we're going to get into perception. Um, I got to adjust the sound here. Cause that one was low. Who made that other video? Who could have such low sound on the internet? And so the collective is able to navigate more for space in this way that we don't understand the algorithm. So if we don't even, we don't even know how to, um, how to think about this. Okay. So, um, so, so, so this, this is very isomorphic to problems in neuroscience to problems in, in artificial intelligence. It's, uh, trying to understand the scaling of, of minds. And in, in trying to do that, we, we pose the following problem. Okay. Standard tadpoles make, you know, standard frog eggs make, make, make frog embryos and everybody's kind of used to that, even, even though, you know, you can remind, I always remind my students, did you realize that, that if I gave you the frog genome, you couldn't tell me what a frog looked like. Right. You could, you could compare it to other genomes that you did know what, but that would, that's cheating. And you, so, so, so, okay. So we asked the, we asked a simple question. Where does the goal of making a frog or tadpole really come from and how hardwired is that? So what we did back on that a little bit. So, so there's, you know, there's a couple of different ways, I think, to talk about sort of purpose in biology and evolution, right? So like the purpose of a polar bear is to hunt seals in the Arctic, right? And so they are white because so that they can sneak up on seals. The purpose of their whiteness is so that they're harder to distinguish from the snow around them so that the sneal, the seals can't see them as easily. Right. And, you know, and they're big and fluffy because it's cold. Right. And, you know, et cetera, et cetera. There's, there's purpose in all of the sorts of aspects of, of a polar bear that are sort of, you know, all centered on their purpose, which is, you know, hunting seals, but, you know, the polar bear isn't aware of its own whiteness. Probably not. As the reason why it's white, you know, it knows to, you know, when they're sneaking up on seals, they cover their nose, right? With their paws because their nose is black, but they probably don't know why they do that sort of thing. Right. It's like at the level of instinct. So they're, well, I'm sure there's, you know, polar bears are probably, you know, more, well, they, they have some level of cognition and that sort of thing, but there, there are purposes that are not in their own mind that they're acting out. And I don't think that you would disagree with any of that. But I feel like it's almost like the theory, the process of evolution, the mechanism of evolution, the ability to encode a form right in sort of, you know, DNA and that sort of thing, and then to translate that into a form, into, you know, there's the DNA of a polar bear, which can get translated into an actual polar bear. And then, you know, the polar bear has more polar bear offspring if everything goes well, that, that, that mechanism of, you know, information, embodiment of information, but also the search algorithm, right? You know, each child's a little different. There's some randomness and the randomness is useful, right? The randomness is because the environment changes or we're not a perfect polar bear yet, there, there's still room for improvement in polar bearness and, and that it's this, it's, it's almost as if the purpose of evolution is purpose itself, right? Like there are a lot, you know, there's the purpose of an alligator, the purpose of a beetle, the purpose of a maple tree, the purpose of all of these different things. And they have lots of different sub purposes and make their livings in lots of different ways. But it's like life itself is searching for purpose itself, I would say. And that, you know, there's nothing, the, the process of evolution isn't thinking this, right? It doesn't have a mind in that sense, but it is almost like it is the, the, it is the bottom up, you know, emergence of purpose itself. It's almost a distributed cognition. Now, because the video has been too long ago, I probably can't pull up the place, but it still is there in my mind. I can't even find the episode, but I remember when I was going through awakening from the meaning crisis and we got to a discussion on Darwin and I thought the relevance realization now again, realization as a double, has a double front to it. There's realization like cognitive realization and there's realization like instantiation realization. And, and part of what I think is, is really part of what I was thinking about a lot during the Jonathan Pigeot, Brett Weinstein conversation was this dual aspect of realization in a Darwinian sense in that there's always the transjective relationship between the agent and the arena. Okay. And, and the, the genetics are always responding to the context. And Brett talks about that a lot, especially in terms of his, his assertion that the religious texts are, are basically archaic coding that should really be set aside because they have been adapted to particular contexts that are no longer the determinative context or the relevance realization context that we're dealing with today. And that's a, that's a tremendously complex thing to try to suss out. But gosh, I wish I could find the Darwinian segments of awakening from the meaning crisis, because I remember it's so often the case when I listen to a video, just like when I notice how people listen to sermons, it's not the points they make that I really remember and land for me and have power for me. It's the insights that the material itself provokes for me. And I remember this is a few years ago. Now this is nine, this is 2019. This is before the pandemic that John put the series out there and together. And let it out, you know, an hour a week at a time. It was the sort of the vision of similar to what Sam sort of laid out there that it's, it's very much a transjective relationship between the environment and to the agent, the agent and the arena. And it goes back and forth, but now you've got levels down in there and that little flatworm, we're going to come back to the flatworm. That flatworm is, is, is trying to figure out it's, it's sort of like the little Peterson family having a discussion. They're trying to determine as a group, what shape the head should have. It was, we took some skin, uh, that we scraped off of an early frog embryo. We, we set it aside in a different environment and we said, okay, now you're free to sort of reboot your multicellularity. You're here. We've, we've, we've relieved all of the constraints of the rest of the embryo. You're no, okay. Now, now notice what they've done and what they haven't done. They obviously left the frog skin cells in a physical environment. Now, now again, part of what we do is we just sort of say, well, let's, let's not look at that. And that's what this, this sort of contextual blindness is what the scientific method assumes. You learn that when you know, you're in college or high school physics and you're learning about Newtonian mechanics and say, well, forget friction. Forget friction. You know, you know how much effort we go through in this world to deal with friction, you know, motor oil, grease, uh, maglevs, forget friction. Now, okay. It just makes the math, forget friction. Cause the math is too complex. The, the complexity of this grand simulation is too complex for a high school or college students. So forget friction, forget the, forget the environment within which this little frog skin cell is, is going to have to continue to exist and not die. Because if you just catch a frog, take a scalpel, um, cut off, you know, just sliver off a little bit of that skin, a really fine scalpel and just, you know, throw the skin cell in the pond. That's probably not going to flourish or just throw that. I'm thinking about a, you know, ponds that I grew up with in Moytonsville, Massachusetts, where we'd catch frogs, catch the frog, scrape the skin cell off and just throw it in the grass at Fairwoods in Uxbridge, Massachusetts. The skin cell doesn't stand a chance, but for the sake of, we're going to let the skin cell develop apart from the network that the skin cell would normally be a part of in terms of the frog. No longer getting instructive signals from, from, from endoderm and from mesoderm and from all these other things, you're no longer subject to all these other signals, what are you going to do? What, what, what's, what's your new, what, you know, what, what, what, what do you want to do? And there's a couple of, what does the frog cell want to do? He said, well, does that, does that tiny little frog cell have sufficient consciousness to want in the sense that we have, but no, wanting is the only word and the best word that we know to use there. Different options that could have happened. The cells could have died. They could have wandered off and sort of went each cell go its own way. They could have made a monolayer of cells in a dish, the way you get in cell culture, all kinds of things they could have done. They didn't do any of that. What they did instead was to combine together and to form a little ball that grew cilia, these little motile hairs on the outer surface. Now cilia are normally sitting on the outside of embryos and they're there to kind of redistribute the mucus around and to, you know, make the pathogens sort of keep moving and not stick to the skin. They're used to, they're used to, um, keep the surface of the, of the tadpole clean. Uh, but instead these cells basically repurposed that genetically encoded hardware. The cilia themselves are genetically encoded. All the proteins necessary to make a cilium are in the genome. They, and they, so, so they have that already, but what they did was they assembled themselves into a new, um, into a new kind of, uh, a new kind of architecture, this, this, this spherical thing. We don't even know what to call it. It's just, we don't even know what to call it. Which, and then, and then they used the cilia to propel themselves. So they started running around, they started moving around. And so we have these amazing videos of them moving around singly, moving around in groups, interacting, going through a maze, going back and forth in various configurations, they have all kinds of behaviors, they have all kinds. They can regenerate. If you, if you cut them almost entirely in half, they will like join back and, and make a, you know, make a, uh, uh, make a, make a, uh, xenobot again. And the, the, the, and, and so, and so the coolest thing about them is, and by the way, we don't, we don't know their cognitive capacities yet. Okay. We don't, we, we've, we're only beginning. We don't know their cognitive capacities. ...now to start to see, can they learn? Can they, do they have preferences? All these kinds of things we don't know yet. But the coolest thing about them is that to my knowledge, they're the only creature on the planet that doesn't really have an evolutionary backstory. Bang. They're the only creature on the planet that doesn't have an evolutionary backstory. What, what, what does it want? The individual cells do. Okay. The cells have a long evolutionary history on earth, but they were selected for that genome was selected for the ability of these cells to sit quietly on the outside of the frog and keep out the pathogens. They were not selected specifically to be able to get together and run around in a separate, in a separate configuration away from the embryo. Where did that all come from? Suddenly, when Peugeot talks about, well, what is a chair? When you, when you see a chair, let's say the chair I'm sitting in and it's got arms and it has legs and it has a cushy seat and has a cushy back. You can just kind of see the back right here. Well, what is a frog? Is that a frog that's swimming around? No, it's not a frog. Are they frog cells? Genetically, it's a frog. If you, if you would deke, deke, deke, deke, deke, deke, deke, deke, deke, code the genome of those little cells flying around doing that little maze. And we're trying to figure out the cognitive capacity of the little clump of cells that have now, that have now activated its cilia so it can roam around by itself, it's not a frog, but if you sequence the DNA from those cells, you'd say frog, not a frog. It's just, this is so Peugeotian. And in fact, one of the, one of the things about it is people, people often say, well, you know, when are you going to buy, when are you going to engineer these things, you know, knock in various synthetic biology circuits, right? Make, when are you going to engine? When are we going to deploy these things to, I don't know, fight the Russians in Ukraine, them do things. We absolutely will do that. But my goal before we do any of that, my goal was to show people what, what can happen while the diversity of the king happen from the exact same genome with no manipulations whatsoever, because if you, because the thing about these Zenibuts is they just have a normal frog genome. They have no other, they have no trans genes, no genomic editing. There's nothing different about them. They are, what we're seeing is the plasticity of, of this collective intelligence that is able to make a new functional protoorganism in a novel way out of the exact same parts. So there's no genomic editing there. Did you manipulate its morphogenetic code, the electrical signals at all? Not yet. No, we're going to, we're certainly going to, that's all to come. No, at this point. Oh, little frog skin. We have plans for you. You haven't done that. This is, this is, this is purely native plasticity. This is what these cells already know how to do. We, we, we, we scrape them, we scrape them off of the frog and we put them in little holes, little, little, little sort of depressions. And I should back up. There are two types of Zenibuts. Okay. The one I'm describing now, we literally did almost nothing. You scrape them off the embryo, you set them aside and you say, fine now, liberated from all the signals that would have turned you into various, various things. What do you want to do? And this is what they do on their own. Liberated. What a word. It's another type of Zenibot, which is actually the one we started with, where we sculpted them a little bit. We, and this is by the way, this is all work done in collaboration with, with Vanguard lab at university of Vermont and Sam Kriegman did, did all the computational model modeling for this. And then, Doug Blackiston did the, did, did all the, all the microsurgery and everything. Good academic leaves his footnotes. We, we sculpted them a bit to give them legs. So you basically just, it's subtractive, like subtractive sculpting. You just cut away some stuff so that you're, you're left with kind of an Ottoman that has like four, four legs, you know, and, and, and we, and, and we put in a little bit of, a little bit of, of muscle and then it learned to walk. So, so the muscle would contract and the thing would basically walk along. That's, that's the first set of Zenibots we made. The second, you think Boston dynamics is scary. The second one has no muscle. It has no nerve. It only, it's only skin and those can get around perfectly well on their own using the cilia and there our interventions are extremely minimal. It's important that it was taken off of embryos or it doesn't matter if you took it off of a frog much later in development. Um, we haven't, uh, we haven't taken it off a frog later in development, but we, we have, we have other evidence that I can't really talk about yet. That, uh, suggests that it doesn't matter that it's a frog and it doesn't matter that it's an embryo. We have, we have, we, we, we have the data on adult cells now. What occurs to me is I'm wondering if this has implications for what it means to be alive in the colloquial sense. So forget about in the biological sense. So we think of our skin is dead and our bones are dead and perhaps dead isn't the right term, but let's say animated, animated with life with them. With Brio yet you showed that somehow you can still trigger Vim and Brio, not via this electrical manipulation. I thought it was that, but does this have any bearing as to what we consider to be alive or it's a diff or it's a, or it's unrelated. Um, I'll tell you that, uh, one of the things that this kind of work does, he thought you were scared now. Just wait for what he was about to say. Is really illustrate the insufficiency of our vocabulary. So people often argue, for example, I mean, alive is a funny thing. I don't, I don't actually know what alive really, I don't have a good definition. The, these cells and these organisms are for sure alive in the traditional sense. I mean, the cells are alive. There's no, there's no getting around that. But, but, but people will often argue, for example, are they robots? Are they organisms? Are they, uh, you know, these, are they machines, these kinds of things? And, and, and we, we, we, we, Josh Bongard and I wrote a paper addressing this question, basically pointing out that though that terminology is almost useless. Now it was, it was great 50 years ago when you could, you, when, when it was really easy to tell apart machines that were, that were, that were boring, predictable. They were, they were designed right. And living things, which were surprising and interesting and warm and wet and, um, and evolved those things are now so intermixed that, uh, with modern, with modern techniques of a digital evolution and bioengineering and synthetic morphology, that distinction does not exist anymore. And so it used to be that you can sort of like, you could knock on something. And if you hear a hollow metallic sound and you say, ah, yeah, that, that came off a factory, that's a machine and I'm, you know, morally, um, uh, okay with taking it apart and doing whatever I want with it. And if you were to do this and it was sort of soft and squishy, then you would say, mm, that's evolved and it's living and I better, I better be nice to it. That right. Tho that easy distinction is just, it doesn't exist anymore. So we need, we need a better vocabulary. I mean, there, there are a lot for sure. But if you want to ask questions about whether they are machines or robots or living organisms, or that, that all that stretches the vocabulary, which is no longer up to the task. Is there a relationship between perception and this morphogenetic code? And I know I keep using that word morphogenetic code and forgive me if I'm abusing the terminology, but is there a relationship between perception and morphogenetic code? I'll give you my reasoning behind it. Right now, what I see is I recognize a monitor. I see a microphone. I see you, you have eyebrows. I see large scale structures. Then the question is, well, is there anything special about your eyebrows? Well, other than you're an attractive man, let's say physically. Kurt Jermungal suddenly gets a little self-conscious about the attention to the eyebrows. Speaking physics would say there's nothing special about this microphone or 10% of the microphone or 10% of the mic. Now he's basically running through Jonathan Pashow stuff. Well, what exactly, what, what exactly is the microphone? Where is the microphone next ness in my, my little blue yeti here? Plus the air slightly around it. It's more a pragmatic matter that it's a practical, that it matters that I can use this. How it's relational. However, when you're talking about this non-neural bioelectric code, it's as if these large scale structures that we recognize as salient and significant, such as a low resolution, fasted like a child's drawings of eyebrows, nose, head placement, and so on, that those are there in the code. So somehow what we perceive is also what is encoded. And I'm curious, well, is that, is there a confounding factor that influences both? Does the morphogenetic code influence our perceptions? Perhaps I can give a better analogy if I, a computer science analogy where we have machine code and then you have like, you've built a top that builds a top library is jQuery and on HTML five and so on. So we have a function bounce, which takes an image and bounces it or texted and bounces it or one that plays MPEG. So question is, well, what makes bounce or MPEG playing more fundamental? Well, to me, I would say nothing. It's us, it's what we use. However, it's strange that objectively there's this code for it. Yeah, yeah. Um, well, there's a, there's a lot there. And what you just said, uh, certainly, um, perception is a part of this whole process because in order to have this kind of, um, anatomical homeostasis where you, you, uh, you, you, you, you, you damage it, you know, an organism like a salamander, which can regenerate most of its organs or a planarian, which can regenerate all of its organs. You, you damage it. And then it grows over the right thing. And then it stops when it's done. That loop, that homeostatic loop has to have a perception component because it has to be able to recognize when it's done. So it has to, so, you know, the whole thing about, oh, self-consciousness and got back to BJ Campbell's, you know, when does a machine, when does something have self-consciousness? Well, what are the, what are acts, acts of self-consciousness? Well, what are the, what are acts actually the constituent aspects of consciousness? Perception that the, the organism has to, in a sense, see itself. Now, again, that's the only language we have to learn. It has to sort of have a goal of itself for it to reconstitute itself after you've damaged it. So it has to be able to perceive, am I a correct planarian or not? And if I'm not, I'm going to keep remodeling until I am. And at that point, so there's sort of a goal in there. So it's an error minimization scheme. And in order to achieve that error minimization, you have to be able to perceive around you in anatomical space and to say, am I in the right region of space? Here is my head and the right size is due. Do I have the right number of eyes? Um, all of that, you need, you need to perceive that. And people, um, uh, people like Roseburg, uh, and, uh, at, at BU had written years ago about the relationship between retinal information processing and development. And I actually think he was, he was really onto something in the sense that I think most epithelia are basically like a big retina and that what they're doing is they're, they're, they're constantly surveilling the rest of the animal, uh, the rest of the body, uh, and making decisions about large scale features. So not just individual pixels, but things like in the, in the retina, you would be talking about edge detection, motion, um, things like that. And that's what they're doing. They're looking at large scale features that individual cells cannot detect. So, I mean, you just think about what this means. One way to look at this is that we have a precedent for this from neuroscience and from visual, from the science of visual processing, the, probably the more accurate way to look at it is yeah, that guess where the retina learned its tricks, right. And guess where, where brains learn their visual processing tricks by far more ancient mechanisms of cellular groups, navigating more for space that that's, that's what it used to be before it became, um, the, before it became vision, basically. And, and you think about, now again, the, the little, the little, the little perceptual aspects of the cells that were like, we, we're gonna, we're gonna, we're gonna be, we're gonna be a whole salamander again. Weren't, weren't thinking about where someday gonna have an eyeball. We're gonna be, we're gonna be an eyeball and this eyeball is going to be part of a, of a Vander clay with, uh, not enough hair on top and way too much hair below. And he's going to be looking at this little computer screen of this other guy with eyebrows and, and. Cosmological argument sort of just feels, feels a little gripping when you think about something like that. Do you believe that the problem of senescence to the degree it can be called a problem is largely a disruption of this electrical blueprint rather than oxidative stress and damage to DNA and so on that are telemeric length that people think? Um, I don't have any evidence yet that there's a bioelectric component to this. I mean, I suspect there is, but, but we don't have any evidence on it. We haven't really worked on aging per se. I will say that I don't think it's anything as fundamental as, uh, this kind of like thermodynamic decay or anything like that, because the planaria are immortal, they don't have a life span limit, they live forever. And so they are telling us that they live forever within an imagined context that of course affords their living. So again, even their eternity, even their everlastingness is transjective with respect to the environment. That it's possible to be a complex regenerative organism with, uh, learning capacity and so on and not age. So, so, so it's clearly possible. So, so the rest is details, right? The rest is, uh, I don't think it's anything as fundamental as the, the, the theories that say, well, look, when you copy things, you inevitably make mistakes. So eventually stuff wears out. If that were true, you wouldn't have planaria. So, so I don't think, I don't think it's anything like that. I think it's something much more contingent, much more specific. Uh, and, and thus I am optimistic that we can overcome it. So I'll just, yeah, I just played a little bit of this interview, um, but it's a, it's a big interview. Now part of where I want to go with this, and this is sort of setting it up to, to play some of that Kurt Jemungle Michael Levin video is where I'm going to talk about miracles, you might say, well, miracles. Bart Ehrman makes the point to Glenn Scrivner and Justin Briar leave that the big, the big impetus for conversion tends to be miracles, but now miracles are funny things because we, I think part of the difficulty that we have with miracles is our framing of them post enlightenment. We sort of put a specific frame around them and then declare that they can't happen because that's what a miracle is. And it, you know, it's okay to, to work on a definition of a miracle. But when, maybe I'll play the other video. Let's listen to some of Michaela's conversion story, or at least her, her spiritual journey. So I told you when I was 17, I was on Oxycontin for a year and getting off of that. I wasn't, I, I'd seen kind of opiate withdrawal in movies and I knew it was like, okay, sweating, maybe vomiting if it's really. Now let's think from the whole video that we've seen, what, what, what all is involved to make a human being. We've been talking about flatworms and frogs. Now we're looking at a human being, which is, you know, you have the culture track, you have the biological track. It is enormously complex. Bad, but there was a mental aspect of giving up getting off of Oxycontin that I hadn't expected, which was like anhedonia near the end. So I didn't care about anything. And I remember sitting in the bathroom being like, does it matter if I'm alive? And then thinking, could this be a side effect of, of the withdrawal? Because the withdrawal was pretty bad. I got off of it way too quickly and I had had sweating and crawling sensations under my arms. But was six weeks later, I hit this anhedonia and then I thought, you know, I'll just wait and see, and then make a more rational decision later. Fortunately, that was Oxycontin. When I got off of, so, so November, my depression lifted. And at that point. I was in such a different place that I was like, oh, well, I'm never taking any medication ever again, right? I was completely disenfranchised with the medical community. I couldn't believe that diet had anything to do with my symptoms. I was unbelievably angry because I was like, even if I get healthy, I have a replaced hip and ankle and I'm never going to get that back. And at that point, the ankle had actually been installed slightly crooked. So I was in chronic pain. And I was like, even if I'm even if I solve all these problems, I'm stuck with these problems, so I was livid. And so November, I thought, you know, my depression lifted and it felt like I was. I think this was the start of when I started to consider God. I think this is what started that. And it was the switch between living in like pain with depression specifically, but the fatigue as well to when it lifted. And it was a switch that felt like I'd been walking around in hell to walking around and it sounds dramatic, but like, like I was in heaven on earth. Like it was a complete switch. And for my entire life, I'd felt and my parents made jokes about this too, that I was on some sort of the wrong path and every decision I made went wrong. So my brother used to, he was just lucky, like everything he did kind of just worked out, he wasn't really late for things. And for me, if something could go wrong, it went wrong. And it was a joke in our family. And I was like, am I just like, I don't know what that is, but it doesn't really make any sense logically, but that was just my life. And then when I got healthy, I felt like I switched tracks into something more positive, and I think that's when I started to. Kind of question, I don't know, reality, maybe just question what I'd been taught. Well, you know who my dad is. He talks about the psychological significance of the Bible, but it was, I really learned about the biblical stories as kind of metaphorically, right? And so we didn't go to church. There wasn't a lot of, I knew the stories, but I didn't understand them in the way I think I'm trying to now. So let me ask you, am I understanding that it was at really a low point in your life, maybe one of the lowest points in your life, you were upset, you were livid with medication and the condition of your body and your mind at that point in time. And how did God all of a sudden come into it? I mean, was it a switch? No, he didn't. He didn't then. That was the first time I felt like maybe God was going to come into my life. Maybe there was more that I was missing, but he didn't come in for a number of years. This is, God has been rather, like my experience in that way has been rather recent. Are you still on any kind of medication? No. None? That's amazing. Amazing, yeah. It really is. I'm incredibly thankful for it. It's crazy. So that happened, but then things got more complicated. So my dad, around the same time, my dad has some similar symptoms to me. He's got some autoimmune symptoms, not arthritis, but autoimmune symptoms and this depression. So around the same time, I was like, dad, my depression is gone. I feel better than I've ever felt in my entire life. You need to get on this diet. And he saw the effect it had on me. And he's very logical and scientific. So again, just keep the word miracle in mind here. He was like, well, you can't argue with the change you've had. I got off of Adderall. I was sleeping 16 to 18 hours a day and suddenly I had energy. And so he's like, okay, I'll give it a shot. And over the next eight months, this was before the meat diet. It was when we were still eating some vegetables. He lost seven pounds a month for like eight months. And then the next September, he put a video out and went viral. And so that happened. Did he put the video out about this experience? No, he put a video out on YouTube called Professor Against Political Correctness. So this was something completely different. Yeah. But he went viral then. So life was pretty weird because my dad, I remember walking by a newspaper stand in Toronto and it had my dad and it said, it was calling him the Fuhrer. And I was like, are they comparing my dad to Hitler? Well, I can say your dad has emerged initially as a very controversial figure, but now considered by many myself included to be just a brilliant professor and just a brilliant man. I mean, some of his perspectives, you're just in awe of listening. Hopefully I get to sit down with him. He lost a whole bunch of weight when he cleaned up his diet. He had gum disease and that went away. He'd had surgery for gum disease. That went away. He had psoriasis. His psoriasis cleared up and he lost a bunch of weight. He stopped snoring at night and he stops snoring at night within like six weeks of the diet. So before he lost all the weight. So my mom was happy about that. That all happened kind of before he went viral. But then right after he went viral, he stopped taking his antidepressants as well. So we'd both been on SSRIs for like a decade and a half. Him a little bit longer than me. Mine, I think I was 11 or 12 years and he was more like 15. But high dose, too high, high dose because... Okay, I'm going to speed this up a little bit. I mean, they just can't overcome obstacles in their life. And, you know, what do you attribute your success to? Well, now I think I attribute my success to God. I don't see any other logical explanation. Like, I was stubborn, right? Like I did make the decision, I'm going to figure this out or I'm going to die trying. I remember thinking those thoughts. But life has gotten too weird. And so I don't know how much of it was me. I think growing up with my dad as a dad and having him really push responsibility on me, it's your responsibility to make your life better. Right, that didn't really click into me until I think I was 22. And I thought, oh, I really can't rely on anybody, right? Like the medical system's not helping. So if I keep going down that route, if you've been in the medical system for 10 years, like maybe you need... Maybe it's on you at this point. And so maybe you try everything. But I think I would attribute it to God at this point, because the next couple of years after all that health stuff, my parents got sick. And that's when things got weirder. So my dad, like I said, it was severe for him. He was fainting. He was pale. He couldn't handle sounds very well or light. Same kind of thing. Impending sense of doom. And his doctor put him on a benzodiazepine. And the benzodiazepine kind of, it allowed him to sleep. Again, I'm going to speed this up. Catholicism. Let me, I have to stop you for a minute. When you attribute your overcoming all of this to God, is that... Because as you know, I'm a Christian. I think you know that. Is that... He's got Proverbs 3, 5 to 6 tattooed on his arm. It's a pretty good indication. Is that something that happened when you turned to God? Or do you think that God just had his hand on you throughout? And then you finally did turn to him. So I think God had his hand on me throughout. I was really suffering. And I remember reading Job and being like, that's kind of... Not that I mean Job has it rough. His family's killed. He's got it rough. But I remember reading Job and being like, what's happening to me doesn't seem logical. It seems like it's too awful to just make sense in this world. And so that was the first time... Well, that was just a passing thought I had had. But I think looking back on it, yeah, God was there. I don't think I would have experienced... Like there, I think there are reasons I've experienced what I've experienced. And I think being able to share my story and help other people makes the entire thing worth it. I thought that before I knew God was related to this at all, I thought the suffering was worth it because I can maybe help other people not experience the same thing. But it was my mom, she got cancer. My dad's doctor increased his benzodiazepine dosage. And he started... So many weird things happened at the same time. He started experiencing a side effect called akathisia, which I think everybody in the entire world should be aware of. It's a side effect of neuroleptics, so antipsychotics, benzodiazepines, antidepressants. And if you look it up, it just says, oh, it's a feeling of inner restlessness. But akathisia is one of the main causes of suicide. So if you hear people who take an antidepressant and suddenly kind of go crazy, it's usually akathisia. So my dad's increase in benzodiazepines started giving him akathisia, and we didn't know what it was. And at the same time, my mom got diagnosed with a completely deadly cancer that nobody survives from, called collecting duct carcinoma. And it's got the same survival rate as brain cancer. And so she went from being perfectly healthy to, oh, you have 11 months and there's nothing you can do. And that summer, my dad had akathisia. So he was suicidal with akathisia. We were attributing it to how upset he was because my mom was dying. My mom had surgery. It wasn't successful. She had surgery again, and it looked somewhat successful. But there was a surgical mishap that almost killed her. She ended up in the hospital. She was on IV nutrition with a PICC line for like two months. And during that period of time, she became a Christian. And one of the women visiting her while she was in the hospital was a Catholic, and they were reading the Bible and they were praying. And anyway, this is so during that period of time, she goes, she goes, I'm going to be I'm going to get better, even though the doctors were like, this, this is it. I'm going to get better. I'm going to get better on our anniversary to my dad. So so that's August 18th. And she was in the hospital. She wasn't able to eat because of this surgical mishap. She flew down to the US to try and get it fixed. That didn't work. Four days later on their anniversary, she just miraculously recovered. And it was like everyone in my family was like, well, that's really weird. Like she said that was going to happen. She's religious now. That's really weird. Not sure what category of life to put that in. Anyway, moving on. What did your father think about that? My dad was so acathesic that he, I think, was just trying to survive at that point. What does he think about it now? Curiously, I don't know. I think he goes back and forth. Right. Like he. I don't really know where he stands. Like he thanks God. And he'll pray at dinner. And he believes that there's something bigger out there for sure. I mean, he doesn't think his whole Maps of Meaning book is about how reality is built along a narrative story. Which is something I've just recently wrapped my head around. So I don't really know what he thinks. I still think he thinks it's kind of weird. Has he embraced? The book is really about what made Christianity successful, because there are all sorts of theories about that. People have been entranced with the question for a very long time, especially starting in the 19th century. And a lot of people have, I think, ideas that are simply not right. A very common idea, for example, is that Christians attracted people into their movement because of their kind of family values, kind of the social, their social agenda of helping people and providing charity and things. And I think it's right that Christianity did invent a number of important areas of charity. But there's no evidence that that led to any conversions. And so what I look at was evidence for conversions. What it is that people talked about as being the thing that converted them or the Christians talked about as the thing that converted others. And in every case, it may seem kind of weird for me as a historian to say this, because I'm... Especially a historian that gave up the faith himself. I am principally a historian, not a theologian. But what all the records say is that people were convinced by miracles and that the Christian God was more powerful than the gods that they were worshipping. And the reason people worshiped gods then, and pretty much the same reason now, is because the gods are powerful and can provide things that we can't provide for ourselves. And so if you have one God who is superior to all the others, that makes a difference. But it's in conjunction with the fact that Christianity was the only religion insisting that it was the only right way. Okay. I played some of this and I played Tom Holland all in the John McWhorter video. I didn't put Bart Ehrman and Tom Holland on the thumbnail because I thought the thumbnail looked pretty good without them. But again, I wanted to get to the Michael Levin stuff in and I wanted to get some of the egregore and the levels up and the levels down in. And I want to get the miracle idea in because again, we tend to sort of say scientifically, well, this is a miracle. People don't actually think that way. Not very often. Well, a scientist might if they're saying, what is a miracle? We're going to apply the scientific level, the scientific method and discover a miracle. The difficulty of course is that there's only a limited subset of things that you could actually put into either even a historical framework, but much less a laboratory framework. And most people come up with the idea of miracles based very much on, I mean, they don't really care whether some scientist somewhere thinks that it's a miracle. And Jordan Peterson, of course, saw his wife's healing, has seen his daughter's transformation and he's still on it. And again, that is typical. But what I want to get into the idea is that a miracle, and this is going all the way to Verveckis, you know, cognitive grammar here, cultural cognitive grammar, cognitive cultural or whatever way he says it is. Miracles are actually transjective things. They are basically judgments. And again, there's plenty of looseness and BS and all you want to throw into that. But they're basically judgments that people make within an agent arena relationship, within a transjective, aureanic arena. I didn't mean aureanic arena, I mean, yeah, I changed my words as I go through the sentence. But an understanding miracles in that way is going to be helpful to understand how people make decisions and the transformations that they participate in, because the transformations are also going to be transjective. Now, transformations, conversions, huge diversity of these across human beings, enormous diversity. Some are slow, some are fast. There's usually a reading back onto. And I like Michaela's story because it's very typical. They say, well, what's typical about it? Her father went viral and she's only eating lamb and her mom is on that crazy diet and her dad's on the crazy diet and they've all got YouTube channels now. No, none of that stuff is typical. But listening to her story is typical of why people make the decisions they do about framing their life within the world and using sort of God as the frame of the frame above all frames. How you can in fact include lots of other smaller frames into it. So, yeah, I kind of wanted to make this video to hopefully set up what I imagine I'll be saying as I start commenting on the death of new atheism. We're going to look at James Lindsay, Sam Harris. We've already looked at Sam Harris, which is we'll just mention him. But James Lindsay's journey to deism. New atheism seems to be in the thaw of the winter of modernity. The the ice holding the ports is breaking up. And that's going to get us into more levels of, okay, what does that mean? And we're going to get into hopefully soon the Weinstein Peugeot video we'll get onto YouTube and so we can start digging into that. And yeah, so I wanted to I wanted to get some of this stuff out there so I can refer to it as we get deeper into Peugeot and Vervecky. And hopefully Peterson doesn't drop anything big. Because that could throw off my schedule anyway. And it's holy week, so I've got extra work and less time to do it. So yeah, this was sort of footnotes getting ready to create an argument. But let me know what you think in the comments section.