https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=fKhg0-qTjcw

 But one of the questions I would have too, though, for you is that while you can say to that congregant, he is risen and for them it lands, you know, in a kind of more, I don't know what you want to say, a historical or physical... Very vivid narrative about it. Sure. And that narrative includes most of the elements that are traditional. That's pretty much where Lewis goes with respect to his ascension question in his book, Miracles. But yeah. But now, if for that, let's say you also have in your congregation a Silicon Valley, tycoon who is wrestling with all this stuff or whatever. If you or if he were to say in his mind or when he thinks, when he speaks the word, he says he is risen and for him, that means something like these profound archetypal patterns of birth and decay that are, that, you know, constitute the nature of reality are at work in the symbol of Jesus in such a way that gives us hope and encouragement, you know, yada, yada, yada, something largely metaphorical. Right. Is that to your mind like not enough in some kind of way or is it is it like it doesn't? Do you know what I mean? Yeah, I know exactly what you mean. Like, is there is there for people who do find some value in in in relating to the language, the image, the symbols, the whole Christian infrastructure, for lack of a better term, but but find a particular value in reading that through the lens of metaphor. What I don't know, I guess the question would be something like what is missing there or like what's what's not enough in that or or yeah. There's a tax for having a big IQ and a lot of education. Then there it is in some ways, they're going to have to they're going to have to do a little bit more work in because I think about so I think about the eschaton, I think about the age to come. And I think about issues like purgatory. Purgatory is such an interesting question because it's like, OK. You know, I I I bury with great praise. I try to bury, honestly, but I I I'm not about to I'm not about to kneecap the grieving. I bury I bury saints and sinners. And when I think about so Jordan Peterson, again, in these little videos that he has with this very earnest Roman Catholic trying to do a sales job, he sort of pushes Peterson to sort of bottom line. Peterson's idea of his soteriology and. You know, I I don't know what the resurrection is going to look like. I really don't. I've thought about this at a variety of angles. In fact, conversation I had with Neil Plantinga, who was, you know, was a professor of mine at Calvin Seminary and related to Alvin. Yeah, he's Alvin's younger brother. Oh, interesting. He's a theologian. He's got a few books out there, but he really last time I had any kind of conversation with him, I said, what are you what are you working on, Neil? He's like, well, I really want to write some books. And this is these are some of the areas he wants to write about. I think he's probably such a perfectionist that the books don't come out because he is such a crafter of words. Anyway, I really hope he gets something done because. You know, there's a whole range of questions with respect to eschatology, which is the most unfinished, you know, locus of the church. There's all range about, OK, what does that what is the resurrection going to look like and how how how will this work? And what does this mean? And this person that I put in the ground that I was their pastor and. I know there, I know their sins, I know their unfinished business, I know all kinds of things about them and how how how then are they integrated into and blah, blah, blah, blah, blah. My questions, my questions go on forever with respect to this. And the fact that I know that this person has a fairly low resolution picture of a reunion with beloved family and friends and no more crying and no more tears and no more broken deaths. That's the limit of their frame. Happy are they? Sure. Now, the people like me that have all of these thoughts and questions and, you know, I can because the the the beyond modernity and postmodernity just. You know, combinatorial explosiveness with respect to issues that arise. Yeah, I get it. I get it. But well, there's the tax on your IQ and your education. Now you've got to carry that stuff around, too, and still figure it out in a way that I could say with Carl Bar, you know, Jesus loves me this I know for the Bible, told tells me so. And so I think the challenge for those with big IQs and big education and walls full of books is, in fact, to create a witness and and to lead institutions that actually scale for people. Yeah. And now in a pluralistic world, don't just scale this way within an evil village, but scale this way into an interconnected cosmopolitan world. Yeah. Because, you know, part of the problem that I see is certain answers which are at hand. And also fall apart upon further scaling. Sure. And so even, you know, it remains a journey for all of us and And I believe that, you know, in the final day when we are called to account for what we've done with what we've been given. You know, these these questions will come to the podium as well. And so, because if the answers I give, cut the legs out from under the poor and their ability to, in whatever difficult circumstance they have, believe that Jesus has them well in his hand. I will be called to account for that too. And so, no, I think the person who's been blessed with all sorts of smarts and education and opportunity, they just like the person living out on the sidewalk after here, out here, has to work out their salvation and fear and trembling. And they just got different challenges. Yeah. And I think God understands. Sure. Yeah, I mean, I think you're very right about like the additional tax that comes from that. But I also, I don't know, maybe there's something about, I'm not sure exactly why I lean in more to the gains that also come from this. I guess because I've, these are the things I grapple with. So I do see them in the whole scheme of things as being net gains rather than net losses, which I tend to view through the lens of development or growth or maturity. You know, Paul says, right, in the, in, well, you could probably tell me where he says it, but, you know, that you've been drinking sort of children's food before this, but now I'm, you know, it's time for. And there's an element even in the tradition that there's sort of different grades gradations of these ways of thinking. And I think of something like puberty, right, where man, there was, yeah, it was really lovely to be, you know, carefree and kind of the childhood innocence that like, you know, Dylan Thomas talks about in that poem Fern Hill of just, you know, time held me, you know, green and dying and all that stuff. Like, there's a wonderful innocence to all that. But then there's also wonders to gaining maturity and learning about sex and, you know, and relationships and all of that, that would be developmentally inappropriate for younger times. But then that time comes and man, puberty sucks, but you get on the other end of it. And it's like, there's also a lot of gains there. And I think that there's a way of conceiving of these, whether they're deconstructions or collapses, but they're transformations. And, and that, yes, you lose something, but you also gain something. And I also think that just as for that kid, like the kid isn't ready for and doesn't need to be engaging with the stuff of adults at that time. That's not, that's not appropriate. We can have different ways of languaging and articulating to different folks in different modes of life and, and all of that, so that we don't have to always be using the same way of understanding these things to different people in the same, in a way analogous to how people transform across the lifespan. Because I just want to, yeah, I don't want to give the impression that like there needs to be one message fits all. And, you know, we should, we should be burdening, you know, a grieving widow with questions of, you know, eschatology or something like that. Like, that's, that's not the point. But I do think that as people are acquiring, I don't know, more context that they have to integrate from their experience with these older ways of making sense of, in this case, the Christian tradition, that whatever church we have that scales needs to be able to fit them in, especially those folks I was talking about earlier, who a lot of which are, are, are crippled by the meaning crisis and are most in the situation where they're just, they're just, they're just, they're just, they're just, they're just, they're just, they're just, they're just, they're just, they're just, they're just, they're just, they're just, they're just, they're just, they're just, they're just, they're just, they're just, they're just, they're just, they're just, they're just, they're just, they're just, they're just, they're just, they're just, they're just, they're just, they're just, they're just needs to be a language for them to and that is seemingly going to have to integrate those modern and postmodern things. And yeah, I think that it might not be the easiest route. And this is the story I just gave, you know, can attest to it's it can be very, very difficult. But yeah, I think that there's also something that I'd like to feel like is comes from that it's it's a turmoil that can ultimately deepen faith, hopefully, right? It doesn't have to. I agree completely. It's it's just also there with the warning of, you know, it is harder for a rich man to enter the kingdom of heaven for a camel get to, you know, through the eye of the needle. And it's like, there's rich in various different ways. And in Luke's sermon on the plane, you know, you not only have blessed or the poor, but you have woe to the rich. And so even though there's there's clearly I'm by no means telling people they should be stupid. God has given you and you have the intelligence and access and possibility and you are very much supposed to in fact, Christ demands that you use these things and pursue the kingdom with all of that you have. But understand that there's also there's a challenge there. Yeah, that and you know, blessed are you little flock for it's God's good, you know, favor to give you his kingdom. And and so you find that theme, not only in the Gospels, but you know, obviously in the Psalms and in the prophets that yeah, yeah, to the you know, it's good to be king, but Kings, if you're king, you're going to be judged at a higher standard. And so for those of us who are thinky talky and and good with words and can read books well and have access to YouTube channels and have a degree of visibility, I think that I think the Bible is pretty clear will be, you know, you know, aspired it's, you know, aspire to be teachers. But remember, teachers are judged more rigorously. And so that's, I think. Well, and yeah, and to throw to throw Kierkegaard back into the mix, you know, he talks about a second immediacy, right, that you go from immediacy to reflection, but then the religiosity through through Christianity that can be attained as a second immediacy, or of course, Paul Ricoeur, I think, famously talked about second naiveté, which I do think when I first was discovering Meta modernism. That was a big part of that conversation that really stood out to me because I think that that's that's a big element to it. How do we bring back the simple? How do we bring back you know, after all this overwrought overthinking meta reflection, how can we land somewhere just pure, simple again, and I think that that that is essential. So yeah, No, I agree. That's probably a good place to end.