https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=kcuN_fkWkTY

 Okay. All right. Hello, Paul. Hello, Paul's channel. Here is Chris Kavanaugh or Chris K as he's known. And I have, technically you have asked officially, but I have brought up the idea of having a conversation with Chris Kavanaugh with you. And you gave the go ahead a few weeks ago, Paul. And we're gathered here today, officially, to talk about hmm. I think we're going to talk about today. What it how can you tell when someone is a critic and when someone's a troll? Oh, that's where I want this to go throws us right into the deep end. But I think I'm going to start with how I know Chris. Okay. If that's okay. Okay. So Chris, I mean, maybe I should ask you, do you remember when we first met? You know, the online stuff is a general cluster he is for me. So I cannot recall, like, specifically, but I remember interacting on Twitter a couple of years ago. And then since then, it all kind of merges into a continuous timeline. So specific events, no. But I probably remember most of the things that we've talked about. And I know you interviewed me and Matt. And actually, maybe me initially, my research. And then me and Matt, because we have a podcast, in case people don't know, called decoding the gurus. And you interviewed us like early on when we started that. And then by the year later, so like on your channel and stuff, we still talk to you there. But, you know, on Twitter, culture war, IDW type stuff, the various conversations were had. And yeah. Okay. Because, okay, so for me, this is very vivid for me, because it was like a journey. I'm sorry. This is like, I don't expect you to be like searing it in your brain. I promise. No, it's for me. It's because I was, I am a mother, but I was this mom who was like, I have these little kids and I haven't used my brain in a while. And then IDW, intellectual dark web, for those of you who don't know, came along and like Jordan Peterson first, and then the rest of the crew. And I just was thinking about things and started engaging on Twitter, had my YouTube channel, interviewing people about things. Twitter was a really great way to meet people and to have them on my show to discuss things that I never liked how brief Twitter was. So that's why I always enjoyed being able to speak to people. But in 2020, I looked it up. So in 2020, I think it was April, in my like YouTube catalog was when I first interviewed you. And we first spoke about your, your work as an anthropologist, particularly like specializing, I believe you said in ritual. So we talked about that. And then we like launched into your critiques against the IDW. And that's how it started. And then you started this podcast and you and Matt, and then I interviewed you guys a couple of times. And to be clear, actually, the reason why I am Paul has been kind enough to host on his channel, I my podcast is no longer a culture work is I don't like conflict and I don't like war. So I do move, I'm looking at narrative and in film and television, or in stories, like storybooks, or like, whatever. But so I've sort of, and that was through my journey. Like I was saying, this journey thing is started off with you were part of that. I was in a deconstructive phase. And you helped me to sort of maybe question, which is so ironic, I really don't think you were trying to catapult me towards the spiritual space. But that's actually where I ended up. Oh, that's probably better. I watched the symbolic world stuff. And I know that you're like, Oh, didn't realize that would be the next step, Andrea. But it actually, ironically was I started off, like questioning things, you helped me be like, don't just follow the these people blindly. They are experts in their own fields, perhaps, but not in everything. And then I was like, Okay, I'm, okay, I'm like, I remember saying, I'm still an IDW girl. Like, I remember saying that at the end of our interview. But you know, then I was okay, I gotta, I gotta start, maybe being a little more critical thinking, blah, blah, blah, taking things with a great assault, these are just people. And then I moved on in my journey over through to narrative and stuff. And that's how I ended up having a channel focusing mostly on stories and film. So I'm not here to plug my channel. That was so shameless. I'm sorry. But, but the name of the channel is, oh, with the bangs. Anywho, but you, you have had a different trajectory from me. I, I was like, you were starting off, you didn't have a podcast. And I, like, again, helpful for me to not just follow blindly, which is a good thing to question. But, and I'm not at all in the culture war space. But you really are. Right? Is that right? It depends on how you look at it. But I'd certainly say I'm involved in that. Like, I can't just keep it. It's probably high. I feel conscientious objector is a lot of people in the culture war field. But, you know, yeah, it's fair to say that a lot of my content like touches on culture war topics, at least online. Okay, so Paul, maybe it would be helpful if you went into like how you first heard about Chris. And I do want to give it over to you, Chris, as well at some point. But I think maybe I'll pass it over to Paul first. I think I first heard about you from I think you did an interview with rebel wisdom. And I hadn't I hadn't heard anything about your podcast before then. And, and, you know, David, I got to know David Fuller, but I was on rebel wisdom a couple of times. He, he would he would sometimes invite me into his he had sort of these campfire meetings, I don't know if that's exactly what he called them. But it was it was basically a big zoom screen. And then he would do an interview, and then he'd have some conversations. And so, and, and I think, I think David, you know, one of the things that I think I really miss David in this space, actually, because I think he really tried to, I mean, we all have our biases, we all come from a place none of us speak from an in none of us speak from a monarchical vision up high looking without our spaces. But I think I think David really did try to be fair. And I think that's sort of the spirit that he he had in terms of having you on. And, and so yeah, so then I looked at I looked at some of your I looked at some of your listen to some of your podcasts, like those are probably the early ones, I probably listened mostly to the Jordan Peterson ones, many, many of the people that, you know, when I go all the way back to Episode One, I mean, many of these people I'm fairly familiar with, they're, they're sort of, yeah, they're pretty, they're pretty, I've spent a fair amount of time listening to a number of these people. So and, and I, I basically just saw, I mean, decoding that caught me that caught my interest first, because a lot of what I do is sort of explaining, trying to explain Peugeot, Verbecky, Peterson, that's sort of how my channel developed. But, you know, most of what I heard on on your channel didn't seem to be decoding necessarily seemed to be quite a bit harsher. Yeah. So maybe since, since we've done the unless, sorry, I don't want to drop Paul, so maybe no, no, no, go ahead. Yeah, I feel it's only fair to co respond to, you know, how I'm aware of your content. And, you know, Andrea already outlined how, how we met. And, yeah, so, like, like you mentioned, David, David Fuller over at rebel wisdom, I think, you know, he has a journalistic bent to him. And so I think, in a positive way, was somebody that even if he was slightly uncomfortable with it, sought out, you know, voices to challenge some of the points of view that he would promote. And, and David and I became friends, I, you know, an internet way on that regard. And I enjoyed that kind of discussing things with David and, you know, pushing back and he pushed back on things that we did and whatnot. So it is kind of sad that he's currently, you know, out of the, out of the space at the minute. But, but in any case, through looking at that, that the podcast that I do looks at what we call, what we refer to as like secular gurus. And by that we were kind of cordoning off from your traditional guru space, like the, you know, people who would adopt that mantle or, you know, be overtly religious figures or that kind of thing. And so Jordan Peterson would, would fit into that category of like a modern figure for, for good or for ill that people look up to and are taking life lessons from and is, is offering, you know, advice to people and, and kind of grant worldviews. And, and similarly, then over time became aware of Jonathan Pajot, yourself, John Vervacky, partly from seeing interviews on, on Rebel Wisdom and, and partly through interactions with Jordan or some, you know, crossovers with various YouTube interviews. I think Nathan at Digital Gnosis, I've seen some, like the discussions that you had with him and John as well. And, and I've, Matt and I, my co-host, Matt have had discussions with John Vervacky fairly recently, at least a couple of months ago. And, and, and yeah, so that's, I'm, I'd say like, I'm relatively familiar with, you know, your, your content, but not, not like, you know, deeply familiar, just I have a broad idea. And, and similarly, I'm more familiar with the content of Jordan Peterson, Jonathan Pajot to a certain extent as well. And I would be, I guess, a lot more critical of the content than we tend to be. And I think that, like you highlighted, from what I've seen of your channel, it kind of makes sense because you're a religious person, as anybody listening to this would, would guess. And the fact that you're a pastor might, might hint at that as well. And so I think in general, you and also David Fuller and a lot of other people are interested in the theological and metaphysical discussions, which obviously Jordan Peterson and various others in that space have an interest in. And I would say I'm less interested in, in that space, or I'm less interested in that. And as a result, it's not, not that I think that that is irrelevant or that people shouldn't be discussing that. I just, because it's not my particular focus, tend to focus more on the aspects that I think are, are the reason that people like Peterson attract criticism, which, you know, would be things like the tendency towards conspiracism and polemical content and that kind of stuff. So in general, Peterson or Pajot, as far as we've covered them, they are not our primary topic of interest. Our time primary topic of interest is kind of secular guru figures and the rhetorical techniques and, and kind of aspects of their content looking at it. So, so Jordan is really only a demons at like a potential member of that category is the way that I would see it. But I would, I would expect that a lot of people that are drawn to him for his theological discussion wouldn't find our analysis particularly, you know, relevant for why they're attracted to him. Although, you know, I think I do have some issues with the, the theological aspects of his content as well. But yeah, that's a, that's a long-winded thing, but maybe some of the distinctions about the way we approach the content comes from some of that. So could you get a little bit more specific on exactly what you want to critique on your channel and why? I mean, Peterson seems to have been a fairly regular, there's at least as, there's a lot of IDW types in your list as I just scroll through your, your podcast topics. Yeah, that's, that's, that's fair to say. And I think it's in part because the, a lot of the figures that we cover that fit the archetype would be like your, your kind of Brett and Eric Weinstein's and people more recently like Russell Brand and, and so on. So that, that is the IDW kind of heterodox guru type is, is very close to the archetype that we are interested in, in part because it's, I actually think it's more interesting to look at than the, like outright polemicists or, you know, partisan pundits or that kind of thing. Though in some cases I think they might have veered towards that. But yeah, so we, in looking at these figures, and Matt and I are both academics, he's a psychologist and I'm a cognitive anthropologist. We're fairly, I would say just by nature, like fairly critical, slightly disagreeable types. Maybe like all people on, on YouTube, like too opinionated, we're not on YouTube, I think we are on YouTube, but you know, all commentators on the internet have perhaps too many opinions and we're no exception in that regard. But we, we try to apply a little bit like the same critical lens that you would find in, in academia when reviewing papers or articles or arguments to the content of the people that we look at. And we don't just focus on IDW people, you know, we've looked at Gwyneth Paltrow, Ibram Kendi, Jonathan Haidt, so on. So we, so we do try to kind of, and Carl Sagan. And we don't argue that all of these people fit into the archetype that we've identified to the same degree. We're kind of interested in the differences. And so we do this thing after we've looked at the content that we, we try to score everybody on a, like a little scale that we've come up with, with 10 facets, right? In part, this was because the people that we were covering were different in lots of respects. And we wanted to acknowledge like some of the differences there. But yeah, so in that respect, in terms of things that we're critical of, it is stuff like, the pejorative word would be galaxy-brainness or like a tendency to present expertise across a huge domain of topics. And like a kind of, not just, you know, that you're an expert in one thing, but rather that your expertise allows you to speak confidently about a whole host of things, including, you know, it could be virology, politics, history, across the wide domain of like possible ideas. And that on itself might just be a kind of Pollyannish way of thinking. But when it's coupled with things like reinforcing strong in-group, out-group boundaries, flattering people who follow you as being the ones that are good and actively like seeking to understand the world, attacking institutions and kind of established sources of knowledge and promoting your own, yourself as an alternative, a more reliable source of knowledge. So a kind of like reactive anti-establishment sentiment, self-aggrandizing and grievance mongering, stuff like that. And promoting conspiratorial heuristics and like I mentioned, kind of partisan polemics of either stripe, also not particularly good. So the more of those kind of things that you do, the more that we would kind of flag it as a toxic style of modern guru, Andrew T or something like that would be an example I think that most people would fit into that category. But we're not saying that everybody that we cover is the exact same because it wouldn't make sense. Like we just did Christopher Hitchens and Eliezer Yudkowski, but we've also done Reverend Moon of the Moonies and like Nassim Taleb. So yeah, we're not trying to argue that everybody that we cover is the exact same kind of thing and that they're all toxic and dangerous. Just in case anybody thinks that is what we're arguing, we're not. Well, toxic is a word that has sure taken on resonance in the last number of years. How would you, if you had to use something other than toxic, what would you describe? Yeah, what would you use instead of toxic? Negative, just like somebody promoting like bad heuristics and increasing the level of polarization and hyperbole in the discourse, encouraging like strong in-group, out-group hostility, that kind of thing. So like negative, the negative spectrum of activities and effects on the world. So do you think your podcast would be especially negative or especially positive? I'm curious about your choice of that. In our case, well, I'd say we're like, it depends. Well, it would largely depend on your perspective of what we're doing. Like from my perspective, obviously what we're doing is overall positive, but that's- So that would be an in-group, out-group thing. No, well, yeah, yeah, yeah. In terms of like whether people who agree with us would- Depends on who you ask. Oh, that's the in-group, out-group dynamic. Yeah, but so the question would be like any group that you belong to will have an in-group, an out-group dynamic, right? Like for a group to exist, there has to be an out-group. When I talk about in-group, out-group dynamics in a negative or toxic way, I'm talking about like very strongly constructing that there's like a kind of positive truth-seeking in-group that is full of good people versus a negative, harmful group that is seeking to destroy and needs to be opposed out-group. So like the kind of binary black and white Machiavellian view of the world. And I don't think in general, like if you're into toy trains and you join a group of train enthusiasts, that makes an in-group of train enthusiasts versus non-toy train enthusiasts, but it doesn't require that you will see all non-toy train enthusiasts as like evil out-group, but there's an out-group, right? So- So what would you describe as the in-group for your podcast? For us, I would say it's probably there's a couple of other podcasts that I think come close to what our kind of approach is, and it would be things like Very Bad Gurus, that's a psychologist and a philosopher kind of covering various material from psychology and philosophy and modern culture and discussing that. And similarly, Conspiratoriality, which looks critically at the kind of overlap between conspiratorial reactionary thought and health and wellness space. And a little bit podcast like Two Psychologists Four Beers that are focused more on psychology. So broadly speaking, we'd be in the space of like academics talking about topics which are not entirely academic. And I would also put us in the space of people that are critical of the kind of IDW position. I think in part because that space feels a little bit like it's represented as the only responsible critique from the left of the excessivism of far left politics or progressive extremes. And from my perspective, it's kind of not necessary to be an IDW person in order to critique them. You could just be a normal center left person. So politically, Matt and I are both center left types. But that inevitably bleeds into how we look at the world. We're both in favor of social welfare programs, in part because we live in countries that provide them. But in general, that's not our focus is on promoting our particular version of politics. It's more the being like looking at content critically and examining that. So I think I would say that I would expect that people who are fans of the people that we cover, they'll likely not agree with all the stuff that we say about various people. And we do try to be fair and at least acknowledge when people are making good points. But I think that at the least that what I would hope is that they continue to consume content but in a critical way. And for me, that's good. It doesn't matter if you still really like Jordan Peterson and Eurindy's content, if you're consuming it in an appropriately critical way, that's more power to you. I think the issue is when people are like insufficiently critical that it can be a negative influence on people. Is the goal of your podcast to influence people who you feel are influenced by Jordan Peterson? No, no, like there are people that would like that to be the goal of our podcast. But we are, you know, just offering our perspective and like people. Sorry, I interrupted you Chris. No, no. Looking for say like blind spots that maybe you wouldn't have seen if you're watching him. You mean, yeah, yeah, before, yes. So I mean, like encouraging people to identify blind spots and that kind of thing. But in regards to Paul's question, Paul, what did you say there? Would we? Well, I wondered if, I mean, I'm trying to get a sense of everyone who speaks, whether you're a minister or a podcaster, you have a sense of your audience, you have a sense of the mission of your podcast, you have a sense of position and perspective of your podcast. And so I was wondering, you know, obviously, you spend a fair amount of time on IDW things, you spend a fair amount of time on reactivity, critiquing sort of in-group, out-group conspiratorial. And so then I was wondering if the purpose of your podcast was to influence, because of course, if let's say, for example, I'm a Christian minister, and part of my desire is to bring other people into the Christian faith, then my goal would be to influence people let's say outside my in-group and to adopt strategies and postures that hopefully would engage them in a way that they would find probably not terribly offensive, not off-putting, because that would be counterproductive to my mission. And so therefore to, you know, try and find a posture where I could at least find some common ground perhaps or mutual interest or something like that to engage my audience in order to. So I'm just trying to get a sense of what the mission of your podcast is, who the audience of your podcast is, because, you know, one of the things that, so I, part of what I've done in my career is also teach preaching. And a lot of these dynamics, as you might, as is commonly known, are very, very common in religious circles. It's, and Christianity, you know, that's, Christianity is very much sort of an umbrella term. Everybody sort of knows the big, so even just the big Orthodox, Catholic, Protestant, something like that. And then obviously within Protestantism, you just drill down into all these tiny little groups that are sort of continually at war with each other bickering. And what so often happens in a space like that is it's easy, especially say for young preachers, to sort of adopt a, adopt an attitude, adopt a posture and a demeanor that basically says, we in our tiny little group, we have the proper perspectives, we have the right ideas, we have the right beliefs. And of course, Jesus said this better than anyone else when two people go up to the temple to pray, and one of them says, Oh Lord, I thank you that I am not like that guy. And, and of course, Jesus then flips the script at the end and says, one person left the temple justified. And it wasn't the one who came to the temple full of himself, full of his perspective, full of the fact that he had all the right ideas, all the right postures. And of course, the irony of the story is that according to Jesus, God looks at that guy and basically, CS Lewis might say, he's actually constructing for himself a little cocoon of hell, because he is such an in-group that and of course, this runs all throughout many, many religious communities, and is something that is deeply common to religious behavior. So I'm just trying to get a sense of what your podcast is, what your goal is, who your audience is, what your mission is. Yeah, those are all legitimate questions. And there's a couple of things that I would say the first in terms of like the overall mission. I think that we view it as, you know, promoting critical thinking, a kind of academic approach to stuff. Matt and I are both people that are like, in favor of the scientific method. And we are both secular materialists, so to speak. So I'm sure that comes across in things that we cover. But out of those things, in terms of like, what I would see as actively promoting, would be the primarily the kind of critical thinking and advocating for consuming content critically. And in terms of whether that's more to preach to the choir of people that don't like that the people that we cover or to reach out to people who might follow them in ways that we would see as like non-critical. I'd say that we are like, we are giving just an opinion on the content, which is very popular. The people that we tend to cover, they've got tons of material and the releasing podcasts have got, you know, hundreds of thousands of fans or millions of fans. So by engaging with the content, it's not like it's hard to find people that have, you know, other takes or positive views available. And so we are, my view, can't speak for Matt, would be that we are offering like a perspective on that content and that we try to be a bit fairer perhaps than is common for the people that are very critical of the figures that we cover because in various occasions, the opposition that people have towards them is strongly political, right? Like that they oppose them because they politically oppose the worldview that they're promoting. And that's not really Matt and my position. We don't think our politics are particularly interesting. Like they, you know, they influence our worldview to some extent as does like our stance on, you know, materialism and science. But we aren't in the mode of like kind of arguing that everybody needs to adopt a scientific materialist worldview in order to look critically at stuff. It's just by our nature, we are like aviaries materialists. So that's part of how we see things. And I would also add that like in my case, I'm from a Catholic family in Northern Ireland. So, you know, religion is not a stranger to me. But even setting the kind of long experience of attending maths aside, my university studies from my undergraduate right up to my current like assistant professor position are based on studying religion and ritual from a kind of psychological and cognitive point of view. So I've been interested in religion, religious communities, the traditions of religion for a long time. So I don't blithely dismiss religion as like an irrelevant, you know, archaic pastime or thing, despite myself not believing I'm being an atheist. But I do approach it more from the view of like, the actual field is called the cognitive science of religion. But it's like kind of psychology and cultural evolutionary perspective on religion. So that's a bunch of things, but maybe some of that addressed, like where I'm coming from. I have a sidebar. No, I have a question that it could be a bit of a tangent, but if you want to bring it back, Paul, at the end, or at the end, but like at the end of this answer, that feel free. So I do have a question regarding, so you actually brought it up about the you being no stranger to religion and studying the ritual and that being your specialty and all these things. And so being a secular atheist, sorry, materialist, is that? Yeah, it's not like I'm, I just think it kind of rationally follows. But yeah, to be to be clear, because you, some people would be like, oh, we see you're like, you know, new atheists then like Sam Harris, like, that's kind of where it would be easy to just place you. I have been placed there. Okay, yeah, yeah, you, you study ritual. And yeah, like that, which is sacred, you study it. And that's something I sound like I'm accusing you, you study it. No, I don't mean it like that. But what I mean is, You want to put it in a jar. Actually, kind of, but it's more, it's more part of me feels like, I mean, you could always be more critical, of course, but that you are more critical than I would have thought regarding the religious parts of things for someone who does like, study ritual itself and respects those who have like hold ritual and, and, and such, like things close, like you study that. And so that's why, like, particularly, there's one particular example, I'm going to go into the weeds, I'm sorry, I'm just doing it, I'm just jumping in. So there was this one particular thing where, in the your podcast, where you're talking about, where you guys are looking through what john John Breveke and john from pleasure, we're talking about for demons, okay. And I, I, so I'm, I guess, I'll make it clear, I'm a Christian, I'm a believer. So for me, I'm like, yeah, that's not odd. And it's not weird. And I don't, it doesn't sound like woo to me. Because the things that they're describing, I'm like, yeah, there's a spiritual realm. And if, like some Protestants forget that, to be clear. And so they're like, you know, Christian materialists, you could almost say, but like, I, that's one of the things, like I said, like, part of my deconstruction was then being reconstructed in finding symbolism, finding the spiritual world more real than I had before. And so I, you guys had were had concerns about the demon thing. And I thought it was like, a little bit harsh because of the fact that you are like, but you should, you know, you study it, you know, that these things aren't just silly, you know, and so I, that's, I don't have a question in there. That's just, I thought you- No, that's yeah. If you don't mind, Paul, I'll just respond a little bit. Don't go right ahead. I'm kind of curious to hear what you're going to say. Yeah. So like one thing is that, I would say that, you know, a lot of religious, there's a lot of religious people in the world of a lot of different stripes. I'm sure you both know that like quite well. And I would say that a large majority of them, including, not maybe not a large majority, that's unfair, I can't say, but I would say a lot of Christians of various different stripes do not spend much time on the, in the modern world on the issue of demons. Some do, but I would say there's a lot, especially of your more like progressive style Christians who don't spend much time like focusing on the nature of demons and or witches or any of those kinds of things. No, there are people who believe in those kinds of forces in a very literal sense. And there are countries where that causes trouble. It's still gnaw with people being accused of being witches or possessed by demons and this causing like genuine, you know, child abuse and various things. So I think that's one thing is that we have to acknowledge that exists in the world. And one is Christians with an interest in demonology in any regard. And they're still Christians like my family in Ireland and the people who believe in it, rather too literally and do harm to people on that basis. But I think that there's a middle ground that is, includes a lot of people that view it more as a kind of ambiguous, an ambiguous topic in terms of like interested in the symbolism and the metaphysical nature of those repeated patterns of being that some may refer to as instantiated aspects of, you know, negative thought patterns or whatever that that to me, that that middle ground, which occupies a lot of theologians is it's perfectly fine in the regards that lots of people like to reflect on the more symbolic aspects and have symbolic interpretations of traditional religious imagery or concepts and to relate that to, you know, contemporary society, ongoing events in their life. But what we were criticizing in that episode and what I would still criticize is a kind of strict, what I would regard as strategic ambiguity between whether you are talking about a metaphorical, like in that conversation, I believe it's that conversation, but to give a specific example, Jordan Peterson talks about Jesus as a potential fictional character, right? And then says, but you know, fictional characters can have real lessons, they can impart truths, like we don't deny that, you know, you watch a movie and you can take lessons from it or that kind of thing. And my view is like, yes, nobody denies like that, even like a, you know, an atheist or a secular person would deny that the part of disagreement comes when you're making stronger claims than like there are metaphorical truths or that kind of thing. And I think that in terms of the sense making ecosystem, the way that things like egregores and demons are referred to is at once like purely metaphorical and I'm purely talking about symbolic patterns that repeat and then at other times as a literal independent force that is impacting individuals from a kind of metaphysical space and people shift depending on the topic, a conversation and it's kind of seen as a mark of sophistication to not try to hammer things to like a literal set of games or metaphysical like aspects, but that is usually where the actual disagreement is and the kind of metaphorical interpretation is just, you know, each to their own and interpret Disney movies however you like or I don't mean that disparagingly, I mean that, you know, religious texts people have been interpreting for thousands of years so of course you can interpret imagery and stuff in a variety of different ways. And yeah, and I think a lot of the things that I take exception to is that in conversations like that, that it's presented, for example, in that specific conversation that the act of being able to comprehend the glass and pick it up is an illustration that the divine is obviously real and that people are attending to a higher truth well or not they recognize it and that to me like slips into very, very deep sophistry about what the argument is and I don't think you need a lot of metaphysical assumptions to pick up a glass and understand that, you know, it can be perceived in lots of different ways. So yeah, anyway, that's like kind of some of my response to that is that I don't think inherently talking about traditional religious imagery, even talking about like evil spirits and what they might mean and metaphorical interpretations of them is inherently bad but I think if you, it's all in what you're saying and how you're kind of presenting them and I think with the pageau content that we are specifically criticizing the way that he is presenting it there, not the general topic that people would, you know, be interested in discussing symbolic takes of religion because, you know, each to their own. Well, I mean, you sort of you sort of implied and correct me if I'm wrong, that you think most Christians are of the variety that wouldn't be concerned with something like demons. Well, it depends which country you're talking about but I would say that the majority of like the majority of followers of any religion are on average not particularly focused on theological to be its own interpretation so they tend to be relatively moderate and so if you take demons as like slightly more esoteric then it is the case that, you know, that there won't be things that people are talking about every day, you know, on the Sunday service but it depends on your particular congregation because there are congregations where it is a bigger focus and I think American evangelical style religion might have more of a focus on demons and their potential role in religion but yeah if I'm factoring in like Christians worldwide I would say the majority of followers I don't think would spend much time like thinking about the nature of demons. Do you know much about the distribution of Christians around the world in terms of, I mean, when you think about Christians in Sub-Saharan Africa, Christians in Asia, Christians in China, not so much Japan. Japan's one of the most atheistic and it's very Christian population. Japan's very small. Christians in Latin America. I would assert that the overwhelming, if you look at it in terms of statistics, the overwhelming number of Christians throughout the world today would have a very vivid, very active sense of the demonic of spirits. Evil spirits, yes, and like I guess I should probably classify that like I think that, you know, lots of popular religious practices, for example, are just about warding off evil and, you know, or praying for like healing and that kind of thing, right, which would include like, and I would say that the vast majority of Christians would completely endorse that like Satan is real and, you know, has effects on the world. So I'm more, I guess, arguing about like the kind of theological conversations around that topic as opposed to if you ask them in the questionnaire, are evil spirits real, that they will take? Yes. Oh, the vast majority, I would say, I mean, I mean, you look at Catholicism and you look at Pentecostalism, which is, you know, an incredibly rapid growing religion in Sub-Saharan Africa, in Asia, in Latin America, along with Catholicism, which of course, most Catholicism's probably not in Western Europe and some in North America, but most Catholicism in Latin America and Africa and Asia, Pentecostalism in the United States and Africa and Asia, these two groups would represent the overwhelming number of Christians in the world, making, let's say, people who would identify as Christians who would, who might be skeptical about the reality of Satan and the demonic, that would make them the probably an extreme minority if you compare them just person to person. Yeah. So it's not, I should clarify that I'm not, I wouldn't make the case, and I may have phrased it badly because I probably am taking as the default, like, you know, the kind of Western European version of Christianity that I'm most familiar with, like, just from upbringing, which isn't fair from a global perspective, but even in that case, I still would maintain that there's a distinction from the kind of lay practices which acknowledge the existence of, like, negative forces, supernatural forces, which I think is a, like, you know, you can completely go out of Christianity and belief in, like, supernatural powers is overwhelmingly the most, like, kind of common belief in the world, I would say. But I do think that the majority of people don't have, like, deep theological systems or thoughts about that and that a lot of it is geared towards, like, ritual interactions with that. So there is a theological structure which exists on top, which is quite elaborated on that, but if you are asking people often about specific rituals or whatever that they're doing, they don't know, right, the specifics in many occasions. And theologians do, or people that are kind of more inclined towards focusing on religious aspects, they are interested in the intricacies of the symbolism and the traditions and the history, but I think that's definitely a subset. That's, like, you know, you would know better, right, there's the tragedy of the theologian or whatever it's called. A theologian is in some ways a product of usually an extensive education and abstraction, whereas the vast majority of believers on the ground, for example, I was a missionary in the Dominican Republic who worked with Haitians, and whereas on one hand I might say that the average educational level of these Haitian pastors was about second grade Haiti, I wouldn't say they had extensive theological training in the sense that they had a, because over the last few hundred years, a lot of what has developed in the West in terms of systematic theology is a fairly modernistic attempt to systematize in an abstract way. I mean, that's all very much a part of modernist thinking. Yeah, I would say the vast, vast majority of Christians, including, you know, the majority of, say, people in my church, people in most churches, that they might have had some catechesis, but in terms of a sort of an abstract framework in which to put things, that runs pretty thin. And the ritual is, you know, in many ways, I mean, you have Tom Holland working on, you know, working on the question of would the ancient Greeks have considered themselves religious? That's a really tricky question because, of course, after, you know, after the Enlightenment, religion sort of becomes a category. Before that, through much of world history, the ritual, the worldview, let's say, which is not a theological abstraction, but is sort of a completely embedded cosmology is something that, and ritual, again, ritual is sort of a word that's kind of an abstraction. You know, someone going to a temple in the first century wouldn't say, I'm, you know, they might, they, even if they use something that we connect with ritual, we sort of take this concept of ritual and sort of demythologize it and deconstruct it into something that is in some ways analogous to, let's say, what a scientist or someone's, say, working in a technology plant, if they're working in a clean room, or a doctor who is going into surgery, he undergoes this ritual of, you know, hands, and that's, of course, deeply embedded in his own worldview of, you know, germ theory, etc., etc., etc. So I guess, to me, that adds two questions, which would be, to me, part of the difficulty of, let's say, secular materialism has always been the difficulty of understanding non-secular materialist people from the inside, because all worldviews have an outside and an inside. And so the, you know, the modernist path has tended to be, well, those, these demons are so on and so forth. And in terms of what I see happening, you know, I'll talk about what I gained from Peterson, because I didn't need Peterson to teach me the Bible. I already knew the Bible. I didn't need Peterson to teach me the value of religion. I was already deeply committed in, with respect to religion. Part of what people who have at least maintained a connection to inhabited religious roots is, in fact, the question of what do we do with sort of this worldview flipping that we tend to do in the modern West? For example, if I am, if I am preaching to my church out of the book of Genesis, on one hand, so let's say from a modernist biblical studies perspective, I can, I can fairly clearly see, I can sort of map out a cosmology that they might have, where the world is sort of a table, and it sits on pillars, and there's a dome on the top, and there's, there's God's throne in heaven. I mean, this sort of perspective that I inhabit, that I say, okay, so the writers of the text were inhabiting that kind of worldview, and they're, they're writing from it. And I am preaching to a group of people that very much see ourselves as inhabiting a globe, which is going around the sun, which is part of a galaxy, which has all these galaxies. And so for a preacher, you're always trying to sort of connect these two worlds. And one of the things you also very quickly learn is that, let's say, if you, if you read much, if you look at, so part of the Dominican Republic has, or the Dominican, part of the Christian Forum Church has had, you know, Navajo ministry for about a hundred years. And so then you, you know, you gain access to, let's say, native populations, and to the degree that they are still sort of inhabiting an embedded worldview versus those that have been impacted by this dominant Western culture that has tended to colonize them. You very quickly have to ask questions of, okay, well, what on earth do we really mean by all of these, these things? Even the word spirit is a very interesting word. And so I don't know from your perspective, if you hear the word spirit, what do you think, what do you think that word means? Yeah. So there's a bunch of interesting things there, but to take the last point first. So in terms of spirits, you know, it is, like you say, extremely diverse concept because it's a, it's a general category for a whole variety of beings. And you can have like moralistic high gods that people will identify as spirits. You can have like much more local, invisible forest deities. What do you, how do spirits work in your world? Or that's more my question. But that would, that would, it's my case is that spirits are a category of being that people are very interested in that are not usually perceived via like standard sensory abilities. It can be sometimes, you know, people have visions or whatever, but like in, in normal life, not, not detectable. And, or, so there's, there's, when it comes to, like, if you say in my life, what role do spirits have, they're a belief that a lot of people in the world have about a category of being that exists. So insofar as I'm part of that world, I'm interested in those beliefs and how they differ around the world and how people, the different categories of beings, how people interact with that. And I think the ontological status that are attached to invisible or spiritual or deities is interesting. That's part of like my academic work is, is in part exploring the way that people interact with supernatural beings of a variety of different stripes. And I, I guess that to tie it a little bit to the demon point, I think that what the point that you push back on, which is perfectly valid is that, you know, demons are of concern to maybe more religious people than I indicated. The vast majority I would, I would assert. Sure. Not the ones that we bump into in a very less circular, but in terms of the work that I do, let's say in missionary work or in work with churches and other, we have an African church that meets in our facility. Right. But here, so there I would say, Paul, though, that in my experience, whenever someone like Jonathan Pajot is talking about demons or various other in the sense-making spheres or agregores, they're very clear that they're not talking about the kind of folk version, the kind of like the version of an actual physical being that is out there causing like mischief in the world. And in fact, they're often quite ambiguous about whether it's even an independent entity with the capability of intentionality. But that's not the way lots of people that you're talking about are reacting to demons. They see them as malevolent beings that can interact and that are much more instantiated than the kind of metaphorical discussion of demons. And I know that Jonathan and other people would want to connect their interpretation to the kind of traditional exegesis and would argue, well, actually, that's the way that people have always understood it. But I think that's a misrepresentation because I think what you're talking about, that lots of people in the world do consider such beings real and to have actual impacts on the world and to do rituals to ward off the harm that those beings might direct towards them if they don't perform the rituals. That Jonathan and various other people are saying that's not what I'm talking about. I'm not arguing that witches are out there kind of in the forest meeting in covens doing things. He is talking about the hermaphroditic images and how this relates to the transgender movement in modern contemporary society. And that, to me, is not the same as taking somebody from a rural village in India and looking at the way that they view the local deities and the rights that they have to offer to them. Because it's different concepts. And part of my critique is that people switch between that, whether they're reporting the more abstract metaphorical interpretation, which is, like you say, because we are the context that we're in, it's more acceptable to talk about that. And Jordan Peterson saying that, you know, endorsing the kind of more folk version of demons, which is popular throughout the world, is something that I think he doesn't do. He's more careful to abstract it up. I would say Jordan doesn't, but Jonathan definitely does. Okay, I'm going to be assertive. Okay, no, no, okay. An assertive spirit has entered the room. Well, I do think, okay, I am no expert in, like, the Orthodox Church within Christianity. However, I'm under the impression that it is considered the Eastern Church. Sorry, why did I do that? The Eastern Church. And it is not the same as the Western Church. And by that, I mean, the Western Church is quite binary. It is, or it is not. Whereas if you look in the Eastern Church, in the Orthodox Church, you have a lot, and by a lot, I mean, you have a lot of both ends. And say the mystery of the Eucharist, the Western Church, transit, sanctiation. It is this. This happens. Then all along come the Protestants. No, it doesn't. It doesn't. Sorry, there's a lot more information, I'm sure there, Paul. But like, but in the East, it's like, oh, it's a mystery. It's both bread and wine, and the body and blood of Christ. It's both. And Orthodox folks, I'm so sorry, I forgot things wrong there. But I believe that is from what I've heard. I believe that is how things are seen. So if I could speak in that space, part of me thinks that this is not part of me, all of me thinks that that they are like people like Jonathan Pagel or other Orthodox speakers. I don't know about Jordan Peterson. He is not a professed Christian. So he has his, that's a separate story. But for Jonathan, I don't want to speak for him. But from what I understand, from the Orthodox faith that he's a part of, there is it's sort of like a leveled down integration of it's all the guests. The answer is like, so do you believe literally that there was Adam and Eve, two only individual people, like, or do you believe that it's just a story that, you know, we see this pattern? And it's like, yeah, yes. The answer is yes. Both end. Both end. Yeah. And that, but I so I like part of the frustration in a way with that is that the question of like, how old is the earth, for example, right for a perennial debate between scientific rational secular types and particular brands of religious creationists is different, right? The answer is different. So if you take 7,500 years as a metaphorical truth, or as a truth, which is not like a, it's not literal in the sense that we mean, if you measure the various isotopes that you will find that the age is much older, then I think that's a difference, right? But there's plenty of people who don't bring that they mean it's 7,500 years and that the there's a conflict there. And in the same respect, like the issue with, you know, things existing and not existing and that being okay with the kind of ambiguity in language. It's not existing. Right, right. But yeah, and actually, I was gonna say, you know, Nargajuna, Nargajuna, I can't remember how you pronounce it, but like the Buddhist philosopher, there's tons of traditions that have these refrains, which refuse to accept like a kind of binary position of exist and not exist, right? And not just Christianity, like a lot of traditions have it in it. And I am somewhat like my that's not my particular jam, but I know philosophers and theologians and various people have spent a lot of time debating about, you know, the nature of emptiness and the nature of time and so on. I don't object to any of that. I think that I, my contention is when you're, when you're like kind of sitting on that knife's edge, but you will lean towards literal when it suits your purposes and then retreat the metaphorical when you're you're pressed. And that's, that's how I perceive what Jonathan was doing in the conversation that we critique. But actually, I would also just add that like, that's a, you know, that's a criticism that I have. I perfectly accept that others have more tolerance and interest for that, that kind of ambiguity and metaphorical analysis. And they don't, they, they don't mind so much about, you know, the actual metaphysical category that you're putting things into. My objection to like Jonathan and Jordan much more strongly than than that is the polemical kind of nature of the rhetoric aimed at people that are non-religious and coupled with that, the kind of promotion of conspiracism and tying it to a kind of reactionary political movement. Those are my main objections. And insofar as people are not doing that, I, you know, again, to each their own, you don't have to be a secular materialist. It's just the particular thing that I've found most convincing. But I have no issue with like people practicing their fear. If I did, it would make things much more inconvenient when I'm interacting with all my religious family and friends. So yeah, I just, I just want to make that clear that like, I know we're, I know that the demon issue comes up, but like part of my issue with that is that it matters because there are real effects from people believing in literal demons in the world. And like when Jonathan was arguing with me, and this was in particular about witches, he said, he pointed out, you know, how silly of me to be skeptical of the existence of witches when there's people who self-identify as wiccans out there. And that to me seems like sophistry, because obviously, I know that there are people who identify as wiccans, and I would not deny they exist. I would deny that they are people with supernatural power. And that to me is the issue, like not whether there are people who self-identify as witches, but whether there are categories of beings that have supernatural powers that are, and are malevolent targeting humans, which are referred to as witches. That's, that's like the, the thing where I would disagree and I'm criticizing, I'm not saying nobody in the world identifies as a wicca, because obviously they do. Well, but you know, working in a Haitian community, there are plenty of people that identified as witches, and they're embedded with all kinds of people who believe them, and in fact would pay them. Because, you know, in, you know, Santaria, I mean, you have the caballo, which is basically the horse, and, you know, you're, I mean, you're an anthropologist, you're aware of all of these things. But, you know, part of, part of also what we're working on is the fact that, let's say someone, let's say someone goes to mass every day, and let's say they live in the West, and they go to mass every day. And let's say that could be during COVID, because this is a very real example. Well, suddenly during COVID, the, you know, their, their local, their local Roman Catholic Church, the bishop or the priest or someone shut it down. And, and now this person isn't going to mass every day. And suddenly, you know, their cortisol levels rise, their blood pressure is up, they're far more anxious. Now, if you, if you, if you talk to them about demons or evil, or many of these things, as we all know, when you talk to people, you know, I do like Jonathan Haidt's illustration of the rider and the, and the rider and the elephant. Because as a pastor, you know, you talk to people all the time, and you can get people to chatter, and they'll talk about this, and they'll talk about that. But generally speaking, you sort of look at their behavior. And, and you say, Okay, this person, this person, this person has been going to daily mass for 40 years. And also, as a pastor, I know that people are pretty savvy in terms of especially here in the West, in terms of sort of the, the worldview that they understand would be, would be considered, would either gain them or lose them status. For example, if they go to the priest, they talk about the fact that they haven't been able to take the mass. And they really, you know, they feel for their mortal soul. Now they, you know, if you ask them to define this soul, ontologically, well, they'd sort of struggle, but a soul for them is a very real category. And now if they go to their doctor, and they, they might go to their priest and really ask for, you know, some kind of something that would help. And the priest might basically deliver for them advice, again, embedded within a worldview, they go to a doctor, they're probably not going to talk about what they spoke with the priest about, because they have a certain assumptions, maybe let's have a real good relationship, maybe the doctor goes to mass with them, etc, etc. But if they're just going to a hospital, they're basically going to assume basically a secular materialist worldview, and they are going to adjust all of their language, they're going to suppress some of their ideas over there. And in one hand, the sort of language they're using, it matters, but it also doesn't. Because in many ways, we look at the behavior, and we ask ourselves questions about, well, to whatever degree the person is conscious of what's going on in their mind, that there are things going on. And in many ways, the better way to describe those things has to do with the language group within which those things are embedded. And in that way, you know, these spiritual forces physiologically for this person are very real, their inability to go to Catholic Mass has raised their blood pressure caused them to gain weight, depending on their age might even be threatening their life. Now, the doctor is going to look at that in terms of, well, the doctor actually is going to be a little hard pressed. Because we would like with these things and say, well, these are all these are all and you could sort of demythologize these are all functions of her worldview environment. Or you could sort of remythologize it and say, she's been unable to she's been unable to benefit from the means of grace. And this is this is existentially foundational for her existence. And so in other words, I mean, part of what part of what I see happening, let's say in this little corner, in terms of my conversations with John Vervakian, Jonathan Peugeot, and you know, I haven't had a lot of talk with Jordan Peterson, you know, he's he's off doing other things. I'm a pretty low status guy. But part of what I think a lot of us are dealing with in this corner is abbing questions about okay, what what what language best fits what's going on. And the truth is, you know, it might have been a lifesaver for this woman for the Catholic Church to open up or to find a parish that sort of on the sly is still is still sort of holding, you know, daily mass. And one of the things that I saw with I don't have a lot of Roman Catholic connections, but my mother and another part of the country, one of the women who lives in her condo is Roman Catholic and she was a daily mass Catholic and she switched parishes during COVID because, you know, she went there. And the irony is that while the whole country was talking about the mortal danger, in her case, maybe not in a whole, you know, depending, but in her case, that daily mass was probably as if not more instrumental for her well being, obviously embedded within a sense of spiritual well being than risking danger of infection. She I don't think she was an anti-vaxxer, but, you know, and so then the question becomes, okay, can we actually talk about this stuff? Because we find that the doctors in some ways impoverished to deal with this unless the doctor has a fuller sense of now you might think that I'm fudging with the language because I'm talking on both sides of this, but I am on one hand very much in my church life, someone who is not, who does not have questions about the ontology of the demonic world. But yet, when I'm dealing with a secular materialist environment, especially as a minister, part of what I'm going to have to struggle with is, okay, what are some categories and avenues by which maybe these two worlds can understand each other? And that I think, you know, for me, that's sort of what sparked my interest in Jordan Peterson, and C.S. Lewis for me has been, has probably been one of the most helpful guides for this, and for many, many Christians, because it's, you know, it's deeply important because let's say this woman who goes to mass every day might in very many ways be sort of ensconced in a secular world, even though she goes to mass every day. She's probably unaware, to the degree, that all of this ritual, all of this ceremony, all of these, and of course, she probably picked it up from her mother, all of these years of tradition have built something into her world, which is obviously formative and fundamental for her. Yet, this world over here of secular materialism, and this world over here of embedded religious practice, these things have sort of had a firewall. And part of the goal is, well, I don't really necessarily like sort of reducing this to, let's say, her psychology, although I'm not doubting the psychology, but recognizing that, hmm, maybe all of this stuff, there's something there that we haven't really accounted for within a secular materialist frame. And I'd say that's part of the project of my conversations with John and Jonathan, for example. So there's a, again, there's a bunch of interesting things there. So one thing that I would say is that when it comes to taking the example that you provide, and interacting with the medical institutions, and the kind of default assumption of a medical or a medicalized kind of secular perspective, just by the default of Western medicine. I take that point, though, in some respect, I think that's a function of the kind of logistical and practical constraints that medical providers operate under. If you take alternative health practitioners, for example, they will spend a very long time talking about your psycho-spiritual aspects, and people, as a result, people are very drawn to that. And I think this is partly why I'm in favor of things like the NHHS and have been more well-funded and stuff, because I think we could do with people, doctors having more time and space for that kind of thing. But so I just want to say that I think part of that is a constraint of logistics and practicalities. But the other aspect is that I guess I take issue a little bit with the notion that secularism can't incorporate what you're talking about, because I take the point about, you know, etic versus emic terminology and what it means to describe someone's experience in kind of cold psychological terms. But on the other hand, none of what you described is in any way surprising for me from a very materialistic worldview. I'm completely aware that humans are creatures of habit and tradition and social belonging. And so to separate a human from an environment that they're familiar and comfortable in, especially one that they've been involved in for decades, could produce a physiological effect. And even in medicine, you know, psychosomatic effects are recognized. Most people kind of treat that as if it means they're not real, but just means that our brains are powerful things which can produce actual physiological effects. I would push back. But our brains are powerful things. There's a lot of woo in there. I'm using Brian in shorthand for embodied cognition. So I'm talking about if you assume a secular worldview and that it cannot account for these things, I don't think that's true. But the other aspect of it is that, you know, things like the kind of religion as a source of meaning and tradition and of like social belonging for people is absolutely real. In fact, I would say, you know, a very, very significant role that religion plays in most societies around the world. But when people get into those discussions, and it is almost certainly the key is when I hear like any discussion about this topic in the kind of, I'm not saying that you're a part of the secret system, but I tend to refer, you know, the kind of sense-making sphere. And a lot of discussion of religion is around the ritualistic, the community, the traditional symbolic interpretationism. But I grew up an Irish Catholic. I'm very familiar with those positive aspects of religion. I'm also very familiar with the potential negative impacts of religious institutions and communities and their ability to suppress, oppress and to damage people. And in many occasions, it's actually the religious institutions and religious people that betrayed, in a sense, the belief that people had in those things. And that's not a small aspect, right? And it kind of, I sometimes feel like there's a kind of unnecessary, like, barrier drawn between religious and non-religious, whereas the vast majority of religious and non-religious people I know are, you know, they're getting along in the world. They're looking for meaning. They're looking for stuff that they value. But they recognize that there are good and bad things. And that applies to as much religion as public health measures and trade-offs. And I'm kind of, I react quite strongly to things that I perceive as suggesting that if you lack the religious impulse, that there's something fundamentally missing or that, you know, your life is, you're denying, in essence, that you actually are religious because everybody fundamentally is. And I see that as like a sort of implicit thing that materialism sucks the life and meaning of the world and that we want to reinject the spiritual and the metaphysical. But in that contrast, and this way, I would say to the EFAs, so you asked, Andrea, you know, how I'm, why I would distinguish myself from the new EFAs. And part is because I actually study religion, whereas lots of the new EFAs don't. But the other part is that I don't think that inherent conflict has to exist. Like I think tolerance and like a willingness to recognize that people can draw meanings from different, you know, like secular or religious meaning structures is beneficial. And that's why I'm like, I'm quite reactive to things which are presenting a secular world as fundamentally like cold and alienating and void of meaning because I don't think, I think that presents, that ends up in the discussion with higher atheists able to be moral without, you know, a religious structure to keep them on the straight and narrow. And I think all of those questions have been like discussed and answered in hundreds of years of debates between atheists and religious people. So in, I guess, in part, that's a whole bunch of things, but that's partly my reaction to that, Paul, is that I think it is, you're completely right that we should take seriously the attachments and social bonds. And, you know, you could frame it in other language, as you suggest, like the, you know, the experience of the numinous, the like esprit de corps or being touched by the Holy Spirit or your commitment to the Sangha or whatever it might be. But in, while acknowledging that, I'm not sure that I agree that my secular worldview requires like kind of, that that's a metaphysical reality that I can't comprehend because I feel like I comprehend it okay and that I understand people that value it. I don't personally believe in the metaphysical aspects of it, but, you know, that's, it doesn't feel that mysterious to me that that exists in human given the kind of social beings that we are. Okay, Paul, I want you to take it, but I have a little quick something just to be clear regarding the empty desertscape of secular materialism. It's not just secular materialism, there's absolutely Christian materialism, like which I didn't mean to dabble in, but did when I joined Twitter and talked to a bunch of scientists about science. The Church of Twitter. So it's not, it's not just, it's not just secular, like it's the idea of a lack of enchantment in the world is what I would say is the thing. It's the idea of scientific method, proving things, that's all, like truth is science. I'm sorry, it's the caricature of Sam Harris. Can I say that? Like that's- Yes, Andrea, by the way, I don't mean to interrupt, but I just want to, before you and Paul respond, there was one extra thing I meant to ask you that I'm just curious about, and you're touching on it now, so before you move on, you know the sense of enchantment and of, you know, the kind of reductionist like scientific materialism approach to the world. A group that I see also strongly object to that, and to argue for like subjective amic experiences and lived experiences and giving more attention to that, is the kind of woke progressive people, right? They're doing it for different purposes, but they're very much emphasizing in the, you know, science is arrogant and secularism is golden, so I'm just curious if you, not signing on to the thing, but on that part, do you tend to agree with their critique of science or not? And Paul, the same question to you, I'm just curious how you view the, you know, the kind of post-modern, that element of post-modernism. Okay, so regarding the lived, specifically lived experience, I actually don't really have a problem with lived experience. I mean, if you have a specific, well what about lived experience regarding the aboriginal way of like seeing science and like their lived experiences that back of the turtle, or like, I don't know, there's a lot of back of the turtle like myths, but regardless, okay, that's not what I'm meaning for lived experience. Like I take lived experience seriously, give me examples, and I'll see how seriously I can take them depending on what it is and the subject. I think that science has given us the ability to, my son has diabetes, and a type 1, he is 11 and has had it since he was four. Thank you, science. Thank you, the Canadian guy who can't remember his name, who came up with penicillin. Like thank you for that. Insulin. Oh, sorry. Better get this straight, mom. Are you sure your son has diabetes? I mean, you know what you're talking about. Yeah, I just said the wrong thing. Just inject him what's there. Yeah, I inject him whatever the pharmacy gives me and it's the right thing. Okay, well, that was my lived experience that was a little bit off for that moment. But no, but like, so I, yes, I understand scientific method helping us medically like such amazing, like so many lives are saved because of the scientific method. That's the most front of my brain example of like where scientific method is like amazing. Absolutely fantastic. Things like precision work, like surgery, even germ theory, things like that. That is thanks to trial and error from many scientists and whatnot. But when it comes to lived experiences, like people who, I had an experience and it has brought me to Jesus or Buddha or which I, I take that very seriously. I had magic mushrooms and I ended up coming to faith. I've heard those things and I take it seriously. Like I take the things that people say that they have seen, particularly in really more spiritually saturated, you know, like we have like the, at my church, they have like the missionary folks who come in and give like testimonials or testimonies, I think it's not of them necessarily, but from people who they're ministering to. And depending on where it is in the world, there are certain spiritual activity things that happen more than say in more Western secular spaces. And so like I, I, like if someone does, I saw this, I believe them, if that makes sense. I believe them as much as I, if it was me, like I would, I would believe that, that like my eyes and I believe, I, what can I do other than call them a liar and, and, you know, things like that. So you could not believe people, of course, but I do take lived experience seriously. So on the other hand, regarding, yeah, the different types of truth, I think that again, the binary way of like it is truth or it isn't truth. Like that's where Verbecky's like, I think it's four P's about the different types of truth. Like, is it true? Well, like what, which, which truth are we, you know, like looking at a story and who's the hero and what he does and sacrifices for the people? Well, it's true that that is inspiring and it happens. And these are things that aren't facts, like the difference between facts and truth. But, but facts can be true. So, you know, so I, so I see, I see, I see, that's how I see the world, if that makes sense. And, and I, and the enchantment piece, I don't actually understand, actually, maybe I do. If you are a secular materialist, like I hope that, I imagine that stories would bring enchantments into your life. I imagine like that's how I see the only way that such things, your life can be enchanted is by living through stories, I guess, if that makes sense. Why do people who are secular always want Santa Claus to be part of Christmas? Like way more than most Christians I know. The tooth fairy, the Easter bunny. I'm sorry, but it's the seculars who really want, I'm sorry. We've all got Christian things. Yeah, Santa Claus was not popular in my house growing up. No, I wasn't allowed. I decided to let my kids choose. You, Richard Dawkins agrees with you. I don't. Well, okay, sorry, I'm, I'm bringing up more things than I took too long. So Paul, please. Well, you had a question about wokeness and, and wokeism. Yeah, so I was kind of curious just about, you know, the, the emphasis on, on, you know, lived experience and the kind of reductionist nature of, of science and secularist worldviews. The, the other group that I hear apart from religious people who advance that critique often is postmodern kind of scholars, right? They, and I, I'm just curious to the extent to which on that particular point, not, you know, all the broader stuff that you, you agree or is it like, is there something that's distinctive that, from the critique that you would have that, that diverges from that? Cause you know, Jordan Peterson is often critiqued that he sounds remarkably postmodern, why reeling against postmodern people. There's a lot of postmodernity in Jordan. It depends what you mean. Right. It depends what such and such is, right? That's something that's very common. So I'm just curious about in that respect, to what extent there's, there's overlap on those points or, or whether it's, it's like, you know, it's just a parallel evolution and there isn't actually a point of contact. I'm still not sure what you're asking, but I'll try and answer. There's plenty of postmodernity in me too. I think, I think. So, so if you want to sort of see this, see this long-term, I see this very much within a religious frame. So part of why the, part of what, during the Renaissance, you have this, this real fascination with sources and literary sources. I mean, Europe, certain parts of Europe start going crazy, looking for Greek manuscripts and so on and so forth. Erasmus of course, is, is finding, you know, at this point in Europe, everybody's learning Greek, people are learning Hebrew, and then they're looking at Jerome's Vulgate. And they begin to recognize that, hey, wait a minute. I mean, today, today, a contemporary biblical scholar might accuse Jerome of writing a paraphrase because if you look at, see, so what I do with my Delta Sunday School class, for example, is I put different English texts by next to each other and I have a sense of the nature of this translation that Jerome is filling in a lot of the space in the, you know, in the, just at the late antiquity, filling in a lot of the space so that all of the doctrines are nicely there for the people reading the Vulgate, for the people reading this Latin text. And come the Renaissance, because of all the texts that have sort of been unearthed because of the Crusades, now suddenly people have access to better Greek texts and some Hebrew texts, and they're learning Hebrew from Jews. And so Erasmus takes it, and now the printing press is there, so Erasmus is, you know, lining up the Vulgate and some, you know, some Greek text and having notes on the side, basically critiquing Jerome and saying, you know, hey, wait a minute, what's, Jerome is doing something funny with the text. And of course, as Erasmus is writing, Luther is reading, and a lot of people have accused Erasmus of laying the egg that Luther hatches. So Luther, of course, is reading this and he's following with Erasmus. Erasmus winds up staying a faithful Catholic. Luther, of course, he's got his own things going on in northern Germany, sort of following Jan Hus, and starts making some noise, wanting a little bit of a discussion, and the Catholic Church is reactive. They kick back. Luther's kind of like Jordan Peterson, so that if you push him, you know, he gets reactive fast. And so Luther keeps amping up. Luther's prince doesn't want him getting burned at the stake like Jan Hus, so he protects him. But Luther very much believed that, you know, if we could get that, you really have sort of the sources of science in this way, in a religious sense, that if we can get the best text, and if we can apply reason to it, then everybody will see the world in the same way. This is Luther's big idea. And to Luther's dismay, it doesn't happen that way. You know, Carlstad, Zwingli, the Anabaptist, I mean, all hell breaks Luther in northern Europe, and nobody quite knows what to do. But the printing press is there, the genie's out of the bottle. By the way, the generation before the New World was discovered, so suddenly everybody wants to figure out, well, how can we all get on the same page again? And so the idea, really, because they've sort of been infused with a lot of classics, Aristotle's been found, suddenly it's, well, let's see, empiricism and reason. You know, these two ideas, what we can see down below here, you know, I see a cat, you see a cat, we all see a cat, we all call it a cat, that's a cat. So, and then reason, and so, and you basically have the beginning of modernity, where we're all trying to be on the same page with, you know, with the stuff that we find. Here I've got a can of Willamina mints given to me by a very strange Jew. And so, and that's hopefully the way we can kind of all be on the same page, all be in the same world. And Galilee, of course, is measuring things, and we're all trying to get in the same world, and that holds for a good long time, that we can, maybe with these things, we can all stay on the same page, and of course, religion continues to adapt, and religion becomes a very modernist thing. And well, we have the text, and the text is going to be sort of the thing we can all agree on, for the most part. We'll argue about interpretations, but, and of course, the religious institutions continue to bear weight, but, you know, go up and down during the modern period. Well, of course, in post-modernity, people sort of get to the end. Modernity really sort of reaches its peak at the end of 19th, beginning of the 20th century, and people begin to realize that, yeah, we all sort of have access to the same reason and empiricism, more or less, but people are sure jigging them in other ways that are pretty significant for the way these civilizations are founded. And so now you begin to get this critique, this narrative critique, and say, well, people are looking at the facts, but they sure are employing them in different ways in a very self-centered way. And okay, fair enough. So people are motivated, and they have a lot of motivations, and they wield these motivations, and off they go. Now, part of what comes along during this period is the fact that, you know, if you say contrast the way Locke sees the world, well, we're just this plain slate, there's all this stuff out there. Okay. And if you look at, let's say, Jordan Peterson's first, his first talk with Sam Harris probably could have convinced the world that they probably didn't need the other three, because if you listen to that talk, it very much goes to the effect that- It's very painful. Peterson is saying to Harris, you know, you don't just see the world plain. That there are structures inside of you that are shaping the way you see the world. And these structures are certainly physiological, they're certainly psychological, but they're also cultural. And there's this great line, there's a book written by an ex-missionary who went out way into the Amazon. He basically, the book is about how he gave up his faith and lost it, et cetera, et cetera. But the book starts with this great story where he's in amongst this indigenous tribe, and he's trying to translate the- he's trying to first write down their language because their language isn't written, it's a tiny little tribe, and then he's going to translate the Bible into it. So he's living with them for years. And one day, he's there with his family, and he's living in the hut, you know, he's completely indigenized. And one day he hears this commotion in the town. And well, what's the commotion? Well, the god, you know, there's this god over across the river, and the whole town is out there pointing at the god across the river. And he knows these people, he's lived with these people. And there's a god across the river, can't you see him? He can't see him, and neither can his kid. But the whole rest of the village sees that god. And they're not lying, they're being completely sincere. This is the first story he opens the book with. Now the whole book is about his deconstruction, how he gives up the faith, and basically becomes a secular materialist. But this incident still haunts him, because those people aren't lying, they're all seeing the god. I can't. Why? And well, it might have something to do with the fact that when- and again, having been a foreign missionary and worked with people from a different culture than mine, now Haitians and Dominicans are real far away from us. But I'll tell you, when I would walk into a room and when they would walk into the room, nothing is as dramatic as that story. But we sure do look at different things. And we sure do pay attention to different things. And the things that we look at and things that we pay attention to, this isn't just from my little life since I was born in the early 60s. This goes back all the way, this goes back generations, and has formed me and shaped me and molded me. And even though physically we're probably pretty much on the same page about everything that's in the room, we know what a chair is, we know what the banana skin walls are, we know what the wood is, you know, all of this stuff, we're still living in sort of a different world. And these worlds are in some ways in conflict. And these conflicts are narrative based. But the more, and this is really sort of where a lot of John Vervecki's work comes in, there is this reality that we have derived from science, that even the way our minds work at a very deep level, I actually figured this out before any of this stuff. I had a guy in my church who had very low vision. And he described it to me once he had diabetes, actually. He was part of Christian science church growing up, they wouldn't allow him any medicine. No penicillin. No penicillin. Really screwed up his body. At some point, you know, one of his parents deconstructed, left the church, got him penicillin. Penicillin. Penicillin. Now you got me saying it. But it deeply affected his, he had health problems for the rest of his life, but he had low vision. And I asked him, what's this like? And he said, you know, kind of phenomenologically, he experiences the room sort of like I do, because I sit in this room, and I imagine I'm seeing all this stuff. But of course, you know, in grade school, you learn about the blind spot, and all of that, and that, you know, I look out this one eye, and there really is a blind spot, but my brain is filling this in. So if my brain is filling this in, what does that mean about actually this thing that I'm seeing? And I knew it with this guy, because sometimes he would be standing in the church, and I'd walk up next to him, and then I'd say something, and he practically jump out of his skin. Because it was like watching a movie in which, bang, someone comes right into view, because his mind wasn't aware of me, and then suddenly I'm in the picture. So you watch this, and you begin to realize that the world that we are embedded in is very much not only a product of the physical things around me, but multiple generations of formation that have physical consequences. I mean, we would wash the feet of the Haitians when we had a, we have foot washing service, and that was the one time I could actually really serve them. So then me, as someone who wears shoes all the time, I have their feet in my hands, and these people have been walking barefoot their whole lives. Their feet are very different from mine. You know, they're flat, they're calloused. And so you begin to recognize that the world is in fact formed, and that this formation goes down in very deep levels. And the more you sort of go down this rabbit hole, the more you begin to realize that a lot of the things that you recognize when you move cross-culturally, well, there's reasons for it. And then it also then begins to, you know, probably no one in church, so I could either sort of be a flat earther and read Genesis and say, well, here's a desk, here's a dome, there are pillars, and sort of demand that my people all be flat earthers in church, or I could sort of take this cosmology that I live in and sort of project it onto the Bible. But I learned fairly early on when I was reading the Bible closely that, you know, that the, I would talk about the firmament and the waters above, to real ardent fundamentalists. My mother-in-law was one, she wasn't part of the Christian Form Church, and God rest her soul, I probably shouldn't have been such a brat. But I'd say, where are those waters above? And she'd say, those are the clouds. And I'd say, but wait a minute, the sun, moon, and stars are within the firmament. So what does that mean? In other words, I mean, post-modernity sort of pokes you to recognize that, wait a minute, there are narratives and motives and all of this stuff floating around. And what I would describe this little corner as trying to do is, is try to get a little bit beyond post-modernity. Now, the nomenclature isn't set. Metamodernity, sometimes people are talking about it. Post-progressive, some people are talking about it, because the reality that you can sort of deconstruct everything. But part of why I, I've gone on too long, I know, but I just want to finish with this story, because it might help contextualize me in your site. So I saw Jordan Peterson working on this. And I thought, first, I thought these biblical series, hey, some evangelical that somehow managed to stay in Toronto. I started listening to it. It's like, he's no evangelical, and okay, well, he's a Jungian. So that's strange to begin with. I didn't know much about Jung. So then I made a video about him. And then I start getting these emails from people. Oh, this is strange. So I start talking to people. I'm a pastor, so I talked to them about their life, and many of the conversations are in private. And so they're very transparent, and they got nothing to lose. You know, they don't know me anything, I don't know them. And I begin talking to dozens, even hundreds of these people. And I discover that the vast majority of these people, number one, were men. Well, given Jordan Peterson's audience, that's not a surprise. But the really strange thing about him was that many of them were depressed. And many of them basically told me, by listening to Jordan's biblical series, the depression lifted. And I'm not talking about someone who was just feeling a little blue. I'm talking about people that, I mean, medically, when I'd listen to what they were describing, they definitely would have been diagnosed with depression. All of the things that they're doing. And they're basically telling me, I listened to enough Jordan Peterson, and you know what? I cleaned my darn room. And I began to bathe. I began to eat better. I began to exercise. I began to prioritize getting out of my room. And then I started doing these meetups. And so then they'd start coming, at least the local ones would start coming to my church. And now we're starting to have, you know, in person conversations. Now, this is an extremely strange thing that watching those videos would have the effect on people. And it's an obvious effect because I can see it, that their lives are improving on all sorts of scales that I can value and secular people could value it. And that led me to the question, what on earth is going on? And that led me, of course, to Peugeot was a friend of his. Peugeot was another religious guy. So we were talking about that stuff. And then Vervecky and the meaning crisis, because well, what words to describe to these guys? And when I talked to these guys, I mean, one guy, I remember he had been religious. You know, the Sam Harris stuff, the new atheist stuff just sort of blew apart his worldview. And then he gets together with a woman and she gets pregnant and, you know, better marry her maybe. So he gets married to her. And then one day, and then they have this kid and there's two year old running around. And he says to himself, now, if I listen to Sam Harris, why do I love this two year old so much? Now, he was a smart guy. Most of the people I deal with are smart people. They've got college degrees, a lot of them work in tech. He said, it's more than just a biologically predisposed to care for my offspring. Yeah, I get that. But I just have a sense there's something more. And I think it's right in that space that as a pastor, I listen to this and I say, well, this is interesting. How does this connect to my two worlds? And for me, that's what this journey has been on. Because part of me knew that after a while, now some of them are going to sort of get lift off because they've improved some things in their body and they're not going to be as depressed. They're eating better, they're having better relationships. They've got a schedule, they're sleeping better, etc., etc. So physiologically, you could say, yep, they've gotten lift off, they're doing well. But for a lot of them, I knew that Jordan Peterson was on the status rocket and we're going to be talking about social wars stuff and all this stuff. And for me as a pastor, I said, they probably need a community of people who can be around them to give them some support. Now, some of them have not gone religious. Some of them have gone orthodox. Some of them have gone back to the Catholic Church. Some of them, one guy in my meetup returned to his Sikh roots. So it's been very complex. But for me, I'm not skeptical about post-modernity. I think it is sort of an end stage of modernity. And I think a lot of the science has driven us to the fact that the world is a lot more complicated than John Locke could have imagined. And especially when we're dealing with it socially, and not just theoretically, but as a pastor in terms of lives of real people, paying attention. I'm curious. I'm trying to figure out how this all is working. So I don't know if that helps contextualize me at all. Yeah, that does a lot. And there's a couple of things I'd like to follow up on if it's all right. But I think one of the things, Paul, is from your content that I've looked at, that actually some of which I find relatively rare, you might disagree, is that you are accurate whenever you're talking about categorically where people are. I heard you talking recently and saying the anti-Wolk space is essentially a kind of neoconservative space, trigonometry, and that kind of thing, which I completely agree with. And also view as people can have different perspectives. The thing which often arches me is when people say they're doing something that they're not. So know thyself is an important thing. And like you had emphasized there, there's lots of different perspectives that people can take on issues or approach things, and people will get benefit from a variety of sources. And I would never deny that Jordan Peterson has been helpful for a bunch of people. I think his self-help material and also online material, a lot of people reacted to very well, and it clearly helped them. Right now, there's some parts that it might get actually to a little bit about the differences in our approaches as well, because I understand what you're talking about also in terms of the desire to translate and to be in dialogue with people like John Ververke, who might not hold the same metaphysical assumptions, but they're interested in engaging. And that even if people, your interest might on some level be proselytization. I'm making Christians out of atheists. To some extent, right? And there's nothing wrong with that, I think, because that's in the same respect that I think it's good to promote academic and critical thinking. It's all down to what people value and think is good. But what I wanted to highlight there is that one, there's an issue that like one thing that we're very clear on from our podcasts, from all the different people that we look at, that there's a lot of people out there having transformative effects on people through their engagement with online content. And it's almost a given that you'll get a lot of testimonials for various figures. And there are people who we would probably all agree that are bad, but they'll still get powerful testimonials. I followed Andrew Tate and I'm getting more tail than I ever got before. Right. Yeah. But also, you know, Andrew Tate is promoting NYE, like in some variety. Some variety is probably the correct way to put it. But I'm thinking, you know, Tony Robbins and so on as well. Like there's a lot of people that are powerful orators and good with self-help messages. And I would count Jordan in that. And also, then in a certain respect, that thing that I raised at the start about the ability to speak in a very fluent way, bringing in lots of world history and myth. And it's intoxicating for people, for good and for bad. I think that way of speech is a gift that people who are good orators have. So one of my points is a potential issue that the heuristic of transformative experiences can also be a constant with people that are, you know, fundamentally still exploiting people or kind of like promoting divisive messages. And there are different levels of that. But the other part, and this, I think, it really catalyzed for me when you were saying that, is, you know, people are focusing on different things, right, when they're in discussions. And when I look at the content of Jordan and Jonathan and various other people, and much lesser extent, John Vervacki, I pick up a lot on the promotion of conspiratorial thinking, the comments about the war in Ukraine, anti-vaccine rhetoric, climate change contrarians. And if you go to, you know, Jordan Peterson's timeline, you'll see hundreds of tweets all about those topics. It's not incidental to his project. He's setting up a conference and organizations, Jonathan Peugeot was part of them, which are outlining, you know, as they define it, an alternative vision. And people in those groups also tend to be very relaxed about their criticism towards Hungary or other authoritarian regimes that couch it in Christian or kind of religious values. And to me, that looms large in their content, right? So that when I see people having discussions, which doesn't criticize that or doesn't push them on it, and when I read it to people, they say, well, I'm not interested in their political stuff. That's not what I'm talking to them about. It feels to me like that's ignoring a kind of big envelope of criticism. And that I'm not saying that everyone that engages with Jordan Peterson is going to become, you know, like a supporter of Putin and a strong anti-vax person. But I would say that those are not minor parts of his output, including in his podcast. And the fact that he works for the Daily Wire, kind of like a self-identification is that he's on the polemical side of, or the partisan side, at least, of the right-wing media ecosystem. And so I guess that I'm curious your thoughts on that, because I think that might be part of the reason that, you know, when you look at our content, you see that we are kind of focusing on the wrong thing and missing things. And I probably feel the same about when I'm looking at the content of, you know, the discussions about egregores and the symbolic interpretism. And a very last thing that I promise I'll shut up is that I saw a video by Jonathan Peugeot where he promoted Alex Jones as having good intuitions and insight and kind of made some, you know, various jokes. And this was in the context of Alex Jones facing that trial for what he did to the Sandy Hook parents, right? And to me, I'm not Christian. I don't have, but I have a set of morals where when somebody has tormented the parents of dead children, telling your audience this guy's good and he kind of gets it and he's a bit bombastic, no, like if you actually dig into he's an immoral predator on people. And I think that stuff like that is irresponsible. And where a lot of my criticism comes from is, is it not being not in the stuff, Andrea, that you were, you know, discussing earlier about enchantment or the tolerance for ambiguity, because there, I think a lot of it comes down to personal values and perspectives. But that other stuff, you know, Paul, you asked at the start about whether I see what I'm doing as like good or, you know, in those, I see pushing back against that kind of aspect to be something like necessary, not necessarily that I need to do it, but like it is good to try and oppose like, conspiracism and stuff that leads to people being exploited and made more polemical in nature. So, yeah, that's a bunch of stuff. But yeah. Well, let me start with the second and then connect it to the first. Part of a liberal part of the question of liberalism, the relationship between liberalism and modernity is a big one, but that's, I'm not going to go too far with that right now. But part of liberalism, if we say we're more or less continuing to be in at least a relatively liberal political conversation atmosphere, is people do get to get their opinions, their religious opinions, their political opinions, their allegiances, their alliances, and it's fair game to judge them on them. And we all tend to have our politics and religion, even if it's not terribly explored, for the most part, people sort of receive a first draft from their parents of all sorts of things. And those drafts tend to get updated. Our mappings get updated as we go along. So, and morality. So, I don't know if you've read any Tom Holland, the English historian, Roderick Dominion. Yeah, yeah, I'm familiar. So, his argument is basically that Christianity has impacted a lot of stuff in the West. And it's deeply, if you compare, let's say, some of our attitudes, I mean, your attitude that, you know, we would characterize Alex Jones as evil because he is on one hand, he seems to be profiting from the misery of a group that, if anything, all our hearts should go out to them that are the parents of the victims of these children in Sandy Hook. I mean, this is an astounding tragedy. You know, it's connected to all sorts of things. And Tom Holland would say that very much comes, I mean, part of that, at least certainly part of its biological, we sort of, you know, we have our mirror neurons, we see those crying parents and I'm a parent. And so, oh, wow, yeah, absolutely. So, yeah, someone who would somehow not be, you know, somehow someone who would sort of take advantage of the misery of these people, you don't have to be a Christian, someone who goes to church to look at that in the West and say, that's pretty evil, you know, and so you say, okay, Jonathan Pagel was soft on Alex Jones. Well, I'm going to let Jonathan talk with the nuance he does about Alex Jones, so on and so forth. But that is a morality. And that is a very common morality that we pick up from our culture. I mean, I'm not going to say that, you know, you can't really have morality unless you're a Christian. Well, no, I think actually we pretty much crowdsource our morality. And that's been embedded with us multi-generationally, I think culturally, and you'll notice cultures have separate moralities. And living in Japan, you know, you'll notice interesting comparison between what you grew up with and what there's in the Japanese space. Cultures all have moralities. Okay. Now, so let's just understand morality in that way and say that people get a chance to critique each other with respect to, well, how do you assess the Holocaust? Do you deny the Holocaust? How do you assess Hitler? How do you assess Stalin? How do you assess Roosevelt? How do you assess Che Guevara or Bill Gates? Or, I mean, people have their assessments, and they usually just sort of well up within them. I like them, I don't like them. I learned this one thing I think about. This moral matrix that we have. We're all participating that, and we don't really, we can't in many ways sort of brag about it, because in many ways we sort of receive it. And like many of our beliefs, it sort of wells up in us unbidden. So there's that moral, it's a moral conversation that we're all participating in. Now, the first thing that you talked about is the heuristics of transformative experience. And I think that's really important. And as a pastor who pays attention and has, in fact, a, I'm very clear about people. I'm a Christian minister, and I would love you to join me in my religion, Christianity, and boy, join my specific church, the Christian Forum Church, even better, maybe. I don't know that it's always right for everyone, but you know, that's a complex thing. But I, of course, have watched a lot of transformation out of Christianity, and we're seeing that on a large scale now in the culture. People looking at church and saying, you know, like yourself in some way, saying, I don't really think participating in this institution or reinforcing the beliefs that I, let's say, were passed on to me from my upbringing, I don't think this is necessarily good. So then it's touching on that broader moral matrix. It's nuanced, of course, you're going to say, you know, Irish Catholicism, there's a big subject, there's good things, there's bad things, you know, the fight over Northern Ireland, I mean, big, huge thing, but you've got moral sentiments with respect to it, you've got moral feelings. And you yourself underwent something of a transformation. You don't go to church, you don't identify in that way. You went to universities, you know, you had other kinds of transformation. And I'm in the business of transformation, as is John Verbeke. And in some ways, you know, my relationship with John Verbeke and the transformations he's seeing, and the tools, that's a very complex relationship I have with John, even with Jonathan Peugeot, to a degree, because a lot of people are joining the Orthodox Church. I really celebrate when people join the Orthodox Church because, hey, they're part of the Christian family. Do I have ideas about Orthodoxy? Sure, but, you know, we'll let that go for now. But I'm absolutely down with you in terms of, I see people leave Christianity, leave the church, leave their wives, leave their families, leave their husbands. I see people transforming all over the place lately. I think we're in a phase right now where a lot of people are transforming. A lot of people, they're discovering this, they're discovering that, they're going to Tony Robbins, and immediately, one of the first things that they say is, this is an upgrade. Boy, I'll tell you, ever since I left Christianity, not afraid of demons, I don't worry about hell, I have my Sunday mornings back, I no longer have sort of a domineering sexual ethic I have to satisfy. I don't have to worry about Jesus talking about lust of the flesh or lust of my eyes. I mean, boy, talk about liberation. This is surely an upgrade. And, hey, I totally get that. I can feel the pressure of Christian discipleship on me. But I see these momentary transformations as fairly small things. And what's different from, let's say, a pastor, from, let's say, a therapist, is therapists look at these people in a little small box, and well-being is sort of their gauge, and so a therapist might tell you, leave that sack of dirt you're married to, and get out there, and have a better life. Okay. As a pastor, I'm seeing people in the wild. And I'm seeing people for long periods of time. And I'm seeing them in connection with their spouse, and their kids, and their parents, and their jobs. And so for me, these heuristics are very interesting, because when you walk with people over decades, you begin to have wonderings about the, you begin to evaluate these transformations. And you say, now, yeah, you're not under the Christian sexual ethic anymore. You got your Sunday mornings back. You no longer have the kind of death anxiety you had before. But these other death anxieties come in, because now suddenly you have to get all of the good stuff between zero and 80, and that's it. And then you begin to notice that, well, now there's a certain amount of yolo. You only live once. Boy, if I'm going to get this all in, I got to get this all in. And maybe, I sure hope my kids are going to be okay if I divorce that jerk, but they'll be all right. They'll get therapy. And you just watch this systematically. And so what happens is that your evaluative frame is far larger in terms of these transformative experiences. And it's not only far larger in terms of their lives, it begins to get intergenerational, because actually their participation in church is going to impact their number of sex partners, and their fidelity with their spouse, and their relationship with their children, and, and, and. And when you watch this multigenerational, especially after you're talking to people, and someone comes into your office and you hear about their parents' divorce, and then you hear about their mother's boyfriends, and then you hear about the fact that they had to go to kind of a crappy school if they went to college at all, because they didn't have any money, because dad and mom split up. And then you start listening to these in multiple levels. So my heuristic is pretty broad in terms of well-being. And whereas on one hand, people might imagine that as a pastor, I'm like, yeah, you know, real tribal, I want you in this box, and I want you to act in this box in a certain way. I've seen people who have deconstructed from Christianity, and I think, it's probably a good thing they did. Probably a good thing they did. And I actually think that maybe 10 or 20 years from now, they're probably going to come back to their faith, and they will likely have a stronger, healthier, in some ways, sadder faith because of their deconstruction than they would have had if they had just sort of white-knuckled it in the institution. And so, you know, and that's part of the reason I got into this space is because Jordan Peterson sort of lit up a bunch of things for these people. And same, just like a evangelistic crusade, you know, Billy Graham comes to town, you come forward, you pour out your heart, you give your life to Jesus, that's in the evening. You know what you really need to do? They're probably going to need a new friend, and they're probably going to need a new group of friends, and they're probably going to have to be mature and fairly stable. And, and, and, and, and, and, again, it's not very different from getting off of alcohol and having that transformative experience of going to sobriety. And so, even though, of course, I have a religious frame, I also see these transformative experiences within a much broader purview. And that isn't disconnected from your question about Alex Jones. And, but I also know that when it comes to people, I mean, part of the reason that I think the woke are really often fairly shallow is because if you're really picky about the morality of people with respect to their racism, well, look at Henry Ford. Why would you drive a car or purchase anything that's been mass produced downstream from Henry Ford? And we certainly don't have those kinds of sensitivities. But if Henry Ford is contaminated, absolutely everything, well, there certainly must be a lot built into a car. And well, if cars are responsible for poisoning the environment, there you go. The sins of Henry Ford are being visited on the world. But I don't find a lot of woke making that argument. So that's so and that's in very many ways why, especially in this space, I'm in here for the long game. Because part of what I get criticized from Christians often is, I'm not closing the deal fast enough with these people. My job is to make them a Christian tomorrow and to get them into church. And now a lot of these people, I do believe they would be far better off if in fact they would become Christian and if they get into church and if they'd stay faithful to their spouse. And maybe if they, I'm not saying every marriage has to go the distance, but by and large, a majority of marriages that are having trouble within six to eight years, people are happy they stayed if they stayed, not all, but many. So that maybe will give you a sense of the game I'm playing in this space. You might find it, at one point, I think we definitely agree and Paul is like, in many of my responses to Jordan's content, I've been inclined to think, I've been inclined to think, you know, just go to mass. I went to mass for 18 years every week and it's, you know, if you really like it, I recommend go try it and see how it gels with you. Because I heard Jonathan reporting recently that he went to some service with Jonathan and he didn't enjoy it. Well, actually there are pictures of, so Tammy, his wife, has very much been coming into the Catholic fold. And if poor Jordan does go to mass with Tammy, you've got all kinds of people taking pictures of them and put them on Twitter and mass. So the poor guy can't even explore religion. Oh, that's why. Yeah, that's a fair point. You know, the Catholic mass, God, good luck to him. He should be Christian. You're formed if you ask me, but Jordan, if Jordan moves to Sacramento, maybe I'll try and lure him in. You know, Paul, I will say, and Andrea, this might help you as well, like when modeling me in your mind that like, I, you know, I was raised Catholic, right? But, you know, Paul, you asked about transformation stuff. As far as I can recall, as soon as I thought about, you know, religious kind of stuff, I was not a believer. Like when I was too young, I, you know, I was too young. I didn't think about it. And when I did, I have like very early, like experiences that, you know, kind of thinking that the stuff in the Bible was stories was like the way that I, so this is just to say, like, I think I had a kind of atheistic aspect to me for a long time and then came across, you know, that Andrea, the selfish gene and the, like, not the God delusion, but more kind of science and that worldview, and I'm finding it appealing. But I actually got heavily into Buddhism and introspective practices, a joint meditation group and stuff in Belfast, which wasn't that easy to find. And I went on like a kind of 12 months bumming around various like Dharma centers in North America. I took a gap year with my own money, I would add, not like some houses. Well, I see it tough. But the, and then I went to university to study religion, as I said, and I mainly did that initially because of like a fascination with Buddhism and also growing up in Northern Ireland with the Protestant and Catholic conflict that was also, you know, like formative. But when I went to university and started studying about Buddhist history and traditions, I basically find that I had consumed a very specific form of Buddhism, the Western, like the kind of Western Buddhism, right, that is very popular. And it gelled with my perspective because it was specifically designed to gel with my perspective. Right. Yeah. And I find that the actual history of Buddhism in all of the Buddhist countries was like much more fascinating, much more complex and much less morally pure, right. There were pogroms, there were intersectarian violence and so on. And then my image of Buddhism was made more complex and more interesting. And that's the way I kind of approached for all of the, you know, the religions that I went on to study and subsequent research about ritual and that kind of thing. But so my transformative experience that I would frame it as is like a series of things where I have an idealistic image, which is smashed. And then I find the more complex, like critical engagement to be more fascinating and interesting and not so reassuring, but like a kind of that's the reality of the world to me. It was like the Buddhist history is not the simple morality tale about like a scientific religion. It's actually that there's fascinating history and the same applies to, you know, Christianity and all the divisions between all of the different groups. I find all of that history and kind of social aspects fascinating. The metaphysical aspects leave me cold and it could just be my personality. It could be tons of things. And I am inclined, Paul, because of that, you know, I'm a fan of writing about human evolution and viewing humans as a social primate species. And I actually, Andrea, you were asking about, you know, like, where do you get enchantment or where do you feel, you know, beauty? And I would say phenomenologically, we're all humans. So, you know, no matter what the satanic versus people or whoever, they will have the same phenomenological experiences. But whenever I look at humanity and the history of human from the lens of like us evolving and our social primates, I don't find that reductionist. I find it kind of like in a weird way, beautiful, you know, the kind of natural world connection and all that kind of thing, and not in a pantheistic way, just in a way that like when I look at our close primate relatives and you see the way that they interact with their infants and whatnot, and I know they don't, you know, their moral systems would be much more questionable. But I'm just saying that level of like affection and care directed towards infants, I can recognize, you know, a kinship there. And then in the societies, I think there's going to be an irresolvable debate where I feel like religious people have an inclination to take credit for the development of morality within given societies. And that is often sort of justified because a lot of the institutions talking about morality throughout pre-modernity were religious in nature. But if you view it that, you know, humans are social primates, and that to exist in the kinds of social groups that we do, we have to behave in a way that is not entirely cruel and dictatorial. Like cooperation overall makes us like, you know, distinguishes our species, our ability to communicate or cooperate with non-kin. Then that creates an incentive that then social institutions and stuff come across on. And I feel like a lot of the research that I'm interested in shows that, you know, you can use religions to build communities and institutions, but a lot of the stuff that we rely on is also built by, you know, health services and governments and secular systems of tolerance of different religions and so on. So I think that secular people and religious people can always just pick and choose what they want to emphasize as the ultimate source. But I guess where we are likely to agree is that in my case, I think there are intuitions that are early developing towards like, you know, empathetic behavior towards others and behaving pro-sociality and the best forms of religion, I think, emphasize that and make it into a higher virtue. So as far as that is what people are aiming for, I'm all in favor of it. It's just the other side that leaves me a little bit wary. But yeah. Well, okay. I see that we've been talking for quite a while and we didn't even address the question I opened up with the things I wanted to talk about, about like addressing about the... How am I too mean to John? The troll versus critic. And like, as you say on your podcast, we don't have to always agree. I appreciate that you're like, oh, we could agree here. Well, but not here. Well, that's okay. If we don't agree on all the things, as you guys mentioned, you know, but that is nice that we could agree on some of these things. Thanks for tying it in. We could have ended there. But then I was like, wait, I opened up this and we didn't even touch on it. I actually don't think I don't want to keep Paul at the office any much longer. And you have work day and I have children. I mean, my husband has put them to bed, but I probably should go make their lunches. Give the kids some penicillin. Oh, gosh. I'll never live that one down. But Chris, we didn't even talk about your Twitter life. If you were not... This is an intervention, Chris. ...active on Twitter. Are you that different on Twitter than Jordan Peterson? Yes. Yes. We've been engaging with you about your podcast and the conversations I've had with you before. But on Twitter, like I told this to Paul earlier, I was like, I think I'm going to say this. I mean, I only DM you if I want to talk to you. I don't really want to write you if I disagree with you, which I don't actually really see your stuff much because I'm just posting my vintage fashion photos and somehow the algorithm doesn't match us, I suppose. I wonder why. Hardly enough. I know. I'm just too sunshiny. But even if I did see something that I was like, well, I don't know if I'd go that far. And they're like, okay, well, that wasn't fair, you know, which is my extent of like how I usually... Yeah, that's your level of artery. It is. It is. I am so like, can we just get along, please? Like, that's me. I'm the one who's like, can we just agree, please? Like, that is me, actually. That's why. Really fun that I appreciate you tried to bring it all together with an agreement thing in the end. But like, I don't want to write that thing that I might disagree with you on or even be like, well, that's really not fair. Can you be more charitable? Even if I don't want to write that because I actually am like, I don't know which Chris I'm getting. This is an intervention. The more happy-go-lucky. No, because I've already, I've actually talked to him about this before and he's just like, this is just my way. But like, the happy-go-lucky kind of Irishman spunky or like Twitter Chris, who is really mean, really mean. He's really, really, really mean. I can help, I think, a little bit. So the one thing I think you have to factor in is like, you are not a sarcastic person, Andrea. I mean, I could have a moment. I'm not saying you're not funny or thing, but by nature, you're not cynical and sarcastic. I'm quite genuine. Yeah. And wholesome in that way. I'm not. I'm cynical and sarcastic. And I, as Paul indicated, I do get very annoyed by things that I see, which I think are like, yeah, like targeting, you know, like the kind of stuff that we talk about. I do think anti-vax promoting anti-vaccine stuff does genuine harm. It kills people. And I don't like that. And so in my, I'm not saying that like on Twitter, therefore everything I do is justified and morally good. How many vaccinations have you had of the COVID? Probably what? Three or three or probably three. I think three, maybe four. I don't remember. You're way behind. Of course. I've only had three, but I gave up on it after I had COVID. So it was like, I even asked my doctor, my doctor's like, doesn't really stop it. You know, had COVID once. I've had three shots, you know? I mean, I mean, you've only had three, you're way behind some people I know. Well, there's, I think there's diminishing returns from like the main thing is to have a vaccine and then we can, then we can negotiate the amount of boosters, but like first vaccinations would do at least as a start, but in any case, so I think Andrea, like part of it is one, just the personality difference, but two, that the thing that you like about the people is often not as high a priority for me as, you know, like I talked about with Paul, as the things that I'm criticizing. And then I do think it's, and this is my own fault, but like my tone on Twitter, I would say is the same as my general tone. The difference is you can't hear my tone. I know, but I've said this to you before. I do think that Irish lilt helps, but. Yeah. Or longer, longer format, right? But like. Yeah, actually longer format. Yes. And that's why I get frustrated because I see what seems really unfair because yeah, you can do, and I interrupted you, I'm sorry, but I'm going to. No, no, no, go ahead. So I see you do a lot of, what do you call it? The threads, but even that barely scratches and which is why you could have had a conversation with somebody you've had on your podcast, David Fuller, like not me, but David Fuller. I'm not, I'm not, I'm not somebody who could handle such things. But David Fuller with his journalistic background, someone that you, you have featured on your gurus podcast, you could have had a talk with them if you were more cordial on Twitter, but you demolished your chances because you were so mean. But that's it. So that's part of the, I think that's part of the difference. And it's a difference with David Fuller as well. Or uncharitable. I mean, mean, just sounds like I'm 12. Yeah. Tone, tone. Yeah. I know what you mean. I just mean uncharitable. Like, well, maybe I'm misunderstood. I just. No. So I think the one, and again, this will be a difference is that like, I think in for David Fuller, this was also the case that he imagines that the, my intention or my desire is to dialogue with whoever I'm criticizing and often know like I'm making my critique of their content because it's there, of what they said as an, as like an illustrative point. No, if I was to talk to the person to the fierce, I would expand on it and you know, social interactions mean that you're likely to be nicer to the person directly, right? Just, just by the nature of like face to face interactions. But in all cases. Okay. I guess Paul can't, can't wait to be destroyed on Twitter. No, but, but in all cases, I try that anything I say, I would say to the person directly and I would defend, you know, what I've said or take back as far as it was unfair. But in, in that case, I think the, my experience, and this is consistent is that various people that you would want me to talk to have been in talks to talk with me or whatever, right? And they have various restrictions about what to do and what kind of things. And invariably in my case, my restriction is very minimum. And I, I, you know, I'm fine to talk to someone to disagree with them, to argue our perspectives. And I'm not anticipating that we'll agree or it will be all incredibly polite. But I find that a lot of the people on the other side are very like, I unkindly, you could put it like fragile about like the perception of being critiqued or having to deal with, with critics. Yeah. And we reactive to it. And so I don't know, because like all the people that I critique, but they're not willing to vary. That's the, the, the issue is like almost universally, the people that I would be critical about, they're extremely critical of other people in their content, harshly critical, like with, with very strong condemnation. And my view is if you're going to do that, you have to be like, you don't, you don't have to talk to people. There's no obligation, but you can't like kind of act like it's beyond the appeal to give harsh criticism if you're issuing harsh criticism. So when we receive, Go ahead. Sorry. I'm sorry. Oh, sorry, Paul. Yeah. So I spoke a lot. All I was saying was if we harshly critique people, we have to be willing to get harsh critiques back. And then I'm talking about us and on the podcast, as you know, we have the policy that anybody that we cover, they can come on and some people have, and you know, it's, in some cases it's been fine. And in other cases, like slightly less comfortable, but it's all okay. Right. And I, I, I don't, I don't see the same level of comfort with some of the other people that I critique. And I think it's really the egos. But you've also critiqued and I think there's some fairness in it. I forget exactly how you phrased it. Sort of this, I mean, and especially in this little corner, and I would be probably one of the kings of winsome here at some, most of the time, you know, this, this sort of artifice, this artificial ability points. Yeah. Yeah. That was the word you used. That was a good one actually. I thought that was quite clever. I didn't invent that. I didn't invent that. That's a philosopher. And because, and I think part of that is especially on Twitter, reactivity just breeds reactivity. And, and to me, and now again, I, I come from a religious, I come from a religious community, a religious context. I tend to find reactivity very quickly gets boring and unproductive because, you know, I meet a Roman Catholic. I know a bunch of things I can say that are going to push their buttons and I'm a Calvinist. So they know a bunch of things that can push my buttons. And at this point for many conversations and the atheist and it's just about everybody else, we all know where all the buttons are and we can just play that game, pushing each other button. And that's what Twitter does, you know, just everybody's pushing each other's buttons. And at some point it's like, all right, well, you know, Jordan Peterson and the wokesters and the anti-Peterson and the woke anti-woke. I watched that. I just think it's pretty boring actually, because what I'm, what I'd really like to do is learn something. And, and I guess that would be the biggest critique I have of your podcast. Did I haven't listened to, I've listened to maybe three, four episodes. I don't really feel that I've learned anything. And, and you know, especially decoding the gurus. I mean, I got into this thing because I sort of wanted to figure out what on earth was Jordan Peterson talking about? And it didn't really help me learn anything. And so, you know, and on Twitter, I, I have, for me, I have found that on Twitter, I have to be really careful on Twitter. And I have these little rules I have for myself on Twitter, because I'll only go back and forth maybe once or twice with someone and then I'll just stop, give them the last word. That's fine. Because I don't know the, so again, part of me is curious, and I have a question of, can Twitter be a learning tool? And I think it can. Can Twitter be a community building tool? That's tougher. Is Twitter a good conversation tool? That's really tough, especially if there's disagreement, because part of, you know, again, as a pastor, one of the things you learn fairly early on is if you have a church conflict, get off the computer and get into a room with them in person right away. Because on a computer, there's no context with text. And on Twitter, when it's compressed, especially that whole environment, that's like, boy, that's just like a dog fight in there or a cock fight. It's just, you know, just blood sport. And so I don't know. I mean, you can obviously, you can do what you want with your podcast and your Twitter. But for me, I would be more interested in your Twitter stream and in your podcast if, I'm not saying, actually, even in this little corner, there are times when I get a little tired of the civility porn. I do get tired of it. But part of what I've learned as a pastor is, if you really want to go to interesting places in a relationship with someone and in a conversation with someone, you have to build the trust. Because, you know, if I really want to talk to John Vervecky about the Christian faith, which I really did want to once, you know, we got to know each other a little bit, we keep building that trust so that finally when we get to a place where he can really ask me a difficult question, one of those things in my head that when I hear about it, I think, boy, I just spent the last 50 years of my life investing in a fan, a fairy tale. I mean, don't think that all of that new atheist stuff doesn't get purchased sometimes in my head. But then on the other side, he's got his list too. And what I find to be the more interesting spaces are when we can sort of, okay, John is not going to kneecap me. I trust him. He trusts me. Let's sort of put down our walls and let's see the world from another perspective. One, let's say, who has stayed away from the faith and has invested in science and done all of this stuff. And he can see the world through someone who has not left the faith as youth, but hung in there and stayed in the church and walked with people through all kinds of things. And for me, if you ask, what's worth my time creating those kinds of spaces where that can be done, that's worth my time. And so what I do in terms of this little corner, I've got plenty of people who call me names and like to poke at my Calvinism and my theism and all of the things that I have. But one of the things that I learned, if I want to really be durable in creating those spaces is, all right, go ahead, push my buttons. I'm not going to react. And this, I think, is deeply Christian value that, of course, my master is someone who told me that I need to love my neighbor all the way up to and including my enemy. And then it's like, okay, yeah, I can have a flame war on Twitter, but it's much more interesting to find out, hmm, why have you made the choices you've made? And can I learn something from it? So that's sort of where I'm at. Yeah, I want to hear. I don't want to keep you guys too long. So I'll try to be concise, which is against my nature. But so I agree, of course, Paul, and especially, I think, when I think about Twitter, Twitter's changed over time. And I think since Elon Musk has took over, it's become a worse place in a lot of respects, because the algorithms are back to promoting like the kind of most click-bitty content. And I do remember when there was, and I'm sure you've experienced it too, where you could get into Twitter communities, like the open science movement and psychology, and you had lots of interesting discussions with people about, you know, whatever your particular topic might be, and you could come across interesting papers or interesting talks. And there was like little mini communities on Twitter. I think they still exist, but I think a lot of that is also like getting drafted into the culture war, in part because of changes made. In terms of like drive-by sniping at outgroup targets and stuff, I think it is a pastime on Twitter that a lot of, you know, in general, people engage in, and that is rewarded by the algorithm and the kind of dynamics of followers and that kind of thing. But I would definitely say I'm not beyond ever, you know, saying something randomly insulting on Twitter, or in real life. But I think, Andrea, and this would apply, Paul, to some of the points you made too, that like there is the thing about you're completely right and I agree that, you know, if you want to engage in dialogue with someone and you want them to trust you, you have to build the foundation. And that even in the case where you strongly oppose someone's work for various reasons, that could still be a useful experience, right? There's plenty of stuff, content that I like, where people are dealing with extreme world views and engaging humanistically, right? And they're never not condemning the world view, but they are trying to understand it and approach it. And I think that's valuable, you know, anthropologists and just the human, I think that's valuable. But I do also think, and I think this is the part I'd push back a little bit with you, Paul, as well, is like someone like Jordan Peterson, I feel like you have spent a lot of time with his content and you have, you know, a particular engagement with it, in the perspective, kind of, you know, all the stuff that you've talked about in our conversation. And so the kinds of like rhetorical tactics, like for example, saying that people going to a church to, or going to an art thing to look at a religious painting proves that there's like a fundamental pool of religious iconography. Like to me, that's an obvious over extrapolation because people go to look at all kinds of art, right? Like the lobster form is a thing in the tape modern, and it doesn't mean that that is a, you know, objective object of beauty. People go to see things in museums. So when we are pointing out rhetorical techniques, I think for some people, they regard that as like superficial, or if we're highlighting the kind of thing about framing, like for example, that to do science, you have to be religious because it involves focusing on a higher truth, right? That belief in a capital T truth. To me, that kind of stuff is interesting to highlight the structure of the arguments and where there's logical leaps. I think for other people, they're kind of like, ah, even if I agree with your critique, it's not like, who cares? It's just thinking of it for a way, point. So I think your mileage will vary depending on the people that we cover and your level of familiarity with them, and like what you're getting out of them, right? There are people who, I don't see how you can miss the religious aspect of Jordan Peterson's content, but lots of people seem to, you know, not regard it as particularly relevant, and that's fine. But yeah, so in terms of whether what I do on Twitter matches the podcast or the way to approach it, I think it's just simply the case that people have different interests and tolerances and the things which I critique harshly, I judge them personally. I realize others will not agree, but I judge them as things that deserve to be criticized harshly, and that's why I'm critical of them. So if I'm on Twitter and I'm recently retweeted Jonathan Peugeot's video where he was discussing the number 666, right? And, Andrea, I would suspect that you wouldn't have liked that tweet, right? Because it was... I didn't see it, and I'm pretty glad. I saw that video come up in my feed, and I've actually watched it before, and I really like it. I do, I really like that video. I know you're not against me liking things. Yeah, you can like it. My comment was a sarcastic one highlighting the kind of what I would see as numerology aspects of it, right? No, I know that this is... I know he says that. Yeah, I know he says that, but that's like in the content that we cover, everyone says, I'm not promoting conspiracy theories. I'm not doing this. You might think this is like that, but it's not like that. So I always... Disclaimers are constant. It's what, as Paul said earlier, it's what people do that actually matters, not what they say they're not doing. I thought he said, I know this is numerology, and I'm doing numerology right now. I thought that's what he... I thought he was like, yeah, this is what's happening. I'm doing... Well, then he would agree. He's like, I don't do it very much, is what I thought. I haven't watched it in a while. I was going to re-watch it, but I just haven't yet. But I thought that he said, I know that this is numerology, and I'm not. Yes, I will be doing it. Numerology is typically a disparaging term used for when people are kind of like spotting patterns. Okay, I didn't know that. Well, typically it's also, again, a function of a filter. Okay. Yeah, but I mean, usually people don't describe what they're doing themselves as numerology. It's what other people designate. Whatever word he... Like he's a guest. I'm looking at numbers. Yes, yes, yes. I mean, he is, right? It's six. And he is, and that's fine. Yeah. But so my... I think you would see my tweet as like a... Why do you do that? That's mean. Like why? But from my point of view, that video is an example of like an approach to pattern spotting heuristics, which finds expression not just in like kind of Jonathan's analysis of 666, but also in negative 48 numerology, which is a particular QAnon follower who distorts like numbers or in the Da Vinci code or in any number of other. And you would see those as like separate in depth and complexity, I imagine. In my case, I see them as a continuum of the same heuristic. And so I'm criticizing heuristic, but with a specific example. And it is mean to do it to Jonathan specifically, but I judge from his content that he is quite open about, you know, being critical about specific things that he doesn't agree with, he doesn't like. So he put the content out and I commented on it. That's my kind of view on it. I do not intend it to be like that. Therefore, everyone has to agree in my interpretation or that I expect that he will like my engagement with his content. I know he will not like my engagement with his content. And I kind of like factor that in, but I could approach it in a much more empathetic and nice way. And various people would say that's the better thing to do, Chris. You know, you catch more wasps with honey. Right. Yeah. But my nature is such that this I am the same person in life as I am online and offline. And I'm a kind of argumentative, annoying person. It's it's it is, you know, you can ask about the cohost. It's the way I'm I'm not saying I couldn't be different. I could. I'm not saying there's no way for me not to do that. But it's just like, yeah, I arguing on the Internet and being like sarcastic and stuff are kind of if it turned off a whole lot of people and I felt I was being too cruel, I wouldn't do it. But I don't think that I'm I'm too cruel. But I do listen to feedback. So, you know, but that's the same. That's the same thing. You critiqued the change that you perceive in Twitter with Elon Musk. The critique you had is that since Elon Musk took over, Twitter is more reactive, less productive. And then you're basically doing the same thing. That's what I hear you saying. Now, and you're basically saying you like doing it. So I'm saying, yeah, yeah, yeah. But what I'm saying is like in in the case for me and the way that, you know, online things, I do there's the concept of like the beer pros and stuff. Right. And people that have been involved in Internet to be at some forums and stuff. That's kind of my my personality. Now, if you are the owner of a social media company and you tweak the algorithm to promote like, you know, partisan, polemical content and outreach, be it that's a completely different thing. And it is also like a whole bunch of social media companies have already done that. And we kind of know where it goes. So I don't begrudge people to use social media in the way that they want. You just have to deal, you know, you have to deal with the consequences of whatever way you choose to interact. But the algorithm changes that I think Elon has brought has, you know, it depends how you interact with Twitter. But there's a lot of videos of people being hit by trains or buses, people fighting in CCTV footage and like on the for you tab. And that before was like, you know, prevented from like kind of trending in general tabs. But I think Elon prioritizes that that will get reactions and that it's the same reason you put it on and act that way on Twitter. That's basically what you just told me. No, no. So I think it's a bit different because like what I'm trying to say is like, I don't I think that being harshly critical can provoke, you know, can provoke responses in people. I know that. And that's exactly what reactivity and Twitter is designed to do, provoke responses, because the goal of social media is engagement. But that's the difference because the goal. So if I wanted that, then my your interpretation would be my goal is to get a pageau and to get him to react and to get in the feud. No, no, that's not your goal. No, you're right about that. That's not your goal. Yeah. My goal is to criticize the specific like thing which I see as the like critical, but not not in the sense of like because I want to drive engagement and create a feud. Right. No, I know. But but see, I hear two things. One of the things is I would say we don't have enough time to get into this, but you're essentially trying to fight a religious war or a spiritual war because it's a it's a it's basically a culture war that you're engaging in. And, you know, you've got ideas of sides and that's absolutely normal. We sort of binary the world. Good, bad. And from there that I wouldn't say binary because like the model is that the thing that I don't have is that everyone's perspective is equally valid. Like it's equally fine to say Russia is being no, no, no. Right. You have a moral universe that you're engaging in and you're trying to push the moral universe more towards the good and resist the evil. That's what you're doing. I get that. I don't deny that. But I guess the bit that I'm trying to just check that if you deny is like there is a reality, right? Like that in events like Russia and that kind of thing. So there are people that think Ukraine is the aggressor and that there it's a denazification pros. OK, yeah. Yeah. So I'm a moral realist. Now, whether I can touch with all the more reality, that's another question, whether I'm right on it. That's another question. But I'm a moral realist. And so what you're saying is, yeah, on one hand, what you're trying to do is push, you know, push towards the correct, towards the good by by being and you're an argumentative person. So you're taking your argumentative nature and your moral orientation and you're going to Twitter and you are doing that. Yeah, yeah, yeah. Yeah, yeah. And your your critique of Twitter since Moscow, I personally haven't noticed much of any difference, but we all experience it depending because it's a social media platform. I'm not going to argue that one way or another. It depends on nature. But it's sort of like there's this area of town that's really nice and it's very quiet and the streets seem to be OK. That would say, let's say, Twitter under an ideal situation. And then there's Twitter where, you know, sort of the regime, the mayor is just kind of liking to provoke excitement and drama by pitting people together. So that'd be bad Twitter and good pitter. And in either Twitter, you go out and start knife fights. So I don't know how it's a moral value to start a knife fight in a good neighborhood and then blame the bad mayor for having a knife fight environment. So that would be in the case of like you what you can do. I think that would make it clear is that you and I would agree that like the targeting of the dead parents, the children, the parents of dead children is something that can be criticized harshly in a knife fight way. And it isn't the same as somebody else going out in a knife fight way to advocate that we should target the parents. I would argue that if I want to get someone to stop doing something bad. Well, I'm not a pacifist, so I do believe in police and military, et cetera, et cetera. But in terms of personal engagement, generally speaking, if I want to actually get in touch with the person, I would rather have some moral transformation than which person it depends on the person. And I'm not about to try to build a relationship with Alex Jones. It's not going to happen. Right. And so the my target is not pageau. If I I'm not trying to necessarily transfer attacking the spirit of numerology that's out there in the culture, the practice, I would say. But yes, the spirit, if you prefer. But yes, they like a potentially generally not that harmful thing, but overall, I think something which like isn't a great heuristic to follow. So, yeah. But I think I do take the point, Paul, that the like there is an approach which is more in line with the kind of thing that you're emphasizing them on, which I think Andrea responds to. And I think there's good psychology research about, you know, on an individual level that you will convince more people by being a lot more empathetic and considerate to their worldview. Like if that's what you want to achieve, that might be the more effective way to do it. Right. Like for everyone to be more like a social worker than like, you know, getting a harsh critique is never enjoyable. Right. But I would say that there is enough variation in the world and in my inbox that the kind of way that I critique people is not entirely ineffective at reaching people and maybe is part of the, you know, the kind of tapestry that exists for critical content. But I do realize it will alienate a bunch of people who don't respond well to that kind of thing. So it definitely is true that, you know, strategically, I think you would want to be nicer than I am if your goal was to, you know, convert as many people as possible to your worldview. Well, and I would also argue that, let's say the way I use Twitter, if more people use Twitter the way I use Twitter, and maybe the way Andrea uses Twitter, Twitter would be a nicer street. And it could be a more productive street for people to make friends, find interesting ideas, have productive conversations. So I'd agree. But I would also think that there would be there would be less direct criticism of people like Alex Jones and that. And so there's a trade off. And I would argue that Alex Jones is basically feeding off this. You know, what would motivate Alex Jones to go after potentially, you know, in one of the I mean, you know, by going, I mean, Kanye does the same game, a lot of people play the same game, go after the most I mean, spit on the Amish, you know, kill their horses. I mean, you want to be popular, you know, go kill a bunch of Amish horses, and suddenly, you're going to be lit up in social media. And it's a part of the problem. I don't want to kill the Amish horses. And I don't like the current trend for, you know, like outreach, tick tock people or that kind of thing. But I will say, Paul, that there's a podcast specifically dedicated to Alex Jones is called Knowledge Fight. They do three episodes a week, about two hours each episode, dissecting his content. They're incredibly critical that follow them for, I think, the better part of six years. And their fans are obviously also very critical. They know in great detail, all of the things that he's promoted is much worse than just Sandy Hook. I will listen to their podcast in detail, they helped out by providing the defense the council with information during the trial. Now I say all this because Alex Jones has never mentioned that podcast. He mentions MSNBC, he mentions, you know, any politician that he can get information from, but he has a very dedicated podcast that critically dissects his content. And he's never once raised it on the show or because it does work. And it has effects. And they are interviewed and kind of profile dissecting Alex Jones. And if you were right, then- I'm not saying there's no place for hard lines. But an example like that is someone who is basically taking their time. And it's not just drive-by shootings of Alex Jones and all of the baddies on Twitter. I'm saying that kind of dynamic, I can understand value. There's an ecology of social reputation. I get that. And I'm just saying it's not the game I choose to play. Yeah. So I guess in my, the comparison I make is that, although I respect that you don't see the same value in it, but I would say that what we do on the podcast is essentially the same as what the people are doing in the knowledge fight case. And so when I'm commenting on Twitter, I'm doing it with the knowledge that there's a big, there are multiple Rs. I know the people's content that I comment on and it isn't the case. Like the, the, the Jonathan Pajol numerology thing I will cover in the podcast with clips to comparable material to, to highlight what I mean. Now you can disagree with it, but that's- But how much Pajol are you dealing with compared to these people that are really holding Alex Jones feet to the fire? Because the quality of the critique, if it's going to be persuasive with people who are susceptible to what you're trying to keep them from, is really going to matter because someone who's neck deep into Pajol's work, if they just sort of see a drive-by shooting, they're going to say, but these people who are holding Alex Jones's feet to the fire, they've earned their credibility by patient focus. That's a different game. But they also in, in many occasions, and that would be the point to me is like, I, I, I would say that obviously we're not like a podcast dedicated to the Jonathan Pajol's content. We cover like a broad range of people, but I, I think that in the same way that the vast majority of devoted fans of Alex Jones will never engage with critical commentary. They will never come across it. And in many respects, their worldview are such that, you know, Alex Jones might not in any way be the source of it, just an expression of views that they hold for other reasons. And I would say with, with Jonathan Pajol, and I'm not, I'm not saying he's the exact same as Alex Jones. I just mean in the dynamics of fans, there are people that are strongly devoted to him or that he's an output of the worldview and they won't like, and they wouldn't engage with the critical commentary that we would have. They would also see the numerology thing as like, well, it's not the same. The parallels that you're drawing are, you know, they're superficial and not there, but I'm not expecting to convert people. I'm making a critical commentary and then people can, that can encounter it, can encounter it and can judge the validity for themselves. And I'm fine with that. I would, I would also argue that a big part of Alex Jones's power comes from reactivity. Yes, I'd agree. And in some ways, it's sort of like fighting a flood with water. I'm going to be reactive back to Alex Jones. And you set up sort of this, this dynamic and, and you know who Ren Girard is? No. Okay. He might be interesting for so you, he talked, he wrote a lot about sources of, basically sources of desire. And, and he talked about basically we borrow desires from each other and talked about mimetic rivalry. And what happens is someone who is always fighting Alex Jones eventually becomes a lot like Alex Jones. Oh, staring into the abyss almost. Yeah, because you, off you go, you feed off each other. And I see this, you look at an unhappy couple, all they do, they're just feeding off each other. At some point it's like, you two can play that game all the way to the grave. And you're going to waste your life. I completely agree that that can happen. And I think there's various commentary, like critical commentary on dedicated to people, which, which is off that form that you're talking about that, like, they hate the people, but they're kind of like attached to them. Right. And so I'm not saying that inherently, like, and also the dynamics that, you know, you can have like the one side criticizing and then the, the, like, just a kind of feedback loop. That's completely true that that dynamic exists. But I, I guess my, my counterpoint, Paul, is that there, that isn't everything. And that isn't what all criticism equates to. Nope, absolutely not. I agree. So those dynamics are in play and definitely impact things. But like, give another example, the hosts of that show, Knowledge Fight, they tend to be critical of when people release the, you know, the edited videos of Alex Jones doing crazy stuff because he likes the attention. Right. And they're critical of that. No, that, that dynamic is definitely real and applies. And, and I think, but I, but I, I think there are ways that you can approach content and be mindful of those kinds of things and be mindful of the audience that you're cultivating and what you're, you're doing. And like, if you notice, for example, that your audience is becoming very polemical and targeted at people, there's ways to kind of push back against that. Right. And show them, look, there are people on your side that behave in this way too. So like empathy is bad and you won't be able to control them all. And I, I agree with those values. So I'm not arguing for just condemn the evil people and like destroy them. That's, that's not my position, which is probably why I'm like, you know, kind of going back and forth a bit, but it's, my position is that that there is another version, which sounds like what you're saying, which essentially takes a relativistic view of, well, everybody's doing everything and it, you know, like all sides are engaging in demonization and therefore it's all a matter of perspective. And since you're a moral realist, you, somebody that believes that I imagine an external reality, you don't think that, that it's all just perspective. And I don't think that. So I think there are things that, you know, you, you can push back on and you should be careful. And I don't claim that I do it perfectly, but I, I would say that our podcast is in that vein and my Twitter use is less considerate, but it is in line with my personality and how I use the internet in, in general. And I, you know, you have to be responsible for that and you have to like, uh, uh, you, you justify it in whatever way, whatever way you interact online, but I don't anticipate that everybody will consider the same lines in a way that they, you know, criticize things or respond positively. I don't think I would catch Andrea in the, the, the way that I, you know, critique things, but I also think, Andrea, that you are somebody that gets a lot of value out of the kind of approach that Peugeot and stuff offer. And there's nothing wrong with that, right? Like just different, different horses for different courses. And yeah, they, I'm talking to you right now. We're, we're doing it. I gotta, I gotta go. I gotta go. Yeah. Late here. So anyway, wrapping it up. So you don't think you're a troll, Chris, you think you're just in the critic space? I think, yeah, I, I think like there's James Lindsay. Uh, I don't, that's a troll to me. There's Jordan Peterson's behavior on Twitter. That's, that's trollish to me. And I, I think I can be harsh and, and sarcastic and maybe at times cruel, but I'm, I'm not like, uh, it is not the, the kind of polemical reactionary outpouring. I'm, I'm pretty selective in what I criticize very harshly. Um, so yeah. And, uh, yeah, that, that, that would be the general thing. And, and I don't think that everybody on the opposing side is like a, an, an evil demon, just a bad guy, or that the sides are just like a black and white, there's tons of gray, there's kind of mixed things. So yeah, that, that would be the general thing, but probably everyone that's a troll doesn't think that they're a troll. So they have to factor that in. But that's it. But I, I think Adri, if you went to Northern Ireland, you'd meet a lot more people like me. I think so too. Well, thank you for talking. Thank you, Paul, for hosting this. I actually really enjoyed most of it. Yeah, you, you, Adri, you had the option to add the nice. I know. I just had to, I couldn't not ask those things. That's a good, I think it's, it's good to discuss them, but I've just, I'm just highlighting, you know, the, I know I did it to myself. I don't know why. Yeah. Glutton for punishment. Paul. Nice to meet you, Chris. Nice to meet you, Paul. Uh, and, uh, have a good evening. I'm sorry for taking up so much of it, but I do appreciate the chat. I could, I could shut it down at any time and I didn't. So we're all fine. Okay. Have a good eat. Have a good day. Yeah, you do. All right. Bye bye. Bye.