https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=HujAcJ-OF5M

 Hi, this is Paul and I'm continuing my Jordan Peterson project. Someone asked me when I posted some things from another class that I did, well these don't really pertain to Jordan Peterson. I'm not going to promise that everything I do on my channel pertains to Jordan Peterson. I'm working on Peterson now because he interests me and I think he's helping me work through a lot of things and these videos that I do about Jordan Peterson are basically my process of working through his stuff. I went back and looked over some blogs and some other things and I think I started in on Peterson last June so I haven't been working on him a year now and when I find someone or something that interests me like this I usually stay with it for a while until I think I pretty much exhaust it or find what I'm looking for. So today I want to talk about how Jordan Peterson undermines the subtraction story and leaves room for God. I'm a pastor and so I'm always thinking about this stuff and the big question that I hear people asking is why is everyone paying so much attention to Jordan Peterson? Why are so many people after watching all of Jordan Peterson's videos more interested in God and or Christianity and or the Bible than they were before? And this has been a big question of mine. I want to know why. I want to understand how this is working in the culture and how this is working in our minds and so I'll get into, as I have in a number of my past videos, I'll get into questions of the mind, questions of being, questions of reality. Now when I talk about the subtraction story, this is Weber, there's a Canadian philosopher named Charles Taylor. That's his face over on the other book and this philosopher wrote a very large book called And he tried in this book to walk through the narrative of what happened between 1500 and 2000 to our culture in the West. Why in 1500 everyone believed in God. God was, in Taylor's words, axiomatic. And why in 2000 belief in God is problematic. And he says most of the time this transition is told via a subtraction story. And in this video I'll tell the subtraction story and then I'll explain how I think Jordan Peterson's work is undermining the subtraction story. And because he's undermining the subtraction story, this is leaving room for God. Now you can read Charles Taylor's huge book, A Secular Age. James K. Smith, who's a Canadian philosopher who teaches at Calvin College, which is the college of my denomination, he has been making a little cottage industry of making James Taylor, James Taylor, making Charles Taylor accessible. And so he's got a small book, How to Not Be Secular, and James K. Smith actually has a number of other books where he talks about contemporary liturgies. And it would be a fun conversation to hear James K. Smith talk to Jordan Peterson. I mean we all, in the words of my teenage daughters, we're always shipping people, which means we want to put people together. And so I'd love to see Jordan Peterson have a conversation with James K. Smith. I think that could be a really cool conversation. But the subtraction story basically goes like this. In the beginning people believed in the supernatural because maybe they didn't know anybody. Because they didn't have science. Or they were afraid of the big bad world. This is kind of a psychoanalytic reason. This would be a reason like Freud might say, well it's our fears or it's certain things going on deep inside our minds that made us believe like we were afraid of the big bad world so we created stories to make us feel better. And so basically if you look at the landscape, the ancient peoples believed that they were creatures in the water or gods in the water or spirits in the water and spirits in the forest and spirits in the trees and spirits in the mountains and spirits in the sky. And you can see this represented here with the story of Nut and Geb. This is obviously an Egyptian picture of the cosmos and you'll see the ground below and you'll see the firmament above and you see the sun and the moon. And all of this is populated by spirits and by beings. And we might imagine that in the ancient world that people just projected all of these gods onto the world. And you see this then they use mythology to explain the world. But these are just superstitions and stories. So here you have Marduk fighting Tiamat and then you have this in, this is pretty much worldwide, you have this in Mesoamerica where they had human sacrifice and they would take out the hearts. And then once we have this idea that the gods were up there and we in a sense enchanted or personified or mythologized the universe and then through magic and religion we attempt to interact that. And this is someone's idea of how the Nut and Geb representation connects with the Great Pyramid and of course you can see, you know, Freud would love this one. So this is what religion is but then, you know, along comes science. And we know science is better because here's a doctor during the Black Death and he's wearing that beak which is full of herbs and things and that's supposed to protect him but you know what he really needed was an exterminator to get rid of the rats that would get rid of the fleas that would stop the plague. And basically so there's a subtraction theory that once we disenchant the world we now take control of the world because we now through science can take hold of what's really happening, what's really beneath all of this which is materiality and chemistry and biology and physics. And Yuval Harari in his book Homo Deus, you know, puts this very succinctly that, you know, we had three great, we had three great enemies. We had plague and war and famine and now via our ability to, you know, via science to control the material world for the first time in history more people die today from eating too much than from eating too little. More people die today from old age than from infectious disease and more people commit suicide than are killed by soldiers, terrorists and criminals combined. In the early 21st century the average human being is far more likely to die from binging at McDonald's than from drought, Ebola or an Al-Qaeda attack. And so therefore science, see now this communicates to us and we're going to get into a little bit what I call my Jungian great cloud of witnesses, this communicates to the watchers that are inside our head, ah yeah, gods are obsolete and dumb and we're done with them and now we have science and so now we know the world. Now Peterson steps into this and he says, and I think again one of his best interviews is this 2015 transliminal interview and he says, yeah but being isn't as simple as that. There's certainly the material or the physical layer that's obviously one of the key and integral layers of reality but there's also the, then in that video he called it the dominance hierarchy and since then he's revisited it and we'll call it the competence hierarchy or the authority hierarchy and that's something. You cannot be a human being and not be dealing with that and then there's also the subjective or the phenomenological layer and so Peterson says, you know, there are three layers to this and what he says that Harris and Dawkins are in a sense Newtonian and they're Newtonian because they imagine that we have direct access to objects and Peterson is in fact going to undermine this because he says, you know, the truth is and he goes through this in his maps of meaning and his personalities, he says, you know, we don't see objects, we see tools. And I remember when I first heard this from Peterson I thought, he's right. This is exactly right because when, for example, for those of you who, you know, you should but my office is a mess. I don't know if that makes me unsorted but my office is a mess but when I walk in my office even though it's very chaotic, full of all kinds of random things, if something is different I see it immediately. Why? Because we see tools and so Peterson has the illustration of the people passing around the basketball and the guy in the ape suit who comes in the middle and we don't see this guy. Well, why don't we see this guy? Because we see tools and this also deeply impacts how we treat other human beings and often if you go back over my sermon archive you'll see that I often make the point that part of the, one of the real big decisions we have in this world are we going to love people or are we going to use people? And here's the crazy thing about human being, we all want to be loved and we all hate to be used but it's so completely natural to us that we see tools, we don't see objects or at least first and then Peterson says that hierarchies, dominance, authority, not dominance, authority, competency, various hierarchies are always in play and this accounts in a sense for the evolution of religions and in fact accounts for the continuation of religions and so I wanted to play a little bit from his maps of meaning course here and I remember the first time I listened to this I was at home and I was doing the dishes where I, you know, listened to a lot of things, I'm driving or doing the dishes and I just had to stop because the truth of what he was saying just grabbed onto me and I began to see, oh my goodness, he's right about this so let's play a little bit of this about cars. They have this concept called alienation and the idea was that human beings become alienated from their creative products and here's why it happens, so imagine Henry Ford makes the assembly line, right, so Ford has no idea what's going to happen when he makes the assembly line. One thing I noticed when I was at the live Peterson event, the simulation event in San Francisco, he does have this practice of speaking to individuals one at a time and he's talked about this before in fact, that this for him is a, I won't go into it too deeply but it gives you a little bit of insight into his psyche and who he is that he does practice this and as someone who does public speaking regularly it's very interesting. The assembly line absolutely transformed the entire planet, right, because it brought in the era of mass cheap manufacturing, it's like it just, it was way more than he thought it was and then did he make a car? Well a car is something that hypothetically takes you relatively effectively from point A to point B, it was really a replacement for the horse and buggy, I mean the first cars looked like that, they were horseless carriages, did he make a car? Well God, it's hard to tell what Henry Ford made, he made a very effective way for transforming the atmosphere, right, and the fact that it also happened to take you from point A to point B might be just completely irrelevant compared to the fact that it was the internal combustion engine and its rapid distribution completely changed the constituent, the fundamental chemical structure of the atmosphere itself, it completely transformed cities, it blew out the rural community, everyone moved to the cities, right, it made all the cities built around the automobile, but then it had this tremendous political and economic significance too, so I mean part of the reason that, because you think well a car is a way to get from point A to point B, but no no, it's not a machine, it's also the embodiment of an idea, and it's a very strange idea, a collectivist society would have never invented the car, because the car is predicated on the idea that you could own a conveyance that would get only you and only you from somewhere to somewhere else without ever asking anybody for any permission, and so the funny thing is, is when you build something like that, those presuppositions are built into it, and then when you export that, say to Soviet Russia, you don't get to, they can't just take the car and leave the political implications behind. The car, the mere fact that you step into one and drive it, is an indication that you're accepting the political, ideological presuppositions that are part of the fact that that thing even exists. And if you listen to this, you can understand why he made such a big deal about the pronouns, because if in a sense the West, that the car into the Soviet Union was the camel's nose for the destruction of the Soviet Union, well, the use of these, in his words, made up pronouns is the camel's nose into the destruction of our society. So, well, that's alienation, it's like, even something you make, you think, well, you have control over what you make, because you've made it, you understand it, it's like, no, you don't, you understand a tiny fraction of it, you launch it out in the world, man, the snakes inside of it, the hydras inside of it, multiply their heads massively, constantly, and you can't really keep track of it. And you see, with this in a sense, he completely undermines the subtraction story, in that, and why he calls Harris and Darwin Newtonians, is because they imagine the world is simple, they imagine that what we're doing is making a car in order to get rid of the problem of horse waste in the cities, which was part of why they made the car. And what Peterson says is, there's way, way, way, way, way more going on, we just don't see it. And the reason he says this is Newtonian is because for Newton, well, here's the things in front of us, and we measure, we measure the speed of this ball, we measure how far the ball falls, and we just have access, we have direct access to reality through these sciences, and Peterson is saying, we don't have anything of the kind. We're doing stuff, but then the stuff we're doing, we don't begin to understand the consequences or where all this stuff is taking us. And so, even in your relationship with created entities, you still see the re-emergence of this underlying fundamental substructure, right? Even inside, it's the Garden of Eden, there's always a snake inside the thing that's walled in, always, always, always. Even God himself cannot get rid of the snakes in the garden, and partly what that means is that, you know, the garden is a conceptual system, it's the conceptual system within which people exist, that's Eden is a walled garden. Paradise means walled garden, and it's walled because a walled garden is where people live, because the wall is culture and the garden is nature, and we always live in a structure that's an amalgam of nature and culture. So we set it up so it's paradisal, as long as we're unconscious, but we can't manage it because there's always something chaotic that's coming in that we will interact with. Now, Jordan Peterson is promising to get through the Bible, and if he goes at the pace that he's been going, he's not going to live that long, nobody does. So you begin in the garden, and the story of the Bible actually ends in the New Jerusalem, and in the New Jerusalem, there isn't any sea. Well, and people say, well, why isn't there any sea in the New Jerusalem? I like the sea, the sea is wonderful, the sea is beautiful, we need the sea to survive. You know, you're missing the point that somehow in the story of the Bible, what this work of God results in in the Bible is that chaos is finally, I don't even know the right word to use, but there's no more tears, there's no more crying, there's no more war, there's no more night, there's no more darkness, the city has walls, but the gates are open because there's nothing to fear from the outside. And so, you know, what Peterson is saying is that these Newtonians are simplistic, and they don't actually fully account for what's really going on. And so what he says is that, he actually says this in the Transliminal video, that something isn't true if it's destroying us. Now he'll backtrack on that a little bit in Maps of Meaning 2017, which I will play a little bit later, but, and so he's saying that, you know, that the reductionist materialists can't be right. And well, actually, and this is interesting that in Harari's quote, which I read before, you look at this, and the more people commit suicide than are killed by soldiers, terrorists, and criminals, which leads into the question of, okay, in our elimination of war, we did what to ourselves so that if we're no longer killing each other on the battlefield, and I'm not advocating that, we kill ourselves. Well, what's the connection there? And the problem with the materialist, he says, ha, we've gotten rid of war. And what Peterson is saying is that, well, wait a minute, we are much bigger than that, and you cannot, you cannot, a couple years ago, I've used this slide in my previous stories before, I found, I went to an alligator farm in Florida, and there was a big alligator named Goliath, and so I'd go to this alligator farm, all these alligators just sitting around in these concrete ponds, and they feed them, they just throw them frozen, they just throw them chicken, and they gobble up the chicken, and I said to the guy, well, don't these alligators get bored? He's like, nah, they got tiny little brains, you put them in a pool of warm water, they just breed, and you throw them chicken, and they're happy and dumb. Human beings are not like that. And so therefore, the materialist conception of what we are is insufficient, and that's exactly what Peterson is doing. And one of the best illustrations of this, if you've never read Brave New World, you must read Brave New World, because it is a prophecy, and it is, and it is, it shows us how we are, and, and, well, it's, if you've never read Brave New World, you simply must read it. One of the commenters, I won't, I won't divulge his name because I didn't get his permission to do so, this actually wasn't a comment, this was a message to me, and I was wrestling at that point with the Newtonian, Darwinian thing, and he explained it to me, and for me, you know, people are like, well, why are you doing these videos on Jordan Peterson? And I'm doing these videos on Jordan Peterson to learn, and actually the comments I get from you all who are watching the videos are a big part of my education, and a little bit later I have a book I started reading, because someone put that book in the comments section, but this very perceptive watcher of my videos said this, when he brings up Darwinian, Newtonians versus Darwinians, it is in regard to what the true, what is the true form of the natural world. I think of it like two poles, Newtonians say that matter is ultimate, Darwinians say that the observer is ultimate, and if you read, if you go back in my videos, and you read that, that section that I've read in about three videos from the Metaphysical Club, where, finchness is the variable there, what a tremendous insight that that happens because of Darwin's revolution. So something is more true for a Darwinian in the pragmatic sense that helps the observer survive, whereas the Newtonian says the world is the source of truth, whether or not the observer is there, it doesn't matter. I think of Newtonian coming from the top, absolute matter, Darwinian being pragmatism coming from the very bottom. The conscious observer, Peterson's rational perspective of religion fits in with the Darwinian because whether or not it is ultimately mechanically true doesn't matter, you know, Peterson says this all the time, if it's true enough for the conscious observer and it works, and that's his case, and that's his case that it is true in the ultimate Darwinian sense. It works across lives and across all times, whether no one is there to observe it from a physics Newtonian standpoint is irrelevant to him. The distinction only matters for the naturalist, but it's reason, but it's reason his, but it's his reason it's true from the naturalist perspective if you can view it as Darwinian truth. And so in a sense, Peterson says here you have the materialist and they're looking at object and so they're inventing the car and the car, well the car gets us from point A to point B. This is Newtonian and it almost imagines that human beings are like gators in a gator farm. Give us some warm water, give us some chicken, give us the lady gators and off we go. This is all we need. And Peterson comes along and says no way, that's, you can't talk that way, that simply doesn't true, that story governs stuff. And in fact in our life story governs stuff. We see tools, we don't see objects. And so, and we have hierarchies, there's my little ladder with the people climbing on it. And so, you know, this is being and so this in a sense the yellow box is the Darwinian view where, you know, we have to limit what, you know, this limits what we have and this is why Peterson is an agnostic with respect to ontology and metaphysics. Now in the conversation he had with Ben Shapiro and Dave Rubin where he says, you know, metaphysics meets, he had that same conversation with Coffin, the Roman Catholic guy in that video. You know, he's talking about metaphysics meeting and it's like, okay, well now we're getting into the Logos and the Gospel of John and the Word becoming flesh. Peterson is finally an agnostic in my read of him because he can't say, every time you ask him about the resurrection which is in very much where metaphysics and materiality meet, he can't answer that. Well, why can't he answer that? He can't answer that because of his box of epistemological Darwinianism that is keeping him in. But now a materialist may jump in and say, aha, but here's the thing, your story depends on brains and well Jordan Peterson, you might be smart and you might see that story, our story world and our brain worlds co-evolve at the same time but you get rid of the brain and you get rid of the story and so in the final analysis which is in a sense what William Craig's point was, what C.S. Lewis's point is and especially in his, you can find it on C.S. Lewis Doodle's Life in an Atomic Age, science isn't telling us, doesn't give us any hope beyond the cold death of the universe that no brain, no story which is where supernaturalists come in and now again nature and super nature, these are far later categories than we have in the ancient world but they're in many ways implicit in many of the stories and ancient peoples understood the difference between natural and supernatural and whether or not you believe in the virgin birth, even the story of the virgin birth bears witness to and C.S. Lewis makes this point again and again, the story of the virgin birth wears witness to the fact that all the ancients understood that babies follow sex and so if you have a story of a woman having, being pregnant without sex, everybody understands what a miracle is. It isn't the case that in the ancient world people just saw miracles all over the place, no, they understood what miracles were which is why they paid attention to them and why they wrote about them and why, you know, why their stories were the way they were and so now I'm going to get into, going to continue to getting into C.S. Lewis' book on miracles but I want to play some of what is Maps of Meaning 12, the finale where he talks about the divine individual and I've made comments before, I would probably edit that language a little bit but let's take a look at this conclusion. Thank you, Tom Kass, let's try this again. Now watch his hands, what's he doing with his hands? He's doing what we all do with his hands, he's putting it together but he, like the rest of us, is an embodied creature so we're putting it together and... ...and I thought, okay, well that's where the overlap is and the fundamental story is something like, it's very straightforward, it's also the frame that you inhabit when you conceptualize the world and narrow and simplify the world which you have to do because it's so complex because you have this infinite number of facts that are laying around you and so what are you doing? Well, you're a mobile creature, a living creature, not a static information processor and you're targeted, you're a targeted creature and otherwise you wouldn't move. So you've got an infinite number of facts, the world is, you know, it's not technically infinite, you know, close enough to infinite in terms of overwhelm us and so we can't process all these so how do we do it? It's desire that orients us and we're a targeting creature. Right? To move is to be a targeted creature because you have to move towards something or away from something so the targeting is built right into the fact that you're a mobile creature and then you might say, well what do you target? And the answer to that is, well you target, you target, you could say you target what you aim for but then you could say, well you aim for what you want, you target your desires and then that leads you into a discussion of the underlying neurobiology essentially, you bring to the table a set of inbuilt desires and the targets that you pick have to address the fact that those desires exist and the desires are actually grounded in necessity and this is, this is a sidebar but this is where I think Piaget's theory is weaker than it should be because Piaget, and you know I'm a great admirer of Piaget, believed that the human infant came into the world with a fairly primordial set of reflexes, mostly sensorimotor reflexes and then bootstrapped him or herself up on the basis of those reflexes in the sociological, in the social surround. And remember, again according to Peterson, one of Piaget's big motivations, he's trying to fit together religion and science, he's trying to put this together and you say, well how does this fit into the question of religion and science? It's a constructivist viewpoint, the child comes in with a few basic elements that can elements of exploration and memory essentially and then it builds itself as a consequence of its exploration in the social community. Now I think that's true except that it's too empty because what it fails to take into consideration is the fact that, and I think this is an observation in some sense philosophically that was first made by Immanuel Kant when he criticized pure reason, is that you can't come into the world structureless, you have to come into the world with an inbuilt structure and then it's the interaction of that structure with the world that provides the information that you can use to build yourself. But the structure has to be there and I would say that's the same mythologically speaking as the idea that the great father is always there, right, there's the great mother is always there, that's chaos itself, the great father is always there, that's order, that's the interpretive structure that you use to interact with the chaos and then of course the individual is always there. Now what's important here is not necessarily how he pieces it together, I've had some conversation with Fulton Brown, what's her first name, I don't remember, but you know she's got some interesting critiques of him in terms of mother, father and the masculinity, femininity stuff but what's interesting here is that the assertion, this assertion undermines the subtraction story because the subtraction story basically reduces us evolutionarily to, well we're these frightening creatures so we make up stories and Peter says why are we making up stories and are those stories simply random and in fact Peterson would say that we are built, you know you're getting into my Calvinism, my John Calvin census divinitatis that Alvin Plantinga will bring in all the time, that in fact could it be that we are in fact built for this story making, that when we see into the sky we are built to see things in a certain way, we are built to see things in the water and in the trees and in the ground, that we are built for this and why would we be built for this? Well now we're asking questions that science can't answer, science might be able to say well we sure seemed that we were built for this, now we're bumping up against the cosmological argument, now we're scratching our head about the fine tuning of the universe, why is it we are built this way and why, is religion just a spandrel, just this excess thing that develops or is this actually foundationally part of what it seems, if we can say we were made for something it seems to be we were made for this, well once you say made for something you are in fact implying and via implication and under the cover asserting that there is an author to this story and that this story is not simply random. At the same time Piaget in some sense re-told that story except he didn't, he didn't say that, given of credence to the fact that the infant comes into the world far more fully formed than his theory presumes. Now the problem with that is that without that additional underlying set of let's call them neurobiological constraints the interpretation universe gets too large, you need constraints to narrow the domain of phenomena that you're contending with and it's in the analysis of the constraints that the answer to how do you stop drowning in an infinite number of potential interpretations emerges. The interpretations are subject to constraints and that's also the way out of the moral relativist paradox as far as I can tell now one of the things I really liked about Piaget was that he described some of the constraints, one of the constraints was well if I'm going to exist in a social world and I'm going to because I won't exist at all if I don't exist in a social world then there are constraints on the way that I have to interact with other people and Piaget's essential point was I have to organize myself to play a joint game with you but the joint game has constraints and one of them is you have to want to play because you have other options and then there are other constraints. You and I have to be able to play in a way that other people don't object to or maybe even that you and I have to play in a way that other people will support and then you can imagine another constraint which is you and I have to play a game in a way that other people would support that will last more than the moment so it has to work today and tomorrow and next week it has to work across the span of times it has to work not only for you and I but it has to work for our future selves and so the damn constraints are starting to pile up that's just on the socio-cultural side that's on the constructionist side only but there's the biological constraints are equally important because not only does the game that you and I have to play have to satisfy those emergent socio-logical constraints but the game also has to be organized so that the internal polity that's composed of let's call them the fundamental motivational and emotional systems that constitute us they have to all find satisfaction because otherwise the system grounds to a halt and so this seems to me to be the beginnings of an answer to the postmodern conundrum it's like okay any set of facts is amenable to an infinite number of interpretations fine got it that makes deriving an is from an ought a very difficult endeavor right no problem all right but that doesn't mean that any old solution will work why well first of all it's merely because we introduced work into the conversation to begin with the interpretation has to be functional and again that's what it seems that's what seems to tie it back to the story this is also what got me interested in pragmatism technically speaking and so because if if your conundrum is here you are and there you have to be and and how to get there then one of the constraints on the manner in which you interpret the world is when you apply your interpretation do you end up moving from the point you're at to the point you want to be and if the answer to that is no then the solution is insufficient now you could call the solution untrue but I it's dangerous to to this is where he kind of backtracks on what he said in Transilamental 2015 to introduce the truth falsity dilemma because because it isn't its functionality more its functionality more than truth although I think you could say that in the final analysis truth is integrally linked to function but and and part of what makes Peterson such a compelling preacher and I use that word intentionally is you can see when he's doing this lecture this is his life this is what he cares about I'm not going to touch that question for the time being the point is is that your interpretation of the world carries within it implicitly a theory about its own validity your interpretation of the world carries within it a theory of its own validity and I've been trying okay my union cloud of witnesses has been watching Peterson and and and they're all processing through his stuff and and and this point where he deals with Piaget I've been I haven't been able to to fully capture this and bring it into my conscious mind so I can articulate it and give you all a representation for it but I think right here is in a sense where it he makes what is what is kind of like the ontological argument for the existence of God I think this I think his view of the world you know really devastates the subtraction story and and exposes the subtraction story to being to being horribly naive and horribly unfair to our ancestors and and when you hear about C.S. Lewis's chronological snobbery and a great many other a great many other brilliant scholars who know the ancient world when they look at the subtraction story and they look at what humanity has done over the years they say this is these are these are brats thumbing their nose at at at at better wiser civilizations this is this is the kind of dismissal that that children do because they don't know any better and and Peterson makes the point here that well it's it's got to work you know the Piaget point in terms of the game it's got to work now and it's got to work for me and for you and it's got to work for future me and it's got to work and it had to work for past me and and this is all built into us and and when we see this we begin to say this can't just be random and certainly it isn't random and evolutionarily you can look at this and say okay evolution has been paring down the the pieces that don't work and now we get a little bit into Brett Weinstein and Jordan Peterson and Joe Rogan's conversation about porcupines and and what Weinstein talked about romantic truth but it's way more than that and and so this Piaget understanding of the games now now where does that go in terms of in terms of the rest of our world get back into the PowerPoint see and when I hear Peterson say this I see CS Lewis's argument from desire and this argument is put quite succinctly in Alan Jacob's book the Narnian you can find it in mere Christianity you can find it in in any other philosophical books that that start from CS Lewis and CS Lewis makes this point Lewis Lewis would use this argument repeatedly Lewis actually gets this argument from Tolkien okay Tolkien who wrote Lord of the Rings Lewis uses this argument repeatedly for the rest of his life as he would write years later do what they will we remain conscious of a desire which no natural happiness can satisfy but is there any reason to suppose that reality offers any satisfaction to it nor does the being hunger no does nor does the being nor does the being hungry prove that we have bread but I think that but I think it may be urged that this misses the point a man's physical hunger does not prove that man will get any bread he may die of starvation on a raft in the Atlantic but surely a man's hunger does prove that he comes from a race which repores its body by eating and inhabits a world where eatable substances exist. Augustine said you know to God in his confessions and again if you're looking for one of the most brilliant men in all of human history you've got to put Augustine in that list Augustine and he's got plenty of his own weirdnesses too trust me on this but Augustine you know we are we are Augustine says to God we are made for you well here's the thing that yeah okay we've got unlimited interpretations but this these limitations that come in seem to imply we are made for something now we might say well we are we are made and shaped for survival but the problem of Goliath the alligator in the in the park in Florida cries out to the materialist and says we are not made for nothing and you cannot actually satisfy a human being by giving him warm pools of water and chicken and lady alligators to to to fix him we are made for something else and Lewis says we are made for another world that this world can't satisfy so that in fact if you put human beings Dostoevsky sees this point Huxley sees this point Peterson sees this point if you give a human being everything they need or they think they need materially physically they will destroy the system themselves why because they know we are made for something else and we are striving for it and we will kill ourselves to get there which makes no sense if all we are are Darwinian creatures so this is where I come to my bigger frame where okay yeah the revenge of the materialist but but we die for things and and for Tolkien well how did Tolkien see this well one of the you know I think we see this partly here's my Jungian great cloud of internal crowd of witnesses they're all the me's watching this and we're watching each other and we know somehow that you know okay give me a winning lottery ticket you know take all constraints off of me in terms of my appetites and desires and what will I'll do well read read a biography of Howard Hughes sometimes and and and look at someone who who has you know very little constraint on him and unlimited resources and just ask yourself if this is the the kind of human being you aspire to be or the kind of life you like to have your your cloud of witnesses knows this and and in fact you know one of the things that I want to get into when I start talking about cultures and knowing is that I you know the reason Peterson will put God in scare quotes is because if you look at this Jungian cloud of witnesses and if you look at our unconscious and even maybe a collective unconscious you could say well well God inhabits somewhere in this system and and things pop up in my mind and I think oh this is the Holy Spirit or this is God or this is the spirits or or this is revelation and and you can you can derive a phenomenologically reasonable argument for that but if God made us for him well if God made us to hear him and to see him he would give us eyes to see and ears to hear and when Jesus says he who has ears to hear let him hear Jesus isn't talking about these things what's he talking about well God has given us and again this is where Alvin Plantinga goes in his census divinitatis God has made us to know him well how well he's given us the stuff and he's get he's made us to know truth well how well that's kind of where we're gonna go with CS Lewis and his book miracles well how do we know the truth well how can we know the truth because the real challenge here which which Lewis he said Alvin Plantinga makes essentially the same argument as Lewis but Alvin Plantinga makes it as a technical philosopher within philosophy and most of us aren't philosophers so we're better off reading Lewis because Lewis will make the argument so much better for a layman to figure out because Lewis is just such a great writer and and and we are we are we are made for this we are it is built into us to see God now now this because we are not perfect at this we are children at this but we are made to see God that is why religion develops because this is what we're built for and and you could argue that you know in Peterson's terms we're acting it out and and in a sense Lewis would say that in some ways all of these past mythologies and religions are do they go off the road yeah but you know we I got to deal with my you know with antithetical Calvinists too in this but but Lewis would say they're these are good dreams boy that sounds pretty Jungian doesn't it these are good dreams these are good stories these are these are us acting at it but it's our fallen selves acting at it and this is where I think you know Freud could be brought back into the situation reasonably I should tag Bolverism I just rewatched that video this morning of the CS Lewis Doodle on Bolverism you know why do we go off the rail when we go off the rail for all kinds of reasons why do churches screw up why do churches abuse people why do why do religious people use religious as an excuse to do the horrible things that human beings always do for each other well because religion is a handy excuse but that doesn't that doesn't destroy the validity of religion just like we use our hands to do harm to each other that doesn't destroy the validity of hands it just speaks to what it is inside of us that is acting and this is exactly where we're getting at the question of I don't personally like the term free will I like real agency because our wills are not free our wills are constrained by all kinds of things but we are real agents and this gets into the question of agency is our agency fully compromised by our psychology by our biology now now I come from a tradition that says we have a human nature I am not a social constructivist that says our human nature is simply a social construction no it's built into our biology but I would say that not only is our behavior built into our biology but our our longing to look for God is also built into our biology and why is Jordan Peterson helpful because poor Jordan Peterson for me is helping me connect some dots or at least suggesting that these dots can be connected that in fact what Augustine said is that we are made for him and if we figure that out maybe we can figure out where on earth this this idea how the story in the Old Testament that has you know the Old Testament is a very secular book and that you know everything is kind of within the box but then in the intertestamental period and and in Daniel we get into this idea of resurrection that that the box will be broken and this comes then when you have the resurrection of Jesus what happens in there is that read NT Wright and this and his resurrection of the son of God another big fat book for you to read you know NT Wright will say you know the Jews for the Jews the resurrection of Jesus means that the ultimate resurrection is beginning we're in the last days we're in the end times and and God has begun his work of redeeming and reclaiming and restoring us here yet in history and we're pointing to the end of the story where there will be no more sea and where the gates of the New Jerusalem will be left open all the time we're in that process and we're only seeing hints of it now and and our and our our Jungian cloud of witnesses all the little sub Paul Vanderklaas that are back there watching Jordan Peterson that are you know trying to think real hard to to take in this guy and and when I say well let's move on to something else another one says no you stick with that Jordan Peterson there's something interesting there he's he's getting at something that you need to see so so don't let him go quite yet keep making your little videos keep talking to the other Jordan Peterson fans out there and keep working these problems because we're we're piecing the thing together me and this committee inside my head now I wanted to get into the hobbit because Tolkien well I'll pull up the I'll pull up the audiobook and let the let the narrator read it because he does it so well the courage the courage of quite small people not all tokens war experiences however produced such dark narratives in a letter to WH Auden he explained how the idea for the hobbit the prequel to the Lord of the Rings first came into his mind it happened years after the war after he had become professor of Anglo-Saxon at Oxford University while he was sitting and grading student papers on a blank leaf I scrawled in a hole in the ground there lived a hobbit I did not and do not know why names always generate a story in my mind eventually I thought I'd better find out what hobbits were like now now here it's it's fascinating because you know what what's what's in Tolkien's cloud of witnesses well he's got World War I back there and again this was a this was a book recommendation by someone made a dropped it in the comments that oh you're you're talking about Lewis and Tolkien you should read this book and I've been reading this book and this book has been sensational and but where do the hobbits come from you know Tolkien survived this war and Tolkien watched this war and well what would you say that hobbits aren't real yeah hobbits aren't real not in not in the sense that Tolkien's are but but hobbits are real well depends what you mean as real I'll get back to the storyteller of the book we don't know why Tolkien wrote those enigmatic words but we do know what hobbits are like from his own account the character of the hobbit was a reflection of the ordinary soldier steadfast in his duties while suffering in that dreary hole in the ground the front line trench most of the members of the British Expeditionary Force were citizen soldiers drawn largely from the working classes unlike the French Italian Russian and German armies the BEF did not experience a large-scale collapse in discipline or morale even during the most intensive campaigns along the Western Front they showed a remarkable resilience relative to other armies the change in character that comes over Sam Gamzey was probably not unlike the transformation that Tolkien must have witnessed among many of his fellow soldiers in battle but even as hope died in Sam or seemed to die it was turned to a new strength Sam's plain hobbit face grew stern almost grim as the will hardened in him and he felt through all his limbs a thrill as if he was turning into some creature of stone and steel that neither despair nor weariness nor endless barren miles could subdue if this was the character of the British soldier in the Great War then it explains the admiration of Tolkien and many others over the years as John Keegan concludes in the face of battle the British Expeditionary Force of 1916 was one of the most remarkable and admirable military formations ever to have taken the field in his magisterial work the world crisis Winston Churchill extolled the qualities of the British Army with his usual eloquence unconquerable except by death they set up a monument of native virtue which will command the wonder the reverence and the gratitude of our island people as long as we endure as a nation among men even Sir Philip Gibbs who became severely critical of military leadership confessed his astonishment at the valor of British troops praising the individual courage beyond the normal laws of human nature as I thought I knew them once historians still debate the ultimate achievement of these soldiers and the causes for which they fought were they merely fodder for a vast and merciless military machine that ravaged Europe to no good end or did they play a vital role in halting German aggression and preventing the dominance of a brutal and oppressive juggernaut over the continent now if you watch my video on the Divine Lobster you know this for me personally is where it all comes down why am I a Christian why do I believe this stuff because I have you know I grew up in Patterson and I worked in the Dominican Republic and I saw Haitians and I work with people now who struggle and die and if you look at human history you say how much excuse me is all of this for nothing and I say I look at Peterson's talking about Piaget and say okay well all of this has to work all of this has to work not only for us but for future generations and I say okay well I'm going to go to the all of this has to work not only for us but for future us and not only for me but for future me and it has to work you know yesterday and tomorrow and you look at all of human history and so I look at Peterson launching this out and I say okay I understand your Darwinian frame and why you say well I can't take it beyond here well I think actually the resurrection of Jesus Christ launches us beyond there and I think that I think the revelation of Jesus Christ in his resurrection says that little people are not in vain read the book of 2nd Corinthians and where Paul talks about who we are we are crushed but not perplexed now this is a book in which I don't think I videotaped my Sunday School lessons on 2nd Corinthians but this is a book where you know the Corinthians you know they thought they were big people and important people and Paul you know Paul is this little apostle he's not even Peter he didn't get to see Jesus and Paul says you know we are crushed we are you know we are destroyed we are dismissed by the world but in Christ we have our hope and our future and this is in fact the entire story of the word becoming flesh and now one of the elements that you know Peterson talks about John 1 and the word becoming flesh Peterson doesn't go much into the other narrative where you have Jesus who's the son of a king this is 1st Peter becoming nothing for our sake also the book of Philippians and Tolkien it's a good Roman Catholic that he is sees this and it gets into his head and how does he express it he expresses it in a hobbit whatever Tolkien thought about these questions he was careful never to demean the significance of the soldier at his post I have always been impressed that we are here surviving because of the indomitable courage of quite small people against impossible odds the hobbits were made small he explained to show up in creatures of very small physical power the amazing and unexpected heroism of ordinary men at a pinch Tolkien the soldier lived among these ordinary men fought alongside them witnessed their courage under fire joked with them mourn with them and watched them die thus the small people who fought and suffered in the great war helped inspire the creation of the unlikely heroes in Tolkien's greatest imaginative work like the soldiers in that war the homely hobbits could not have perceived how the fate of nations depended on their stubborn devotion to duty perhaps this was Tolkien's quiet way of suggesting that we may in the end owe more to these forgotten dead than our modern temperament allows that is a chapter of ancient history which it might be good to recall advises Gandalf in the fellowship of the ring for there was sorrow then too and gathering dark but great valor and great deeds that are not wholly vain and I can't help but when I hear that again I hear we labor not in vain and yeah yeah when I look at the frames of this world yeah I I Peterson has to contend with the materialist frame and in a sense that's where William Lane Craig tags him but I if the postmoderns are right you can't give me a should that says I can't believe this stuff and in fact if I'm going to believe this stuff I want to live in this stuff if you know if you're if you're in the if you're in the Star Wars fandom which again the this the the ein boss I wish I had Roland here to help me with the pronunciation in that video you know Peterson says well you know Star Wars is mythology for for engineers yeah well if you're into Star Wars you might as well be into it but but poor you who are into Star Wars because look at you've got somewhere between George Lucas and Disney as stewards over your over your fandom over your universe well I prefer I prefer my fandom and my universe and and every week I get to go live in it with my brothers and sisters in Christ and in fact every day I get to go live in it in terms of my devotion and if the materialists are right well then you know the good news and I always smile when I when I watch when I watch shows about this well the the universe will grow cold and will break down it'll all mean nothing the good news is that you get to die before then yeah that's real good news I've got I've got better news for you and that better news is in when in the resurrection of Jesus Christ when his disciples touch his hands and his feet and it begins to dawn on them and again I'm going to go live in it and I'm going to go live in it and I'm going to go live in it and I'm going to go live in it and I'm going to go live in it and I'm going to go live in it and I'm going to go live in it and I'm going to go live in it and I'm going to go live in it and I'm going to go live in it and I'm going to go live in it and I'm going to go live in it and I'm going to go live in it and I'm going to go live in it and I'm going about this is I think let me say E dust that he vice president wide we had we really living in our culture of Kindness. So once we had our parents lives, as I've the's 5,000 or I have my parents lives. The actually like is this video it that the AA is the two to three people in the older generation are in place. Let's talk a little bit about Modesto about grd a little bit about ey Vino evales as well as Jonathan Mindy Ar gr subscribe a little bit about Gerry I wouldn't know my father. But somehow he, you know, I could imagine that if a man was standing before me that looked just like my father and sounded like my father and had information that looked, you know, information that say very few people like within my nuclear family would know. And then I'd look at my father's chest and there were the burn marks from where the paramedics tried to resuscitate him after his heart attack in a diner and say, look at the burn marks, it is I. I would still look at my father and just kind of blink because everything that Jordan Peterson teaches us about psychology, you know, this, we would try to get around this and lately there's been all of these different television shows that try to get at this idea of coming back from the dead and how to process that. And it is as Jung says, this is all kind of like dreams to us. But I live in my fandom and I live in it to believe, you know, what Tolkien here, the point he makes that we labor not in vain, even if you labor anonymously, even if you labor and nobody knows it or cares or sees, even if you labor and people despise you for it. But read the Gospels, Jesus talks about that. And this is again is why in my sermons I was talking about misery, deliverance, gratitude. We labor out of gratitude. Our labor does not bring about our salvation. Our labor is an expression of gratitude as a result of the gifts that we've been given. So this is why I think Peterson undermines the subtraction story and leaves the door open for God. And I see a lot of people seeing an open door and I'll tell you what human beings are like when human beings see an open door. They usually walk in because we're nosy. And I'd say we walk into that door and we look for God because we have been made for him. Now if we want to continue to believe this and if we want to sustain belief in it, well then we're going to have to do things that sustain belief in it because there's a lot around us that says no, you can't believe in that. So there's my video for today.