https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=TFxRW4XBIiA

 Good. Hi, this is Paul, and I have a very special conversation today. Reflecting back in my life, I have really only had three pastors, people who were pastors to me. The first was my father for a good number of years, and the other two were co-pastors at the same time, Dave Bealan, who I'm going to talk to today, and Dante Vanegas. And there's a lovely biography written of Dante that you can find. Dante's Dance, is that what it's called? That sounds right. Dance is in the title, that's for sure. Yeah, I bought it, and I read it, and I loved it, and I gave it to someone that I could use it. So. Yeah, OK. But Dave Bealan, did you minister your whole career at Madison Square? Yep, I started in 82. And ended the end of 2019. So I was in my 38th year. OK. So you were there longer than my father was at Northside. He was there for 36. Oh, wow. Yeah. But Dave, I came to Madison Square my junior year in college with Calvin Friend, who of course Dave knows well, and my sister Ruth. And let's see, so that would have been, maybe 182, that would have been 83. You weren't there long when I got there. And I, of course, after college went to seminary, and Dave was doing some intentional mentoring of seminarians at that point. Mark van Heidsma and Frank Guder. And Dave actually was one of the two pastors that officiated at my wedding. Dave and my father. So this is going to be special today. Part of the reason I'm doing this is when I first started the channel, one of the things I wanted to do with these conversations, I had no idea I'd have all these people approaching me wanting to have what essentially have been pastoral conversations on the channel. But one of the things I wanted to do with the channel early on that I really haven't done much of is to interview pastors, and often retired pastors. Because I think part of the dislocation in the United States between a lot of people and the church is that they don't know pastors well. There's sort of a misrepresentation of pastors that's out there in the culture, TVs, movie media. And so once I started my channel, I get a lot of people saying things like, well, you're not like regular pastors. And I tell them, no, I don't think that's true. Pastors are all different, and some are unusual, and some are better, and some are worse. But I don't really think I'm that much different from many pastors. So Dave, thanks so much for doing this. Yeah, you're welcome. Thanks for having me. Yeah. Well, let's begin at the beginning. You and I have a number of things in common. And one of the things is that we're both PKs. We're both sons of preachers, which isn't unusual with preachers, actually. Many preachers have preachers as fathers, and it's often been sort of a generational thing. So let's begin at the beginning, and let's talk about your parents. Who were they, and where did you start? Where did they begin your story for you? Yeah, thank you. My father, who's still alive, he just turned 93. Wow. And I meet with him for lunch every week. And I have basically met with him every week since I was about 13 years old. Really? Yeah. Now, there's been times when we've lived too far apart from each other, so we had to do phone calls. But we've lived close to each other enough of our lives that it's been most of my life. And the reason it started at age 13 is my father had a forced sabbatical. He was pastoring. Let's see. Let's see, I was born when he was 25. So he would have been about 36, 7 years old. He got really sick, and he had to have his gallbladder taken out. And his doctor said to him, if you keep living like this, you're going to die in your 50s. Doctors probably don't say that kind of stuff anymore. So my father had six months off. And he started to realize that his marriage was faithful, but he was giving leftovers to my mother, and he was losing his children. And I got into his appointment book. All five of us kids did. So every fifth Saturday, I would go out with my father. And he would intentionally bring us somewhere and then ask about our lives. He started to take me to go fishing, and it was at a really critical juncture in my life. And now I'm still having lunch with him every week. And about a year ago, he says to me, I'm telling him a story. And he says to me, you told me that last week. So let me tell you a little bit more about my father. Did he say, if you keep living like this, you're going to die in your 80s? You know? Yeah. Yeah. Man. He grew up in Holland, Michigan during the Depression. So he was born in 1929. And he's a teenager during World War II. So the kind of dislocation we feel now and the pressure we feel and is there going to be a nuclear war, that kind of stuff, he lived through all of that. And then when he graduated from seminary, he's 25 years old. And he takes the church in Celeryville, Ohio. It's on the edge of a muck field, not immigrants, but there are already Mexican migrants there. This is in the 50s. And he's got an evangelist heart. And he built a chapel for Mexican migrants. And there is a language barrier there, obviously. There still is with a lot of interactions with Mexicans and other immigrants. But during the dedication of that chapel, and I was at that, and I remember the dedication, he said later it was a bittersweet thing for him because he realized that he had made these relationships. And now they were going to basically part ways. And so that was sort of an awakening for him. Then we moved to Florida. And he had about three years planting a church. And the first convert was Native American, Mike Penquo, who became an uncle to us. And he was at our table at least once a week. And in fact, we were so close to him when my dad then moved to Grand Rapids, Michigan, the first church reformed church. A couple of years later, Mike moves up there too because we're family for him. He doesn't really have any other family. So we moved from Florida, where Mike is the first convert, to Grand Rapids, Michigan and live now in an African-American neighborhood. In fact, Eastern was sort of the dividing line. It was, east of there was mostly white. And I know that's changed now. But west of there was a Black neighborhood. And so many of my white friends wouldn't come to my home. And I would play basketball with my Black friends all the time. And they actually protected me when I needed protection when we were out later at night. And like this guy, yeah, he's white, but he's OK. Backs are Christian school, people would say to me, you play like a Black man. And I said, well, what do you mean? And they said, well, you're really aggressive. You know, like hit this rebound and all that kind of stuff. So anyway, my Black friends actually said, how come you can play in the winter without any gloves on? I said, now, my ancestors must have played hockey in northern Europe or something. So that's now it's forming and shaping my life. When I'm 13, Martin Luther King is shot on April 4, 1968. And we had just gotten a television. There was no television in our house until I was 13 years old. And then my father's upstairs, and I go upstairs to get him. And this is a famous point in my life because he starts to weep. I'm sitting on the floor. He's standing there watching Walter Conkright tell the news. And I noticed little spots on the carpet next to me. It's his tears. He's just looking. He's not wiping tears away. They're dripping off his chin. And I had never seen him cry before. Now, he may have cried. I just didn't witness it. So the way I talk about it is those tears evaporated, but they were like seeds in my soul. And he's the same age. They're born within a couple of months of each other. And he was spoken of with honor and reverence in our home. So we had those kind of conversations when I'm 13 years old. And so that happened on a Thursday. On Sunday afternoon, I'm marching with my dad downtown. And they have bullhorns. And the white and black pastors are praying together on the steps of the city hall. And so I'm witnessing that too. The other thing that was very unusual about my father is he would go to a black harbor. So he would figure out all of the news in the black community because that was sort of the hub. You actually got a much different slant on life than you would in most other situations. And he would say to me that the barber would talk to him in such a way that people would start to let their guard down. And he would kind of get to know what was going on in the neighborhood. So I'll fast forward a little bit. When Melanie and I got married, sometime in seminary, we thought, OK, well, let's start a family now. And we couldn't conceive. We couldn't conceive. And then when we graduated, when I graduated, I took the call up to Madison. We'd sort of gotten to the point we're almost giving up on that. We had some interventions and saw on medical stuff. We decided, well, God still wants us to be parents, but let's try adoption. When we went to agencies, they said it's a five to seven year wait for a white child. And we said, we will adopt an African-American. And this is part of the dysfunction of our culture, is there were all kinds of kids available. However, the Black Social Workers Union was making it very difficult to adopt into white homes. And so they said no to us. And then I came in a month or two later with a Mexican young woman from our church who was impregnated by a Black boyfriend. And then when I brought her to Bethany, because she wanted to explore what is adoption about, they sort of made the connection. They said, oh, you're the pastor of that church and you live in that neighborhood. And then they wanted to know where I might send my kids to school. And we said, of church, neighborhood, and school, two of those three will always be, no matter where we go, will always be integrated, or we won't go there if we adopt a Black child. So then it came Kendra and Jackson and Acacia. And they're now 39, 37, and 34. And we have a grandson who's 12, who if he walked by here, you'd say, oh, he's dark-skinned African-American. And the other one's light-skinned. But you'd also say he's not white. So I have now seen the world through my 37-year-old African-American mixed-race son and daughters, but particularly through these young boys as they navigate this life. And let me just say a little bit about my mother. And then I feel like I've hit the alter-call point by now. It's been going on for a while. This is YouTube, not television. We major in long stories. And I knew you'd do well. I'm not used to that. So my mother grew up in a pastor's home. In fact, people who heard my grandfather preach by my mother's dad and me, they say, you sound just like your grandfather, which I take as a compliment. Because when my dad was too busy for me before the age of 12, this man taught me how to really grow up and be a man. Bird calls, how to clean a fish, how to love the Detroit Tigers, all that kind of stuff. That's what my grandfather. But he was a, I don't like to use this term because it's loaded with too much. But he would probably be called a progressive back in the day. He goes so far back that his first church in Detroit, Michigan, at the beginning of the Depression, they would pay him in potatoes and eggs because they didn't have any money. So my mother grew up in that kind of environment and is the embodiment of grace. When my cousins got pregnant before marriage, they would tell my mother before they told their parents because they just felt the warmth coming out of her. So she's very gracious. If grace and truth are married together, that's my parents. My dad's like a prophet, although he's mellowed. And my mother is grace personified. So I hit the jackpot with my parents. I really did. And some of it, I'll tell one more story than let you ask follow-ups or whatever. But when I was about 10, so this is before that break in my dad's life, but I was about 10 or 11, he came home and he'd had a hard day as a pastor. And he got into a conversation with my mother that the tone got harsh. Now, my dad never used his physical presence to sort of intimidate anyone, including my mother. He never called her names. But this was sharpness in a way that there was no gentleness in it. And we heard it. I don't remember what it was about. But then it's time to eat. And there's us five kids and mom and dad. There's seven of us around the table. And he often opened with prayer. And he said to my mother, Mary, I had a hard day. I took it out on you. That was unkind and wrong of me. I need your forgiveness. And then before she even answered, he looked at us kids and he said, some of you overheard it. That's not the way I should treat your mother. I need your forgiveness. So when I look back, I cannot quote one of my dad's sermons. But I just quoted you word for word what he said to my mother and to us as kids. When I was 10 years old, the next time he preaches a sermon on confession or forgiveness, I am not rolling my eyes in the fifth row. I'm actually listening. So he was the same in the kitchen as he was in the pulpit. And when he wasn't, he would own up to it. Now, he was way too busy before I was 12 years old. And he's got his own idols that he needs to confess. And he's done that. But I don't think I would be a pastor were it not for experiences like that. I might not even be a believer. But I wouldn't be a pastor. I'm quite sure of that. Well, tell me about your faith formation growing up. I mean, you've started out with that because that's what you just said was, I think, integral. But for a lot of ministers' kids growing up, ministers' kids always sort of had a reputation, sometimes, for wildness. Over-sexed and under-loved. But obviously, for you, you didn't have a negative image of what a pastor was or should be. How did that impact? When did you make Profession of Faith? And what were some of the things around that? Yeah, that's interesting. As a child, we actually have pictures of me with a little table that's tipped like a pulpit. And I have a Bible there. And my two sisters are there. And one of them has a plastic doll. There's no guy. I'm doing a baptism of a single mother at age, what, 8 or 10 or whatever. And you're going to follow in your dad's footsteps was fine with me until my dad wasn't available to me when I was 10, 11, 12, 13 years old. And then that switch happened. And then we moved at age 14. So in other words, my faith is vibrant as a kid. I love Jesus. I feel close to him, especially out in creation. I read like crazy. I'm always reading, including the Bible. You don't have a television. Right, exactly. No screens in our home. And then when we moved at age 14, I was actually getting involved with a wrong group of friends in Grand Rapids. And if I had stayed here, I think I would have been down a pretty dark pathway. But I hated moving. I'm 14. I have to break into a new school. I just had started 10th grade. And then we moved to Muskegon. I had to break into this new friendship network. I was, who am I angry at? My parents would say, we're following God's call. So now I'm angry at God. And then for the first time in my life, I go through depression. It's not clinical. It's circumstantial, but it's pretty deep. And that's where God met me. I read a book called Love Is Now by Peter Goquist. I should go find a copy of that. I don't have it now. But it's what God used for me. I'm in the living room. My mother's sitting there too. It's a Sunday afternoon. I start to cry. She notices it. I don't want her to notice. She gently asks me what's going on. And eventually, we pray together. And then short time after that, I make profession of faith. And become an evangelist. I'm going to the beach with my friends and witnessing the people walking up on their beach blankets. Leading youth group, I'm speaking in chapel. It's, yeah, I was on fire. I was like, let's go. So, and then I had another, I had an intellectual doubt challenge in my first year of college where Marx. You went to Calvin? Yeah, right. Karl Marx, BF Skinner, behaviorism and Freud. So I get these explanations of human behavior or why you believe what you believe. And I hadn't been exposed to it before. And it rocked my world. And I was drinking too much beer. And so I was free of, when I went to college in 1972, you could get drafted. You could drink beer and you could vote. You can still get drafted and vote, but you can't drink beer anymore, at least not Michigan. And because I was, I wasn't sure if I was a believer, if I believe what I used to believe and is this really mine, it's pretty easy for me than to do things I wouldn't have done before. So, last chance bar, which is still there on Burton aptly named a bar. It was just, I just drank too much. So that's going on. I could have gotten a lot more trouble, but anyway, I went home and my father who almost, I mean, Christian forum pastors, especially then didn't have altar calls, he had an altar call. And I couldn't help myself. I'm in the front and I'm weeping and I feel like I need to come home spiritually. So it wasn't a very long period of time, but it was dark and devastating for me. But then it was a recommitment and it was, I don't really think I've wrestled with doubts since. That doesn't mean I don't, my wrestling mainly is with the slow pace of my sanctification. If the Holy Spirit, right? I mean, if God is so strong and I'm supposed to just live out who I already am, how come I still have some of the same sins that used to bug me when I was in middle school? Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. So, yeah. I wanna add a little, I wanna add a few comments here cause most of the people who watch this do know nothing of the Christian Reformed Church. Muskegon is a town on the coast of Michigan, on the big lake as they call it in Michigan. And so there are beaches there, it's a vacation place there. Profession of faith is sort of like confirmation. What you do often when you're a teenager, you were baptized as an infant and profession of faith is sort of your first adultish move of owning the faith. So I just wanted to add those comments for Catholic, Orthodox, skeptic listeners who mostly comprise this channel. Let's talk a little bit about your call to ministry. So you obviously had a sense of it. When you're preaching on the beach in Muskegon, Michigan, but also often for ministers kids too, that's a little more complicated, especially after you've read a little bit of psychology because wait a minute, is this, can this really be from God or am I just sort of playing out the psychological roots of my upbringing? My grandfather is a pastor as mine is, but on my father's side, my father is a pastor. And can there actually be a God who was doing this or am I just sort of following along the line, working out my psychological issues via the poor Christian Reformed Church has to get the brunt of it. But talk to me a little bit about that. So you started college, you had this time of doubt and you had to wrestle with really some rights of passage things. I mean, okay, you're 18, you can be drafted, you can drink, you can vote. You have to figure out, okay, how does God fit into this? So talk to me about that sense of calling and how it developed. Yeah, interesting, that's a good question. So my freshman year was when this last chance bar altar call thing happened. The next year, so half my way through my sophomore year, I have applied to UCLA because I wanna get out of West Michigan. I wanna get out of the bubble. And speaking of psychology, part of what was going on with me is I didn't think I could ever match or live up to the success that my father had. This is putting it in hyperbole terms, but I felt like a little bit like I think Michael Jordan's son feels like. You know, he made it into college basketball and sat on the bench part of the time. Because he really was a good preacher and I didn't just think that, other people said that about him and he's a leader. So he would get asked to speak in various places and larger assemblies and so on. And so that's the part that was going on inside of me, but I didn't really face up till later. So there's something called Urbana, which happens every three years. And it so happened that I had an opportunity to go and I was in the same place. It so happened that I had an opportunity to go to that and turned it down, partly because I couldn't afford it. It was only a couple hundred dollars, but that's right after Christmas into New Year's. In fact, New Year's Eve, 20,000 college students, you know, worship together and they have speakers from all over the world. Well, one of the people whose way was already paid, who was going from our church, one young person got the flu and couldn't go and it was all paid for. And then they said to me, do you wanna go? And I said, okay. But you get thrown in- It was the Dutch thing, you know. It's already paid for, we can't let it go to waste. That's right. I mean, Bob will use whatever craziness in your genetics are there. I mean, he'll use it. So there I am and I get thrown into potluck and it's pre-cell phone day, obviously. So I don't actually see anybody from my group after I get there. So it's really me and God among 20,000 people. And I'm with a roommate who's in his 40s, who's a missionary and he gets up at six o'clock and prays for an hour on his knees. And he doesn't really, can I use French on this YouTube? He doesn't give a shit what I think. He doesn't give a shit what I think. He doesn't give a shit what I think. He doesn't give a shit what I think. He doesn't give a shit what I think. He wasn't trying to impress me. He said, hello. I'm 20 years younger than him. But during that, during one of the worship times, and I think it was on the New Year's Eve service, I'm all alone in the middle of 20,000 people and we're having communion to bring in the new year. And I hear God's voice. And this is what I hear. And it's like hearing your voice, Paul. It's almost like I'm looking around. And here's what I hear. There's lots of good reasons not to go into the ministry as a pastor. That your dad is a pastor is not one of those good reasons. End of transmission. So I decided not to go UCLA. I probably couldn't have afforded it anyway, but I decided not to go. I enrolled in Greek class and because it seemed so clear and powerful to me that I felt like I couldn't do anything else. And then off I went. I didn't want to preach, which is interesting. Even when I got the seminary, I thought, I'll be a pastor somewhere in some role, but I'm not gonna be like senior pastor preach because I got problems with authority. Quite frankly, that was it. I wasn't admitting that to myself either, what do you mean? Get up there and speak for God and like tell people this is where it's at. No, no, no, that's not me. So it took me until seminary to work those things out. And my marriage to Melanie was also very interesting because the last thing she wanted to do was be a pastor's wife, which is another story, which I guess we can get to. But while I'm in seminary, it becomes clear to me that I really pretty much resolved the daddy issues because Andy Bannstra, who was one of my professors who I'm sure you know, handed out this assignment list when we'd have to report in class. And my father's name was on November 14th. And I know what's happened. He's thinking while he's typing, sees my name, but he puts Mark Gillen in instead, and they're friends. And so in class, I raised my hand and I say, Dr. Bannstra, do you wanna tell my dad he's got a report on November 14th or shall I? And you know, he's just publicly, I don't know, embarrassed for me. And I don't know, maybe his dad's a pastor. I think his dad's a pig farmer, but anyway. Andy's in heaven now, but Andy, then after class he talked to me and it really just rolled off of me and I chuckled about it. Part of it though is because my dad that year resigned from his ministry in Muskegon and took two years off and I wasn't sure he was gonna go back in. And some of it was denominational tensions. And so I started to feel like, yes, I wanna be a pastor and I'm okay, but maybe not this denomination. So that was another sort of crisis during seminary time, which actually took me five years and a lot of my colleagues were done in three, but that was Melanie's fault. Melanie was, she didn't want it, let's see, how did she put it? I'm not gonna wear hoop earrings, pantsuit and make sheet cakes. Ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha. You'd have to live through the 70s to understand all of those references. Yeah, yeah. I get it. Yeah, we're old. Ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha. Yeah, so actually it was a year long internship, so now I'm gonna get into a little bit. And her problem was, I've seen too many church leaders, elders and pastors whose children didn't get enough of their father and whose spouses didn't get enough of their husband. It was husband in those days. And our internship proved to her that I would put her first. So we both had Monday off and I never did anything on Monday except hang out with her. And I actually had the pastor, my supervisor, who's a pastor supervising my internship, more than once asked me to help him to do something on Monday and I said, I won't do that. And he said, at one point he said, I will write you up for this because I need you to help me. And I said, I can't because I have a commitment to my marriage. I didn't say to God that seemed a little, I mean it was, but so that proved to Melanie that this was plus, she watched me and she said, you're called to this. But here's what I had to do. I had to promise her before the internship and I wasn't willing to say this unless I meant it. I said to her, I won't bug you about this for the nine months we're on internship. If at the end you really still feel like this is not for us, I'll figure I heard God wrong because I knew she was, I mean, we're already married but I knew I was called to marry her and I also felt like I was called to ministry. And because I grew up in a pastor's home, if she wasn't on board or if I had to drag her across the line, this was not going to work. So she had to be genuinely, the way I put it is, I figured I was creating too much static in her prayer channel and I had to quit and shut up and trust God. And I didn't ever bring it up and we started dating on Mondays but also Thursday night was like our coffee hour which we actually have kept doing through our entire marriage, thanks to her. And she was convinced I could be the father of our children and actually make this work in two boundary setting. And I had learned from my father's mistakes too, but anyway, Melanie, one more story about Melanie, you might know this story, it's like a famous story. I preach at this church four or five times and I'm on a duo with Ben Ritter who's a classmate of mine and a duo, I mean, either one of us is gonna get a call. So the last interview includes Melanie and we started talking about gifts and what do you like to do? I'm a vocalist, so I sing. And then they turned to her and asked her the wrong question. They said to her, do you play the organ? And her response, just like this, is the only organ I play is my husband's. There are six people interviewing us, three of them laugh and three of them do not laugh. And I already know the vote is gonna be like three to three. So I get in the car, we're toward the end, I get in the car and I said, Melanie, I can't believe it. And she says, look, if they can't handle that, we don't wanna go here. Oh, my wife. Yep, no, I do, I remember that story. You've told it multiple times at Madison Square. It's a lovely story in my view. It's not a story you forget, especially if you're a seminarian. Yeah, yeah. So talk to me a little bit about what seminary was like for you. Well, Melanie was, speaking of Melanie, she was a teacher. Actually, the first year I was an RD, a resident director in the dorms in Calvin Seminary and Calvin College are on the same piece of property. And I was teaching a speech course at Calvin University as a 22 year old. My speech professor went on sabbatical and he needed people to pick up his courses. And I had already taught it as a TA. What was his name? Del Nye Camp and Tom Olsengood. They both taught this. Okay. But anyway, I taught that. So I was teaching and I was doing an RD and I was going to seminary part-time because I was just trying it out because I was married to Melanie. And she's teaching school full-time. The next year, I go to seminary and I'm not teaching anymore and we're not being RDs. We only did that one year. That didn't work in our marriage very well. I can imagine. Yeah. But the last year, especially of seminary, I didn't, I worked, I painted houses, interior and exterior during the summer and on breaks. But the rest of the time, I could devote the entire time to studying. And I found out I loved seminary. Now, the other thing that happened that was really key to this is in my senior year at Calvin College, John DeVries, who's also now in heaven, but he would come and preach there and he preached a sermon on Sabbath keeping and what a delight and joy it is, which I hadn't heard much of. And he said, I challenge you to pick a day of the week. Sunday's probably your best choice to just be in relationship with God and other people and just enjoy life, make it a real Sabbath. And he said, I challenge you and I think your grades will go up. Now, it wasn't a promise. So I decided, I'm gonna do this. And one Monday, I had three exams on Monday. So I had to arrange my week, including even Friday night and Saturday morning and Saturday afternoon so that I could not open a book on Sunday. My grades did go up and I kept that practice all the way through seminary, and which was also really key and Melanie figuring out, maybe this boundary setting can work actually, but it made my seminary way more enjoyable than I think a lot of other seminarians experienced. And I didn't care if my grades went down because of it. No, they went up for the most part. Church order, I got a C minus in, but I've since learned that you need to know some things about church order. Yes, you do. Yes, you do. So I didn't have very good professor though, bless his soul or bless his heart. How do you say about people that have passed on? So seminary was fun for me. I made relationships. I met Dante, the co-pastor you talked about from the very beginning, and he would ask me to pray with him. And he was older. He was significantly older than you were. 19 years older than me. And a lot of, especially if you read his biography, which I recommend, it's a wonderful book. But actually he and my father had crossed paths, Spanish Danny and New York and Patterson. So he had a lot of, we'll probably get into your relationship with him because that's another big part of your story, obviously. But I didn't know that you had met him at seminary. Yeah, so we were in class together and we started to pray together. And the reason I go pray together is because I didn't pray with other seminarians. You know, you study prayer, but you don't actually pray together, right? And then he started taking me to the prison in Ionia because he'd spent, he basically spent from age 19 to 33 in and out of prison, mostly in, and then he was dramatically converted at age 33. And I got to know him at age, I think he was 46 or seven when I got to know him. And he is the Billy Graham of prisoner preachers. I mean, he had, they were eaten out of his hand. They loved it. They were eaten out of his hand. They loved it when he came. And the fourth time we're going out to Ionia, which is about a 30 minute drive from where we live, on the way out there, he says, it's your turn to preach. And I laughed just like you did. And he said, no, I'm serious. You're supposed to be instant in season and out of season or NIV, be prepared no matter what or something like that. So I opened my Bible and I'm thinking, okay, now what do I do? How about, where does it say in Romans, you are not your own, but you belong, because the prison is called Ionia. So I did this play on words and that says Ionia, which I mean, it was sort of typical Dave Bulin play on words. I don't know what you call that kind of humor, but it works, except that they were, you could feel how disappointed they were when Dante introduced me as the preacher, right? You could feel it. So I mean, I had- These people don't got a lot and what little they get you took away. So when we get done, Dante says to me, he said, that really went pretty well. He said, I did detect a spirit of snickering in the back row, we should probably cast that out. And then, several times after that, he would bring me along and he'd let me know in advance. Years later, I said to him, why did you do that on the way out there? He said, I did that on purpose. I had watched you interact with the guys. So I knew that you weren't gonna treat them in a way that was condescending or paternalistic. I also had watched you preach. So I know you could do something on the fly, but I also knew it would stretch you quite a bit. So I mean, he never called himself my mentor. And this is before I had been called to Madison to be his partner and co-pastor. He was just hanging out with me and we were enjoying time together. He'd also, let me tell you one more story about where he took me. This was in July or August. It was hot. And we went to a revival in a black Pentecostal storefront church. So we get into this room. I'm the only white person in there and the only white person that would dare come in. I mean, in fact, I wouldn't dare. Dante brought me in. And he's loud and I have a loud voice. And pretty soon we're both singing at the top of our lungs and shouting. I can hardly hear myself. The place is just raucous. And then the evangelist from Mississippi gets up and she's a woman and she's probably in her 60s. And she's got this big voice and a teenage girl, a 13 year old girl comes up with her. And she says to the girl, read John chapter three. I remember it was John chapter three. She reads four or five verses and the evangelist says stop to the girl. She just stands right next to her. She preaches for five, six, seven minutes and she's starting to get cranked up. And then she goes to the girl, read on. And the girl reads some more and she says stop. And then she preaches for a while. And then there's an altar call at the end and now we get in the car. And Dante says, we call that a read on preaching. And I said, what do you mean? Well, first he said, what do you think? I said, well, that woman can preach. And so he says, read on because she can't read. She's gotta have a 13 year old girl. And I said, how is this possible? She preached Orthodox Christian faith. And Dante says, the home she was raised in, the pastor who mentored her, she's probably more Orthodox than most people who read all those books you all read. Then I said, then I just got quiet. And I thought, I am going to one of the most academically challenging seminaries, probably in the world. I'm soon gonna get my master's degree and she can preach circles around me and she can't even read. Yeah, yeah. So it was very humbling. And he would do these things on purpose. In fact, when I got done with seminary, he says, you came from a great home. He knew my father and my mother. And in fact, he did my mother's funeral. He said, you got this great education. What we gotta do is figure out how to get you into the penitentiary for six months without getting your name in the paper. He said to round out your education. Let's talk about how, so you, you made it through seminary. It took a little longer. You were able to calm your wife's anxieties about being a preacher's wife. And so then you get out of seminary and obviously at some point you have this other duo that you were on. How'd you, I mean, it almost sounds like Dante was grooming you for partnership in terms of being a co-pastor with him. Did he get to Madison first? He was at Madison in 1978. I started going to seminary in 1979. So he'd been there a year. We switched from another Christian Reformed Church because we started to go to Madison in the evening just because I was developing a relationship with Dante and Dave Siplinga who was his partner at the time, white pastor, who was also a good friend of mine and a mentor. And a month or two before I graduated from seminary, so that would have been a May, 1982, Dave Siplinga took a call to a church in Chicago and they wanted to maintain this co-pastor relationship. And co-pastoring is like an arranged marriage or another way to put it, pastoring in itself is like running a marathon. Co-pastoring is like running a marathon with a partner and the rule is you have to finish at the same time. So you gotta pace yourself to this other person all the time. So they know this is a risky thing because if there's a division between the two of you, it becomes a racial division in the church. And the other pastors, this is a joke, the other pastor's name was Dave. So they had Pastor Dave all over the place. So this was a money saving move on their part. That's right. That's right. And it's not just Dutch folks that like to pinch the penny, I'll tell you that. Yeah. So they knew we were already friends. I mean, it was obvious to everybody. I was, in fact, one of my painting jobs was Dante's dining room, which also then helped me get to know Jackie really well, his wife. And then Melanie got to know Jackie. And so there was this couple relationship that was starting to develop as well. So I think there were three people they considered. Might have been more, but the vote was, I think in, I think it was in July or August. I can't remember now. Anyway, I became the pastor in September so that I had one other call at the same time. And they were both in Grand Rapids. And here's the irony about that. A year earlier, Melanie and I were talking about, okay, where are we gonna go? And we said, we will go anywhere but West Michigan. And we've gone nowhere but West Michigan. And I think the Holy Trinity obviously listens to all this stuff and they go like this. Did you hear that? Did you hear that? We're gonna fix them. It was a surprise to me that I was there and a challenge. Dave Sippling was really well loved by this congregation and it was, they were grieving. And he left in June and I came in September. So it was like four months. That was, it was a challenge for me to fill his shoes. I remember the day I was there more than four and a half years, which was how long he was there. Now, at least I was there longer than the previous pastor. And I was starting to develop my own relationships. I was also only 27 years old. And I would preach on things like marriage and children and it's like, I better stick to the word because I don't really know this from experience. That's right. That's right. Let's, maybe we should talk a little bit about Madison Square because that obviously not only was the place of your ministry, but every pastor who's been anywhere knows that pastors certainly form the church but the churches really form the pastor. And I should also mention for a lot of the people who listen that up until fairly recently in the Christian Reformed Church, the norm was that clergy would stay somewhere between four to seven years in a church and then move on. Churches tended to be quite similar to each other and pastors would go from one place to another. My grandfather, generally speaking stayed four to seven years. The church he spent the longest in was Owen Sound, Ontario which was a church he didn't want to go to. And my grandmother and my aunt really did not want to go to Canada, but he very much felt called partly because of the people were coming there after the war. And there was so much pain. And today we would look back at it and say, this was all trauma from these Dutchmen who had endured the occupation. Then after the war could get to the, could leave the Netherlands, but they were coming to Canada just with all of this trauma. And this was just manifesting in their lives. And it was a real, there's just a ton of pain and brokenness there. But my father spent 36 years at Northside in Patterson and you spent your entire, at least, pre-retirement ministry at Madison. I also wanted to mention when you mentioned earlier that your father started a chapel, for those who don't understand, and many people in the Christian Form Church don't understand the tradition in the Christian Form Church of chapels. Chapels were sort of satellite ministries that were always in some way dependent upon the larger real churches. And generally speaking, it was the Dutch that went to the real churches, but the chapels were ministries often to other groups of people. So for example, when my father was called to Northside Chapel in Patterson, the chapel had been in Patterson for a number of years and had been a ministry of a number of Christian Reformed churches who geographically weren't terribly far away, but they understood they probably couldn't, they couldn't minister to the African-Americans were moving to the industrial North during this great migration. Warmth of Other Sons is a tremendous book. I read that book a few years ago and I thought, my goodness, I'm reading, I'm reading my story in this book. But so chapels were sort of these, they were very much second tier churches. They weren't even considered to be real churches. And before, you know, I, when I started, when my sister and I started going to Madison in college, my grandmother, Hiram's wife, Grace, told me, oh, we used to, I used to go there sometimes when I was a kid because she, there were, there were, again, celery, there were muck farms over on Lafayette, you know, which is just, it was just very close. There are celery farms there. And she told me how they keep these wooden planks over it because everybody wanted the celery that was white, it sort of protected from the sun. And, you know, all these, you know, Grand Rapids, you have multi-generations and they go back. But tell me a little bit about the history of Madison, of Madison and its chapel days. And then, because a lot of the history of Madison, both the charismatic, the, I don't even know really a lot of this history. When I got there in college, I began to listen and there had been some experiments in communal living that had happened. There'd been some experiments in charismatic movements of the Holy Spirit. And of course, in the Christian Reformed Church, these things would have been very much, these are things that would have been very experimental, be very chapel-ish. So why don't you walk through a little bit of the history of Madison as a chapel and then it becoming a church. And then it was actually during my college years that we really saw another transformation of the ministry with you and Dante, things really changed. Yeah. Oh, it was planted in 1912 in the same neighborhood that it's in now. In fact, little storefronts and so on. It has never moved from there. 1912, so that's, no, I'm sorry, 19, I'm getting my dates mixed up. I think it was 1914, which is also the start of World War I. In some of the Dutch-speaking immigrant churches in Grand Rapids, one of the pastors there was an evangelist and there were people moving up from the hill country in the South. And they were going to Poverty Hollow, which was the informal name of the poor housing area that was right in Madison Square. It was on the other side of the track. So it was literally on the other side of the track, sort of like what you have in the South, right? There's the town, the white town, and then the other side of the tracks. Well, this is the other side of the tracks for poor white people. What are often called white trash in today's environment. And he wanted to reach out to them, but there's no way they would culturally fit, not just because of language, into the church that he was leading. So he wrote a book in Dutch about, it's called City Evangelism, Why and How. And that launched this ministry. And because it was a chapel, which meant that it was not subject to all the same rules and regulations. Their first pastor was actually a woman. They didn't call her a pastor, but nevertheless she was their pastor. And then there's another woman later. And in the 50s, we had a blind pastor. He was Reverend Dubois, or Dubois, they called him. He was a graduate from Calvin Seminary. His wife read all of the texts that he had, except the ones in Braille, which there weren't very many in Braille. So we have, and these are, so we have women leaders and a blind pastor, probably who can't get jobs in regular churches. And then the neighborhood changes from white to black, and it gets integrated already in the 50s. It's small, it's the smallest church in our area of churches called the classes. And it's got the smallest budget. In fact, when I became pastor there, our annual budget was $40,000 a year, of which 20 we would raise ourselves through offering, and the rest was gifts from other churches. But, so I became pastor there in 82, so that's 12 years after they became organized, which is a technical term in the Curitiba Forum Church for removing from chapel or teenage status to adult in organized status. So before that you're unorganized, and then you become organized. And as one of our deacons, Marty Main said, who you know, Paul, he said, we became organized and nobody noticed, including us. And the reason that joke is so funny is because it was so much fly by the seat of your pants. We didn't like committees. Dante himself, I literally never got a piece of paper from him. Nothing written, nothing typed. If he were still alive, I wouldn't dare text him. I would either talk to him in person or call him on the phone, right? So he's old school, but he isn't just old school, he's very relational. Anyway, I got all stories behind that, funny stories. But Madison, so I started coming to Madison actually, the first time I visited there was 1975, Dante wasn't even there. I went on a Sunday night to hear a sermon about why women should be in church office and be pastors, which I had never heard one before. And it was in the little hole in the wall, Madison church. And it was in an evening service, there were like 30 people there, but it was significant. And then Melanie actually didn't wanna go to the church that I was going to, a much larger Christian Reformed Church, not a hole in the wall church at all, I'm not gonna name it, but my dad had been the pastor there. So she was known as either Dave Bealand's wife or Marv Bealand's daughter-in-law. And I do not have the kind of wife who will be identified very long that way. So we had to find another church and we started going to Madison and they would pray for people, lay hands on them. We would hear speaking in tongues, their bodies were as engaged in worship as their minds were. We started to fall in love with gospel music, even though I heard it as a kid, but now it was like part of the church. Dante's wife, Jackie, in my view is the best piano player I've ever heard. She's amazing. She's white and Dutch, but if you close your eyes and you hear her play, you'll swear you're in a black church, Yeah, yeah. which is amazing. She doesn't express herself emotionally when she's speaking, but she sure does when she plays a piano. So, and then there's a gospel choir and I am, while I'm in seminary, I am growing under this, growing in my appreciation for this ministry, the ministry of the Holy Spirit, the ministry of healing. So it was as much multi-ethnic, let me put it this way, it was as much charismatic, open to the Holy Spirit as it was multi-ethnic, but those two things together, plus it was aggressively evangelistic, which was, he would evangelize people as he's going through McDonald's order. I'm not kidding you, we would come up to the window and there'd be three people that would wanna see him because he's speaking in English and then in Spanish and he's got them all laughing and then he invites them to church or whatever. He's just an amazing guy. I don't know where, maybe you should ask a question or two. Okay, okay, well, let's talk about some of the, I wrote a blog post a few years ago on these chapels because I really do think that the role of the chapel in Christian Reformed Church history has not at all been explored. And I think it's actually essential to understand something deep about the Christian Reformed Church. It's obviously formative for you, it's been obviously formative for me because my father came to Paterson in order to, his job was to try to transform a chapel into a church. But I didn't know hardly any of this until I began noticing, following this word chapel around. But it sort of was a place in, in fact, one of the founding members of my current church when he's old style CRC, does not believe in women in office. A lot of the things that happen at our church, just, it's kind of a crazy place, but he sort of tolerates it and blesses it because, well, this is, he doesn't use the word chapel, but he says, well, that's kind of what this is, isn't it? It's always been that. And so these chapels and then the churches that they became were outliers for the, what was the establishment in the denomination. Now a lot of that is gone, but there was, yeah, so people who, my sense when I got to Madison in the 80s was, even though I can't see through the eyes I have now, but this was a place where refugees of various different stripes, North Side was that to a degree, Living Stones is that to a degree. I mean, black folks, lots of big black churches around. And so if they wanted that, if that worked for them, they could certainly have that. And they didn't need to go to some slightly insane little church with a white leadership and have to deal with all the racial awkwardness that they're just gonna have to deal with. And historically Dutch institution. But so it's sort of a place where misfits and refugees can find one another and build something different and new. And so for me coming in, I grew up in a chapel situation, obviously. And so when my sister Ruth, my sister Ruth found the church first and then came and she said, this place is just like North Side. And Calvin at that point, Calvin was my roommate and he had a car so we could get there. And so Calvin of course had his own history in the Christianity Forum church different than mine, but we started going there. And for me, of course it fit, but there were elements at Madison. Of course, the African-American element, North Side was percentage wise, more African-American than Madison, just simply partly because Madison's in Grand Rapids. And eventually you had all these white people fled into the church from the rest of the denomination, students in fact. But the charismatic strain, and then also you could just tell fairly early on because I began listening to people's stories. There was an emphasis in Madison about story that this wasn't just the Heideberg Catechism and Doctrine, there was that too, but there's also a culture where people's stories matter. Madison, and I think people who have watched my channel for a long time might begin to figure out that, oh, part of where Paul gets his stories from is Dave Beal, because bring Dave Beal on to YouTube and the stories just, pull the cork and out they come. That's right. But there's a spiritual value to that in terms of story. I think pastors, part of what pastors do is help people tell and shape their stories. And Madison, then the church is the place, it's sort of that muck field, if you will, very fertile, dirty, gritty, real environment where people's stories can grow. And Madison, I could tell fairly early on, was a place for a lot of refugees. If you were charismatic in the Christian Deformed Church, you were an outlier. If you were African-American, you were an outlier. If you were in a mixed race marriage, you were an outlier. And especially in a place like Grand Rapids, different from pretty much everywhere else in the Christian Reformed Church, where this Christian Reformedum is so thick, like it's no place else in the denomination, you need a space where you can sort of, you can be charismatic or you can be Black or you can be Hispanic. And of course, this eventually will roll into the gender conversations that are happening in the denomination right now. But Madison was very much a place where people who could not fit in to the Christian Reformed Church, but could never not be Christian Reformed, by virtue of their formation, could sort of find a space to work out their faith and fear and trembling. Yeah, I agree. In fact, some of them would say, and the names are Jim Haven and Rod Mulder, who you know, but they said, when I asked them their story, they would say, we're on our way out of the denomination. And when we got to the frontier or the boundary line, there was Madison right on the edge. And we visited and stayed. So that's very much, then I would also say there were African-Americans who had felt disenfranchised in some way from their own churches, who also found a place there. Or there wasn't always the case, or we love their children so well that they got involved because their children did. Our children's ministry way back into the 50s, and then our youth ministry was a drawing for a lot, a lot of people. But I think the storytelling, or another way to talk about it, this word gets overused now, but there was something authentic about it, and not hiding. And Dante was, I mean, he sort of, I used to say, you're the straw that stirs the drink around here. Because he would say, I don't have your theological thing, I can't do strategic planning like you can. And sometimes he would talk that way about himself. And I would say, quite frankly, we're paying you to be you. And so there's people to this day, he's been in heaven now for 12 or 13 years or whatever, but to this day who I run into, who are part of the Christian Reformed Church, these are outlier kind of people, because they heard him preach or experienced his presence, and they just felt loved and accepted. He spoke their heart language, is another way to talk about it. So he would tell stories on his earlier days in New York, and he would use, I would sometimes say to him, not only has not any other Christian Reformed pastor ever said what you just said, no one else has even thought what you said. It was so often out of the box. So you'd go to church on Sunday, and you didn't know what was gonna happen. And we'd let the mic go around, and sometimes we'd have to correct stuff, but we would just, it was messy. It was unorganized. It was, I think for some people, very frustrating. We would, at the beginning, we never started on time. What is on time, right? In fact, in fact, that reminds me of, here we go, uncork the bottle. The first time I preached at Madison, I hadn't been there in the morning. So I say to Dante, what time does church start? And he says, right away he says, when the Holy Spirit shows up. And I say, well, when do most of the people get there? So he says, oh, well, 10 o'clock or so, because I needed to know what time to get there. So that was a month before. Let me finish with that. This was really, really, really formative to me. The day before I'm gonna preach, so Saturday before, it was Memorial Day weekend. Pastors always hand off Memorial Day weekend, Fourth of July weekend, right? And the Sunday between Christmas and New Year. So I get Memorial Day weekend. And I'd never preached there before, and Dante and I are friends. We have no idea we're gonna serve together, he says, let's get on our bikes and ride down to church, which is about a, I don't know, three quarters of a mile away. So we ride down there. He said, I'd like to pray. And I thought it was mainly a bike ride with like, maybe we'd go in the building or not, and, you know, pray. So we get there and he opens the door and he starts with confession. And I'm gonna use the S word again in a minute. He's confessing and he's going on and on. He's being very concrete. There's nothing abstract about this. And about halfway through his confession, I say to myself, oh shit, it's my turn next. I cannot be abstract after he just laid out, you know, all these sins. So he's confessing away and then it's my turn and I confess away. And then he gets out a bottle of oil and he starts anointing the pulpit and prays over that. And then he anoints the piano and prays over his wife, Jackie, and then he knows where everybody sits. So he starts to pray for people by name and then the doorways. And then he finally anoints me with oil and he says, I know you don't have your notes here, but pretend they are. Let's pray over your notes. And it took over an hour. And when I came in the next morning, my mental map is God is present here. I can see the little shiny crosses all over the place. This is a consecrated space. I have been anointed by my pastor and this isn't theoretical or abstract, it's real. And so I enter one of those thin spaces or luminous spaces or whatever. And I started doing that every time after that before I preach. I would do the same thing he did. I would anoint all the doorways. So I've basically been doing this for over 40 years and it's prepared me. Sometimes I'll tell people, I didn't tell people for years because it felt a little weird. Like I'm more spiritual than you, I'm your pastor. That's why you called me to be your pastor because I'm more spiritual. I get up at five in the morning, I anoint all. But after it leaked out a little bit, people said, well, it's really meaningful for me that you actually pray for me by name because you know where I sit. So anyway, that's been a practice of mine and that's from Dante and it has changed my whole, I call it mental map as to how I approach things on Sunday morning. Talk to me about the, at some point you're probably going to have to do. I mean, you sent me this sheet about what you learned about ministry and of course a lot of that is coming through already. But talk to me about the, I mean, one of the things that really was formative for me as a college student and a seminarian because this is, a lot of the, so I grew up in Patterson and it was Northside and it was day camp. And I mean, I had all of those formations in me but the charismatic element was more new to me. Now, Stan VanderKlay certainly had his pietism and his deep faith, which he also received from his parents and the formation of what was just, common Christian reformity in the poor areas of the Midwest, which formed him. You know, it's at some point I should probably write, I should probably rework my father's memoir because make it a little bit more translatable to a broader audience. But the charismatic element at Madison Square, I mean, obviously part of that was Dante and Dante prayed over me at my ordination and I remember almost nothing of that service but I still remember Dante's prayer over me, which is interesting. You probably prayed over me too but I don't remember yours, sorry Dave. But I- I'm a little more vanilla. That's right. But what you say about Dante is very true. And, you know, as a college student, you know, we could reliably expect from you sermons that were, I mean, you're a tremendous preacher, sermons that were, you know, vibrant, they were healing. They were, they were learned. They were wonderful. Dante just never knew quite what to expect. And it was sort of like some of these major league baseball players that, well, they'd strike out a fair amount but they'd also lead the league in home runs. And that was Dante. And so he had this power to form and to shape and to provoke, you know, which I very much hear in this story and that provocation, this holy provocation that he would, that would pass through him was an integral part. But the use of care, I do remember, I won't mention his name because I would never want to embarrass this dear saint. But I do remember once when someone dropped the collection plate, which of course, and before the remodel, you had that hard floor that could never, you know, those floors are indestructible. And you'd have these cheap metal plates and someone dropped the collection plate and someone stood up to give a word of, a word of interpretation on the dropped collection plate. And I thought, well, that's a preacher. You're often doing, you're also giving words of interpretation on things that are similar to dropped collection plates. But talk to me about the, and you don't have to name names. At some point, you are going to have to write down some things and often for pastors, you can't write memoirs until enough people have passed to glory because their stories are holy and they must remain holy, even though they must pass out into the common world so that their holiness can produce its fruit. But tell me about the charismatic element of Madison and maybe, you know, since this is your story, tell me how that formed you. Yeah, very good. My father already welcomed it in his ministry. Although it didn't seem to get much of a beachhead. At Madison, before Dante was there, there was already the previous pastor, Virgil Patterson was also black and also, he was not Pentecostal, he was PCUSA, Presbyterian Church of the United States, or the USA. And then, but he was charismatic. So in fact, he resigned because of racism in the Church of Reformed Church and resistance to the Holy Spirit, not just in the denomination, but at Madison itself. So part of the pain of our history, we've got plenty of pain in numerous mistakes, but was that particular resignation of Reverend Virgil Patterson. I actually got introduced to him by Dante. In the first year I was there, in 1982 or 83, he died of cancer and young. I think he was in his late 50s, maybe. But just myself, so I wasn't completely, out of the loop in terms of ministry of the Holy Spirit. And when I started attending Madison, they would always invite people up for prayer afterwards. And I'd see people getting their hands laid on them and oil would come out. It was not center stage though. It was, I wouldn't say it was hidden, but it was quiet. And then it just sort of picked up steam. In fact, there were times in the life of our church and some of these were after you left, Paul, like in the early 2000s, where we would have 30 people go down on the floor, including white, Christian Reformed, buttoned up accountants or lawyers. And we're trying to swoon or whatever, that we just called that resting in the spirit. And we'd have speaking in tongues, that actually happened mostly in the 90s, 1990s and early 2000s when it was growing like crazy. We'd get 300 students on a Sunday morning. Dante was still there. He left in 1996, but it was a time when we were, he left in 1996, but it was the most spiritually formative time of my life because of these interactions with the Holy Spirit that were happening in worship services, but also in other meetings. And people were coming to Christ and there were healings, including my own daughter. It was an exciting, very formative time. And there was such a sense of the presence of God in that sanctuary. We would, I would hear people over and over and over again. And this surprised them. They walked in the sanctuary and started to weep. Yeah, yeah. And nothing was going on, except they were walking into the room where maybe the musicians are starting to crank up a little bit, but that, and you know, now that I look back on it, Dante and I would do this consecrated the sanctuary thing, but so would other people. The prayer servants started walking. So if you got there early, you would watch people with their head down and they would stop at a chair because we didn't have, after 1991, we moved from used to chairs, but, and then they would pray. And then there was the next one and the next one. And then there'd be a circle of about 20 people that would, the musicians and the prayer servants would pray and you could, loud enough you could hear and they're praying for people that were coming in. And then at the close of the service, you could be invited forward. In fact, in the middle of the service, we would often say, come to the altar and lament, or we probably didn't use that word. It's hip now, but back just weep to cry out to God. And there we would for sometimes 10 minutes. So, I mean, you had to be, in my view, spiritually totally insensitive. If you didn't sense the presence of God, and I was gonna look it up, but I'll just refer it. 1 Corinthians 14, basically is talking about tongues and prophecy. And then Paul says, unbelievers will come among you and they will say, certainly God is in this place and the secrets of their heart will be revealed. Now, that kind of thing, or some variation on that seemed to happen almost every week. And so I would read more about the Holy Spirit. I would preach on the Holy Spirit. We had healing services once a month on Sunday night. Yeah, I remember them. I remember them well. And people would come from all over and ask for healing and we would pray. So you're doing reformed theology with this charismatic interweaving going on, plus black gospel music. It was a very unique mix for quite a while. Yeah, yeah. Talk to me a little bit about mentoring because fairly early on, I went there in college and then transitioned to seminary. And I remember you took an active role. I mean, you initiated and said, well, why don't we get together, we'll read some books and we'll go over and take some space from the Catholics and do some prayer. And my sense is, I think I was probably one of the prototypes or one of the first people to do that with you. But my sense is that you did this all along because I continue to bump into Christian reform ministers that you very much shaped. Because during my years, it sort of went from me when my sister and I started going, what attracted us was that it was not, she was going to RBC at that time. And I was going to Calvin. It was not like going to the Noel Crest worship service. It was much more like the, something like the church that had formed my sister and I. But then there was the student invasion and which I'm sure as a church was a little, probably one of these blessings that the Lord gives that sometimes you ask, Lord, would you bless someone else with that blessing? But you took it upon yourself to mentor young men and women going into the ministry. And I think actually, I don't think either of us will know the legacy that that will leave for the denomination. But my sense of it is that it is significant for the church. So talk to me about why you started that and what you learned as you did it for years. Well, what I, this is a good question. What I noticed as I started ministry is that I learned how to read the Bible from Calvin's seminary, including things like church history and all that sort of thing. And I learned theology and I learned how systematic theology and biblical theology fit together. And I think I had a great education. But I learned how to evangelize, disciple and lead from people I hung out with who were doing it themselves. And that was my father, Dave Sikuling and Dante Venegas, including sitting around their table and watching how they interacted with their spouses and their children and going on hospital calls with them. By the way, Artie Berger is another one and he's an elder. He's also in heaven. I did his funeral a year and a half ago. Lovely man. Think Morgan Freeman, but as a deeply committed Christian. Yeah, yeah, yeah. I can still hear his voice. I can still hear his voice. Yeah, so let me do a little detour. So we would have newcomers classes and we would say to them, well, why'd you come to Madison and why'd you stay? And like 50% or more would say, well, Artie Berger, and sometimes they didn't even know his name, our elder would say, hello, sweetheart, or son, it's a son, welcome back, right? And they would say, I felt like I was loved here and accepted and he had great cologne, which he did. Sometimes they would say that too. And then every once in a while I would say, and then they would say the music was so good. And every once in a while I would say, preaching's okay too, don't you think? They would reference him over and over and over and over again. It was amazing. Yeah, so I don't know where I was going before I went on my little side trip there. Mentoring. Oh yeah, yeah, thank you, thank you. So I noticed that my dad taught me, Dante taught me and Dave taught me and it was kind of hang out, it was pretty informal. I don't remember ever reading, well, my dad and I would read books together, but not Dave and Dante, they just take me with them when they went places. Which I started to do, but I would get eight to 10 to 12 seminary students or college students who wanted to be in this group. And I would say to them, I can spend some one-on-one time with you, but I'll do it at your request and we're gonna meet as a group. So that was actually quite rich because they would reinforce each other. And then at the, the document I sent you, Paul, was I started writing down some of the things I had learned and it was just one page. And I would hand that out to them and I would say, if you wanna hear me talk more about how I learned this stuff, let's talk about it. But I would also, more importantly, I would, the second, sorry, the backside of it was, what question would you like the group to deal with? And then I would say the edgier the better and they can be personal. And if I think they're out of bounds, I'll just tell you. But it's boring if you're not asking good questions. So, and then I would give them some examples and that's actually where that, that's how that document started. Because then I would say, let's just say you're a regular there. I don't know if I did this with you yet, but later I would say, Paul, it's your turn. You need to come with a question. I'll have my own, but you gotta come with a question next week. And if it only took, it would be for one hour, I'd start at four and end at five because they all got their studying to do. But if it only took us a half an hour to kind of deal with your question, then I'd have my own in my pocket, so to speak. But they would ask questions about worship services and why we did this. And because I would push them a bit, they would ask me questions that were sometimes pretty hard to answer. Or I would have to say, there's more going on here than I could talk about, but I would break confidentiality if I did, so I can't. Stuff like that. But mentoring was, I got poured into by these three or four men and my mother and Elaine Smeeling. So there's women too, but primarily these four men. And it's my turn to do the same and give away to others. Plus I loved doing it. It was just fun. Yeah, yeah, yeah. Well, Elaine, I mean, you mentioned, you mentioned bringing back some saints for me. And one of the things, even though it's not the focus of this conversation, but the people might listen to this and say, oh, here's two pastors talking, yada, yada, yada. But the church is not the pastor. And it sounds cliche, but it's true. And so part of what made Madison really special in those years, I started going there in the 80s and actually left for the Dominican Republic in 1990. But part of what made it special during those years were saints like Artie Berger and Elaine Smeeling and Rod Mulder and many, many, many, many dear saints that's his church. That's what his church does. So true. Now, after I left, I remember I was there during this big expansion where suddenly you've got, sometimes I talk to pastors and pastors are like, oh, I really want my church to grow fast. And I'm like, I was at a church that grew fast and you know what? It wasn't much fun. It wasn't much fun at all. People got lost. It's hard on everyone. And that kind of rapid, it's exciting to not, it's exciting for a little bit. And then you're just annoyed at not finding a place to park or not getting a seat and just being part of a crowd. But during those years in the late 80s, the church grew very quickly. And then there was when I was already gone in the seminary, you had a building project and the church had said right away, this isn't gonna be about bricks and mortar. We're gonna do one building and then we're going to plant. Talk to me about, and a lot of that happened when I wasn't there. So although I do have like Mark Holland who, is around here, was there for some of that. Talk to me about what you learned in the attempts at trying to plant. And then you went multi-site. So talk to me about some of that. Well, yeah, so we went, in 1985, we went from one service to two services because we couldn't fit everybody in at 11. So we went to an 830 service and then did Sunday school in between. But 830, there are some people that they love that, but inviting a friend to an 830 service, I mean, they really can't believe it. 830, right, so that didn't work very well. I mean, and then we went to a 10 o'clock service, which most of the students went to that one because they could still get breakfast and they could eat lunch. But it's also the most optimum time just to go to church. So that one would fill up. And then the other two would, the 1130 would pretty much fill up too. But we were actually doing three services plus the Sunday evening service. So part of what was going on there was we were wearing ourselves and other people out. I almost left the ministry in 19, let's see what year was that, 90 or 91. I think it was 91 or two. It was in there. There was a conjunction of a whole lot of things, but some of it was we just had so many people and so many hurting people and we didn't have enough staff. And it was just driving me crazy, not just me, all of us crazy. So we thought, God is sending us people we should plant. And we planted two daughter congregations, but neither one of them survived. They both got into trouble. And so when the multi-site idea came along, part of the reason they, you do sort of the exit interview thing is they didn't get them enough personal, spiritual, I don't know about financial, but personal and spiritual support from us. And multi-site was actually a way of us being a lot more connected together and care for one another and still to grow. I have mixed feelings about multiple services and multiple site. I have a very strong sense that we have to plant churches. I think church planting like Keller, Tim Keller's work on church planting. I feel like shouting when I read his stuff on church planting. And if you don't, I mean, to make it real simple, and I think he uses this analogy, I'm not quite sure. If you have an apple orchard, the ultimate goal of an apple orchard isn't apples, it's other apple trees. And if you're not planting new apple trees, your 80 year old orchard is eventually gonna not produce any apples either. And there's certain, when you plant a church, there's a group of people or a niche that that church will reach that yours won't. So, and if you wait until churches are ready to plant, you won't plant churches. So you have to have leadership that shoves people out and says, the people who are already here are not our only priority. Right. There's this priority too, and you have to, they have to be balanced. One doesn't get more than the other. And so, I think of multi-site is the only way your church is gonna plant. I'm okay with it, but I think it, I think it's got built in problems. And I don't know that I necessarily wanna talk a long time about that, but I'm not a big flag waker, flag waiver for multi-site or even multi-services because we really had three different churches meeting on Sunday morning. Yeah. And trying to pastor, I mean, we would, on Sunday morning, our highest attendance was over 1,500 and the building did seat more than about 470. So we were maxing out these spaces. And there's a vibrancy about cramming people in, but it's an event you attend more than a community you belong to. And I think Jesus is gonna welcome me in because of the blood of the cross, but there might be a little purgatory conversation I'm gonna have with you about some stupid things I did. Surprise, you got a lot of things right. There really is a purgatory. How much people seem to spend longer time in there, just so you know. Well, the Catholics will enjoy what you just said. Now, one of the things that is recent for you is retirement. I'm not there yet. I've probably got eight to 10 years before retirement, Lord willing. But talk to me about that because one of the things that is clear through your story and from what I've, at least from my viewpoint of you is, pastoring is very much who you are and what you do. And retirement then is a, if people don't like purgatory because they can't find it in scripture, neither can you find retirement yet. This is something that we must figure out. And I've watched a variety of pastors do this and I've seen them do it in different ways. So I'm curious to hear about your transition and your reflections on this. Well, mine was a little weird, but by the way, the retirement word, I refuse to use it. I would talk about transition. And then once I would describe what transition meant, they would go, oh, you're retiring. So I would use transition. And I would say I'm retiring from my role as senior pastor at Madison Church. I retired my last day was December 31, 2019. I remember Ash Wednesday that year was something like February 26. And we were talking about coronavirus and making jokes about Corona beer. And then a couple of weeks after that, we do the two weeks to shut down things. Yeah, the two weeks to end the pandemic. Right, right. So, and then was it May, the end of May, George Floyd is shot. So people accused me of having prophetic ability because my, and my retirement included a financial gift from the church. So some of the people that knew me well said, you know, now this was like six months into the pandemic, everybody's worried about their budgets. And they said to me, wow, you know, you really planned that well, because they actually, you actually, did you cash check yet? So I got out just before all that happened. Let me just say a little bit about when I almost quit in 1992, I ended up in a retreat center in Wisconsin, a Catholic retreat center and sister Mary Ann, who I know and love to this day became my spiritual director. He'd never heard of the Christian informed church. So I could use any name I wanted to not have to do the filter thing, right? And she said, you're exhausted, you're burned out. And she helped me and she's very, she's very rooted in her Catholic faith, but was very ecumenical at the same time. And we would make jokes about Thomas Aquinas and John Calvin up in heaven enjoying our relationship. And here's, this is, this is to me, it's really funny. And you'd understand it because I think of the way you got raised as well as I. The second year I'm there, she says to me, I can tell you preach grace, but you live by works. And I laugh out loud, she says, why is that so funny? I said, when I was a kid, we were taught that Christian informed people live by faith, but Roman Catholics live by works. And God has to send me all the way to Wisconsin to a Roman Catholic nun for her to say to me, you preach grace, but you live by works. So I started to organize my life in a different way and set up boundaries and develop my relationship to Jesus Christ by the habits that I pursued. And it wasn't as if I didn't have any good habits, but she really helped me nail them down. And I went back there 15 years in a row until it closed. And she was enormously helpful to me. Jesus saved my soul and Sister Marian saved my ministry. And I became much more joyful and much less pushed around by what people thought. We can all say we don't care what people, any of the time somebody says, I don't really care what people think of me, inside I go, my crap detector goes off. And the other thing is I had five sabbaticals of three months. So in 38 years, I had five of them. And for three months, I didn't preach. I wasn't the guy. Nobody laughed at any of my jokes except my family. Nobody took shots at me either. And I didn't go to a meeting for 90 days in a row. By the way, if when I get to the next place, they're having a meeting, I'll figure I ended up in the wrong place. There are no meetings in heaven. There's only meetings in hell. So what I had to do is I got four tastes of what it was like to be in this chapter of my life. And it pretty quickly dawned on me that my relationship to Jesus, my relationship to Melanie, or my relationship to my children and at least one good friend were vitally important for me, not just for now, this future time, but right now. And I started to realize I didn't have enough really close friends. And I needed to invest more in my marriage. Now, let me say that what she got was time with me, but too often my head was somewhere else. And I had to figure out how to change that. But especially spend time with Jesus so that my identity was so nailed to that rather than I'm the guy or I'm the senior pastor or that kind of thing. Now, it's also been fairly easy for me because a couple of organizations have said, if you do mentoring and some teaching, and then Melanie and I agreed, I'd only preach once a month, which during the pandemic was fine. But now I get a lot more requests because all these pastors know me. And I am amazed how different Saturday night feels. Oh my goodness. So I'll use the word retirement a couple of months afterwards. This is the analogy I use. When I was a young father and I would put my kids on my shoulder and walk for a quarter mile and then take them off my shoulder, I felt like I could blow. I didn't realize how much weight I carried for 38 years. Is the offering gonna be enough? Do I have to fire this person because they're not performing? And if I do, what kind of crap is gonna hit the fan? Another elder's had an affair. I mean, it's just on and on and on. What do you say to people? What do you not say to people? What do you do with this ridiculous email you're getting? All that stuff is... I remember saying to my father, you preached every Sunday morning and every Sunday night. You did all the funerals, you did all the way. You taught catechism. How did you do it? And his response was, I didn't have email. Great answer. It's a great answer. Well, I think we've covered at least an initial take of the waterfront and you've been gracious, Dave, and allowed me to pepper you with questions. I always give a chance at the end of the talk. Is there anything you wanna say or you wanna ask me? Anything we didn't hear from you? Anything you wanna say or you wanna ask me? Anything you wanna say or you wanna ask me? Anything we didn't get in that you'd like to get in? Why do you do this? Why is it fruitful and fulfilling? Not this. Well, you can add that too if you want, but why do you do what you do? This YouTube channel thing. Well, I got into it because if you go to my channel and if you look for the Freddie and Paul show, that's how I got into YouTube. A member of my church who was disabled, who was a mook on, you know who Howard Stern is? He was a mook on a local Howard Stern type shock jock. And he's a white kid from a couple of Dutch CRC parents who grew up in a black high school and so loves to rap. And so he's kind of a mook on this rap station and that all fell through at some point. And he says to me, Pastor Paul, why don't you and me do a TV show? So I didn't want, every now and then he'd go down to public access and that was not gonna work into my schedule. And so I said, well, why don't I just take my cell phone, Freddie and we'll do the Freddie and Paul show. And when we go out to lunch or after Sunday sometime, we'll just spend five minutes or so and we'll talk about sports and he'll give a rap. And sometimes his mom will be on and sometimes his mom's boyfriend. And I mean, just do some stuff like that. And so we did that for a year or so. And we had 10 or 15 people, sometimes 10 or 15 hits on the show, probably most of them him and me. And so then that's how I sort of got started into YouTube. And then people would, I blogged for a number of years and people would often say, when are you gonna write a book? It's like, how on earth do you write a book when you're pastoring? And I always blogged because I wrote on CRC Voices, partly just because as you well know, especially now you got all your ministry in West Michigan, which is special in some ways, but in other ways, if you're out here sort of on a frontier, some of us need to write or speak to process. And so I did that with blogging for quite a while. And then people would say, well, when are you gonna write a book? It's like, and I soon realized that if I wrote a book, my mother would buy it just because I wrote it. She might read some of it, but what's the point? Most of the people in my church don't read books, but they do watch TV. And not my church so much because a lot of them are quite old, but people do watch things. And so I started playing around a little bit more with YouTube when they had the Freddie and Paul show. And then Jordan Peterson came along and I began to, first this guy's giving lectures on the Bible in Toronto, and he had rented a 600 seat theater, and he's packing the place out and they're spending 40 bucks a head to listen to him. And I thought, well, see some evangelical that's sort of been undercover at University of Toronto. And so he started listening to his lectures and it's like, no, this is no evangelical. And I knew Phil Reinders, you and I both know Phil. Phil's up there at Knox, he was up there at Knox and right on the U of T campus. And I thought, there's plenty of empty seats. That's to say nothing against my friend Phil. And he's a wonderful preacher and a terrific pastor. And I have a world of respect for Phil, but if some of the best preachers I know can't fill their churches, why is this guy rambling about the Bible for two plus hours and people can't get enough of it? And then I read in the comment section about how, well, they wanna learn more about the Bible and they wanna go to church and they're going to Orthodox churches of all places. I thought something is happening here. And so then I made a video, basically talking a little bit about Jordan Peterson, because I knew there was also an intersection with YouTube. And so I did that. And then suddenly I had, before I had 15 subscribers for the Freddie and Paul show, none of them for the Freddie and Paul show. And then I had 300 and before, you know what, I had a thousand and then 2000. And then I thought I should keep doing this. And so it sort of replaced my blog in that I would do commentary on some of the stuff Jordan Peterson would do or other videos that I would see. I figured out how to do that. And then I also just would sort of talk out loud to let people in some ways, I mean, I have to have an appropriate filter, but to let people understand some of the, what I think about, I mean, you wrote it, you talked a little bit about a crisis of faith early in your college. Well, a lot of people think that pastors, a lot of people don't understand that faith is struggle and faith go together because it's not sight. And I started talking and people started listening and then people would write to me, email and they can we have a conversation? And so I'd be having conversations, I go for weeks and months without a really integral seeker conversation with someone who maybe they were raised in the church, maybe they had never been in church. The first Sunday after I did a video, my friend Rick comes into church, he's my friend now, he comes into church, gives me a little gift and says, I've never been in a church before in my entire life, but I saw you on YouTube. And Rick is now sort of my partner in crime, we never would have got through the pandemic without Rick. And this isn't a dying little church. And for about a year he'd be coming to church, he says, I don't know what you're talking about on Sunday morning, but he does know what I talk about on YouTube. So then people wanted to talk to me, so I'd have these conversations like this on Zoom, but then more and more people wanted to talk to me and there was a fair amount of repetition. So when the conversation was appropriate, I would ask, I'd say, can I record this? Because often we would talk and then they'd email me back and say, what did you say to me when I asked you this? It's like, I don't remember what I said to you. So I started recording it and then I would send them the conversation back. So they would have a record of it, so they could refer back to it. And then with one guy, this is the first one, it was a tremendous conversation. And so I asked, I said, would you mind if I just posted this on my channel? He said, no, that would be okay. So I shared it on the channel. So then people start seeing that and then not only do they wanna talk to me, but they wanna talk to me because they want to share their stories and so it just has kept growing. And I found, so one of the things that Dante prayed over me was that I would be an evangelist. And I had worked in the Dominican Republic with Haitian pastors and I had worked at Living Stones and we had a little bump when I got there and I had mostly black folks who came in then after I got there. And I'm sure part of that was just the fact that I probably more than a lot of other white CRC pastors had a little bit more comfort and familiarity with African-Americans and their story because of how I grew up and what I had been through. But then through this YouTube thing, suddenly then I start getting letters from people that are like, I was in this place and this was going on and I found faith because of you. I didn't anticipate any of this. And so I still don't quite know where all of this leads, but I certainly see the fruit. And so my church is small. Most of my members are elderly, but a sermon that 30 or 40 people will hear in the room on Sunday morning, a thousand or more will have heard on Saturday. So this is what I do. And then I just, every now and then I say, well, what should I do next? And I keep doing what I'm doing. And then I think about people I wanna talk to. And I said, early on, one of the things I wanted, I wanted some more ministers on, especially Christian foreign ministers on the channel to talk about their lives and talk about their faith because people don't, a lot of people today have very little experience with the church and a good number of people have bad experience with the church. And nothing, I want this channel to be honest. So I don't want people to lie or cover up their thoughts or their feelings or their stories. I think you have to put them out there and obviously in an appropriate way. There are only about half of the conversations actually get posted on the channel because people's stories are messy and not everything belongs on YouTube. Right. But this has been, I've really seen God work through this. And I believe we are seeing a movement of God's spirit. I think we might in fact, in the next 10 years, see a significant movement of God's spirit where he continues to transition his church. I think part of the Madison story is very much a Christian reform story because that church that you grew up in or that at least you knew, the entire Christian reform church is becoming outliers in terms of that old culture that is going away. And I think it's partly for that reason that Madison played the role that it did because in some ways it was a harbinger of a much bigger transition that the Christian reform church has been going through. I mean, the kinds of, I remember you saying at one point, the kinds of stuff we're doing here at Madison is hardly cutting edge. A little bit charismatic, a little bit more expressive, some more contemporary music. You know, lots of churches were doing that, but part of the reason I think you had the accountants and the lawyers who were falling on their face in front of the sanctuary is because of this transition that's happening. And I, even though I think we will continue to see a significant transition in the American church, we're going to see a whole lot of churches dying. I think God is going to continue to do what he's done all along through his spirit. It begins with these little Jewish communities and then these Gentiles coming in and, you know, Lydia. I mean, they have no synagogue in Philippi because they don't have 10 Jewish men. So you have a bunch of women out there by the stream and, you know, she extends to Paul, hospitality, and he accepts. So I think we will continue to see this transition, but it is led by the spirit of God, and none of us, you know, are smart enough to see what exactly God is going to do, but he's doing it. And so this little YouTube channel in my own small way, you know, I pray is part of Christ's renovation of his church. So that's why I do it. Beautiful phrase, renovation of his church. And God loves his church a lot more than we do. Yeah, yeah. And the Roman Empire once dominated the world with all its technology and equeducts and military might, and it is gone and the church is still here. Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. So that's why I do this. And, you know, and so this, so you put out a conversation and you never quite know what it's going to do. And on my channel, my commentaries on Jordan Peterson or Jonathan Pigeot or other people, they tend to get the most views, but it's these conversations that I think really impact people, partly because they're just so true. I mean, you're an honest man and you've shared, you've given us little glimpses into your life and there will be people out there that this conversation will be different because, you know, a lot of pastors went to Madison and a lot of people went to Madison. And so people will, I think, be blessed by your curation of your story and Madison's story. But there are others out there that God will use this little conversation to bless them and to move them. And so, I see it all the time. Good. Well, it's been a delightful way to spend a couple of hours, Paul. Yeah, Dave, it certainly has. And so thank you for your generosity and I certainly praise God for your story and the way that he's used you. And I'll just end the recording right now and then we can wrap it up. Okay.