https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=scQlbO_u_7Y

 Too many concurrent sessions. What was, what did I? I had this problem before. All right. All right. Now let's try again. Oh, are we streaming? I guess we are. I guess it's working. Here we go. One way of understanding Neoplatonism is to see it as basically a thousand-year project of trying to unpack what Plato was saying through Socrates. Socrates, with Socrates said, you know, his wisdom consisted in him knowing that he did not know, which is not skepticism. He's not him claiming he doesn't know. That's the easy mistaking of what Socrates is on about. So there's a direct line, and I'm going to argue this when I do after Socrates, between Socrates saying, I know. I wonder, you know, I often, you know, he promised to do after Socrates, but he announced that before COVID. And I mean, I feel pretty, I feel pretty happy that my rig was always just me. And then when it came along, of course, things improved. But I was happy. I'm really not depending on, dependent on anybody else just to make this channel go. Oh, that I do not know. And Nicholas of Cusa talking about learned ignorance. Hi, John, for Vakey. I'm really happy to see you again. Now it's I think, you know, just for those watching on the live stream, Sevilla, her channel is a quality existence. And she's been around pretty much from the start. She's the one who coined the term the little corner of this little corner of the internet. And she has been she's devoted her channel basically to the study of Pursig Zen and the art of motorcycle maintenance. And Lila. And so she's she's actually she I've had conversations with her, Peugeot said conversations with her. John said conversations with her. So she's she's a part. She's a player in this, but one that not a lot of people necessarily know about. So I'm really looking forward to this conversation, Sevilla. I've been wanting to talk to you for quite a while. So I'm very happy to hear. And I've so I've so enjoyed what you've been doing lately. One of the things you've been doing lately is talking a lot about neoplatonism, which I've become interested in as well, more than likely through you. So so I think one thing that. Evan, Evan Friedman, you're looking for a link. Look at my latest video post and try a link from there. It's not going to talk to him. Yeah, it's not a Patreon thing. There's there's Shirley. I'm going to say something now. Shirley's Rick's mom. So Rick is real. Shirley can attest to it. But I saw you reading at some point. I don't remember which video that was. It was fairly recently. It might have been with Paul VanderKlaai. I think could be reading this book. Yeah, I know God. And so that really excited me because I was reading it at the same time. Since since you put the idea, you know, in my unconscious and in my conscience, I'm very interested because of my interest in Persics metaphysics and a metaphysical understanding of reality for some reason really, really appeals to me. It makes the most sense to me. So in the in the meaning crisis, you said we don't have a place for wisdom. And then you said something really interesting in the Four Horsemen video. You said the secular human humanism is of course the reasonable goal of wealth has the reasonable goal of well-being or equality. But then you said and here's Australia for all intents and purposes is a secular humanist paradise. And yet suicide is outpacing covid deaths. Yeah, that's what I've been told. And they appear to becoming, you know, they've become very authoritarian. So the idea of the good for everyone can be enforced by rationality just doesn't seem to be working. But this this model says there's nothing beyond rationality and person would call this a subject object way of looking at things where there's absolute objects and absolute subjects and that way of seeing things. He calls it subject object metaphysics is yield an unquenchable desire and capability for certainty mostly over the biological threats. But at the same time you get all that boredom because you've conquered the purpose that we were put on, you know, in a lot of ways put on this planet to to contend with which is nature. Let's just say so nature is kind of removed from the picture. And here we are in this, you know, intellectual level hell. And there's so so there's there's that. So Jonathan has said then unless we all are united under a highest good then our spiritual attention gets fragmented towards the lesser gods. And he he jokingly mentioned the flying spaghetti monster, which is which is a trope from my generation. But we see but we see that this divide now, you know, it's causing this divide, which is like a holy war. And each side is unwilling to update their dogmatic worldview. That's one problem. Another problem is again, you know, the real big problem, the meta problem is the meaning crisis. But, you know, that that believing in God per se, like through Christian or, you know, another dog, another established lens might not be an option for people. And Jonathan and Paul have both talked about the Christianity has a certain inadequacy these days that maybe it's going downhill, that maybe it's coming to an end of a cycle and there needs to be some kind of revivification. Yes. So you're saying that in that revivification, this is what I understand. You're seeing neoplatonism, platinus and later neoplatonists as a possibility. In fact, as a strong possibility of a place to look to revivify this this lack of coherence on a spiritual level. And that perhaps even is it fair to say that the religion that's not a religion might be really grounded in neoplatonism? Yeah, it properly understood as a source for revivification, not the revivification itself. Right. We can't go back to neoplatonism anymore than we go back to shamanism or things like that. Yeah. And there are aspects of Platonism that are incommensurate. What do you want me to agree or disagree with, Grizz? I mean, part of where Peugeot, so you've got my you've got Peugeot and myself and Vervecky and I'm kind of in the middle of them being a Protestant. And I'm on the side of Peugeot in that I'm a committed Christian and I believe all the Christian stuff. But I also think that Vervecky is right when he says there's no going back. And I think what we're actually going to see is Chesterton pointed this out. This is part of what Peugeot talks about in terms of a new cycle that what Christianity has able Christianity survived the death of what C.S. Lewis called the discarded image, which is an amazing thing. And I think Islam is is clearly struggling with modernity and Islam took a massive hit when sort of the focus of energy and attention left the Islamic world and was really came into Europe during the age of discovery in the colonial period. And a lot of. Resurgent Islam ism is sort of a reaction to that. Why? Why has Islam lost its way? And there's plenty of that within Christianity. Why is Christianity lost its way? You know, Grizz, if you really want to have a conversation, you're going to get out. I have to get out of that shed and drop into the discord. And yes, we know you have a Patreon. So I think. And that's why, you know, even though I certainly celebrate, as in the last live stream, you know, many people heading to orthodoxy, I think orthodoxy will continue to change and develop as well. I don't think I don't see change as. Optional in any of this. So I, you know, I, I basically agree with that. And I, I actually think that. You know, whether I don't know, you know, what will happen with John, but I think for many, many people, especially here in the West. Christianity is going to be the the most live option. OK, 15 minutes. Save me a seat. Yeah, I got my own schedule here, Grizz. I wasn't planning on this being a long one. Go ahead, Casey. You want to say something? Yeah, so. Oh, shoot. So do you see John as maybe. Serving is sort of a. This is a loaded word. Sort of like a prophet type figure where he's just sort of opening the door to people. To more people, kind of like Jordan Peterson did. Where he's just sort of opening the door to more people and saying here, there is something here. And maybe. Pushing them in that direction, but getting sort of mixed up. With his own. What's going on with him where he's people can't return to Christianity and it has to. I think Christianity probably will have to transform. But who knows what it'll be and trying to direct it in any way may end up being. It may end up failing trying to have a person direct it, let's say. Yeah, it's I mean, basically by by definition, all this spiritual talk. None of us. So I so Cassidy recommended a movie to me that just came out now in the streaming services, Amazon, Google, the Jesus music. And I'm about a third of the way into it. It's really been good so far. Things have been changing rapidly around us. In some ways that the Christianity that my grandparents were raised in. I mean, what where we are now is in some respects, you know, nearly in this, you know, is just remarkably different from the Christianity of my grandparents. And so things are changing rapidly. And the question with all of this stuff is, can you in fact change productively so that you don't lose the thread? I mean, that's always the case. And I really do one of these day. I talk about it all the time. I have to dig up this clip and it was in the Peterson Sam Harris talks when Peterson is basically basically acknowledging the way of humanity, which is if you don't change, you will die. If you change too much, you will die. The whole point is finding what you can change. It's basically for Vakey's relevance realization. And so I think John is also like Peterson becoming a bridge by which via John's own transformations, which you know, we've John and I have now been talking three for for about three years. John's transforming me. I'm transforming him. Peterson's clearly continuing to transform and evolve. All of these transformations are going on. And the question is, do you lose the thread? And that's, you know, that's up to God to decide. But that's that's what we're all working on. Is it we talked about this earlier today in the discord? Is it cattle? So it's sort of a spirit of something that's coming that's going to emerge something new. Does it have to be catalyzed by a person like some person comes along and like catalyzes the spirit in some ways? But it's like if you're trying to do that consciously, that's where you run into like serious trouble. So like, does it just have to happen naturally? Like, are we just are we pushing this along too fast? We have to let this grow or the stakes too high to not do something about it. It it it it stuff is going to happen. I mean, look at the Protestant Reformation, for example. Luther begins wanting to initiate a confessional conversation within the Roman Catholic Church about indulgences and a variety of topics. He's been reading Erasmus. He's you know, Europe is now the printing presses there. New texts are coming forward. And, you know, some of the powers that be in the Roman Catholic Church basically want to stomp on it like they've stopped on things before. Oh, but now the printing presses there. Oh, but Luther's the prince that's, you know, that recruited Luther to Wittenberg doesn't want to see his priest burned at the stake. So I'm going to I'm going to put you in the castle. And, you know, we're going to let the politics play out. And, of course, everything just happens. So, yeah, things are going to change. Yeah, you're exactly right that people are catalysts in these processes. Martin Luther King Jr. You know, was a tremendous catalyst in terms of the the transformation of race racial conversations in the United States. Down a certain direction, very different direction than Malcolm X, who was another catalyst. And so, you know, Peterson definitely playing a role. But for Vakey's also playing a role and Peugeot's playing a role and we're playing a role. So, yeah, you definitely need people as catalysts to to see these things go. And someone in the discord asked, well, well, where? Well, you know, it's quite remarkable that something like the Apostles Creed. Endures till today. And nobody quite knows who wrote the Apostles Creed. Sort of like the Bible, it sort of emerged up from below. And the church is thinking of emerging from below. Speaking of emerging from below. Sorry to interrupt your spiel about Apollo Creed. That was a boxer in a Rocky, right? Can we see more of this, the Vakey thing? How about the thirty two forty two timestamp or the thirty nine nineteen one? OK, you want to jump there? Thirty two. OK, let's start. OK, here we go. And he heard you say this and he really lit up. There's. That's that's definitely something that is really interested me is. There's something, you know, there's you have these scientists, let's let's just say they're in the scientific space where they where they are. They feel like they're absolutely objective. They feel like this is what Peugeot said in that there's a nice clip with with all four of you talking about your conception of the meaning crisis in the in the four horsemen that that Jonathan posted. And he said that he heard you say this and he really lit up. And then he restated it in his own words, which is how can you think you're standing outside of your experience and being objective? There's no possibility for pure objectivity. Yeah, there's this is Thomas Nagel made that point in a very great book, The View From Nowhere. The idea that we can have a view from nowhere is a fundamental mistake. But the typical reaction to that is a fundamental mistake, too. The typical reaction is a kind of perspectivalism in which all all we have is an indefinite number of perspectives and they're all equally good. So you get a kind of complete relativism. That also is a mistake. To say that we so jumping gris when it hits the point that you it's really salient for you. We're not just like that view doesn't include the capacity to take the view within itself. That's what I meant about that. And this is Nagel's point, right? That the attempt to do that doesn't provide an ontology that actually grounds the practice doesn't give a place for the existence of science itself. Yeah, exactly. But let's see. So you're saying that basically let me put it in. OK, it's that no matter like we're we're going to exist within a bubble of unknowable. Like things that are always going to be outside the realm of our knowledge, no matter how broad and advanced. But that is the thing that we're embedded in. And that's the dilemma of our species is the point I had. Or always limited. I mean, there's no getting around this limitation. Yeah, that might be what like when people talk about tell us like, is there a tell us to science? Maybe that is that's like the hidden one, right? Is ascending of our species to something that can know everything. Maybe that's what's trying to manifest through science. Or at least that may be one aspect of it. Yeah, but although science, I think, has demonstrated that what we do is we silo because the duration of our lives, the capacity of our awareness, all that limitation will will in a sense together as communities. We attempt to transcend it because we transcend our individual limitations. But we're still, you know, we're still limited. We're not God. I mean, and in a sense, God is the variable that fits into that equation because God is, you know, what knows what? I mean, God is the everything in many ways. Right. God give me the serenity to slot me into the right compartment where my knowledge matches where I'm needed. Yes. Yes. Let's see what's available is going to say really basic, you know, please. One of my best settings is I don't put things in accessible enough terms. So please. Well, you're working on a vocabulary that, you know, you're working on vocabulary to really try to pinpoint these concepts. I don't think that's a besetting sin. I think it's just a function of the role that he's playing. You have to. I mean, I come up with plenty of new words, too. And I got God one and God two and all these concepts and they get they get horribly inside. But it's just part of the practice. Well, the main reason that was excited for to see you do a commentary on this was because I knew it was like you watching to your friends going at it. And that would be fun for you and it'd be fun to see you have fun. So, yeah. Well, and it's it is fun. It's it's great fun. And I haven't there's so many videos out right now that I'd love to do commentaries on it. I just simply don't have the time. So I take these little stabs at it. And actually, I trust, you know, you not just grim, not just gris and, you know, people who post on Twitter. And I judged I helped you all help me sort of develop a hierarchy of what I should pay attention to next. So and this one I've tried to get through a few times. It's and it's not not any problem with the content each time I start listening. It's like, I got to get through this video. But there's just so much here. And the earlier part where Verveckis talking about picture thinking, I think was also really good. Forty one thirty three is good. But thirty nine nineteen is when they laugh. OK, we'll see that. We'll get we'll get to there. We're at thirty five. Also, you know, we'd rather read the glossary, you know, we think we're worth it reading the glossary. But what what I think it must mean then is why would you even want to do science at all if you didn't value the fruits of science? So there has to be a value. And I think this is probably the most basic way you could put it. There is some value in doing science. Let's say you could you could parse it out and say, well, because we finally discovered that if you don't if if you can step away from matter or material, then you can actually manipulate it and then you can live longer. So that's a value. And I would say that that is the way you get to science, if that's your value. Right. If you decide if you try to do science that way, you get corrupted by funding. Right. So when scientists are at their best, but I'm going to reinforce your point. When scientists at their best, they're doing it because they love the goodness and beauty of truth. Right. And then when you say, well, that that's good. That's good. Tell me that the three trends and demos in there. Yeah, yeah. And, you know, that's parallel. Another video that I've you know, I really loved lately was that Megan Domb on Rebel Wisdom because they were hitting a bunch of these things, too. Such that that makes sense to you. Right. What is it about truth that's inherently good and beautiful that draws you into the practice of science? And tell me how that sits within your worldview. That's a that's a way of putting it because if the scientist is drawn by anything other than that, the scientists will not engage in what is fundamental to science, which is the continual attempt to overcome self-deception. Science is a family of methods for overcoming self-deception in our attempt to understand the world. Science. And I think actually, you know, where he's doing what he's doing here, this gets into a video that I just recorded. It's kind of a rant of why why won't Jordan Peterson go to church yet when he's making these points that he's making. But the point that what what what Vervecki says here about science is also true about wanting God, because, again, within the idea of God, you have the idea of everything, at least everything good, everything beautiful, everything true. And so this when you go back to Peterson's conversation with the two Catholic theologians, if you're pursuing anything but God, if you if you pursue God, you can have everything that's within God and under God. If you make science your God, these other things are going to get deformed. And now as human beings, all these other things do get deformed because that's how we are. But in terms of ordering, ordering the life correctly, that's why science can't be God, because there's other things that are left out of science. And when you get into the question of the scientific lab leak, you have to leave three piece of knowledge sort of to the side in order to really use the one P to pursue science. And that's why science is a beautiful thing. It's a good thing. It's a wonderful thing. It's an awful thing, but it's just a limited aspect of the entire domain. And if God is actually at the top of the hierarchy, then you actually get everything. So, yeah, he's saying you can't be a good scientist, basically, unless you're a Christian, unless you're in a Christian value frame. It's like you can't escape this stuff, right? It'll just keep coming back. You can try to articulate it whatever way you want. But really, it's going to keep coming down to the same things and you're not going to escape it. I, you know, Martin Zarathustra asks, how does one pursue something that isn't an object? Well, I think this is in Christianity why the God of Christianity is God number one and God number two, because we clearly need a focal point to pursue. And as Peterson says, again, within like minute twenty three to twenty eight in the conversation with the two Roman Catholics, that's, you know, because then it's Christ. So Christ then becomes the focal point of the object, because in some ways God, as such in paganism, is too far away. It's sort of like worshipping the arena. And now with Christ, now you have a focal point in front of you, because we as human beings need that focal point. I think BS, Martin says, OK. People don't realize how much I love negative comments. I love it because people are then, you know, there's so much there's so much BS in the world. And there can be so much BS in church and so much BS on the Internet that at least when someone cusses me out, I know what they really think. Well, Martin, you're free to leave a comment and say why. Maybe we'll learn something. Well, the problem is what's the alternative? So, OK, so science is your God. Romantic love is your God. What's the alternative? If science is your God, you need to leave three P's to the side and you can't integrate it into your life. If romantic love is your God, you're going to kill the object of your romantic interest because they are not capable of bearing that load. It just goes on and on and on through the system. You need something. You need a focal point. Oh, the PS was not at you, Paul. Thanks, Martin. Sorry, I appropriated somebody else's BS. That's funny. So that's that's I think why we all I think that's part of the reason why we get these cycles of in Christianity where we keep trying other things and other things are found wanting. And it's sort of like John six where Jesus says this outrageous thing about eating my flesh and drinking my blood and everybody leaves and Jesus looks at the cycle. You guys going to leave too? Well, where else can we find? I mean, this is we're stuck with this. I haven't in the in the verveky Sam the second verveky Sam conversation. I thought they had a little portion of it where they talked about If if basically, I mean, John, John continues to make the point rightfully so that a lot of my approach to this doesn't entail ontological necessity. It's really sort of barking up the tree of the ontological argument and saying, I don't see a better system. Therefore, this must be the system. And verveky says, well, you know, I don't agree with that. And so maybe there is a better system. And the problem is then OK. But every time we try to pursue a better system, we keep falling back on the default. And I think for that reason, we keep having these cycles of Christianity. And now with modernity, Christianity survived the loss of the discarded image and the drump and jump into modernity. And Christianity is going to survive the loss of modernity. And, you know, the GK Chesterton's great line, because our God knows the way out of the grave. And that's why I don't think it's going away. But that doesn't mean it won't be messy. And it's like, is that something that you can actually do? It seems that it has to be something that's revealed. Right. It has to be through some sort of revelation. Right. What that is and what that looks like. If there's going to be another one, who knows? But if you're trying really hard to make a new revelation, you're just building another tower of babble. Like you don't have things in the proper order and it's going to fall apart. Yeah. I. None of us are smart enough. To know. What comes next. You can't know enough. And if you sort of conceptualize the mass of humanity is a sort of this giant thing. That's that's, you know. This this is we're groping. We're groping our way towards it. You know, the Protestant Reformation. In many ways, it's just been one failure after another. But it doesn't mean that all of these failures didn't lead us to progress. Because Martin Luther was one of the most important reformers of the Roman Catholic Church. Now, he did so in a negative way, but it wouldn't have you. You wouldn't have the Council of Trent without Martin Luther. And so these things happen all the time in our world. I play civilization and one of the little you know, when you do when you discover a new technology, Sean Bean comes around with this little saying, it's you know, it's our enemies that teach us to build walls. And I think I think that's that's where we're at with Christianity. And I think this huge struggle that we've had over the last hundred and fifty years of Christianity and science, I think as we come, that's something that has to be contended with. And I think we are making progress and any religion that doesn't contend with these things. Buddhism has to contend with secularity and modernity and technology. Islam has to contend with secularity, modernity and technology. And most of the contention has been happening in the developed West. And so the question really isn't whether Buddhism or Islam or the other major world religions can survive back in their homelands. The question is, can they actually survive what has been the greatest challenge against Christianity of our generation, which has been secular modernity, science, technology, all of the disruptions that have come through them. Now we got to keep an eye on the time. Kind of like the video. Yeah, I'm kind of curious. I want to see a little bit more of this isn't it's science isn't its propositions. So you're talking about methods for continual attempt to overcome self-deception. Science is a family of methods for overcoming self-deception in our attempt to understand the world. Science isn't its propositions. Yes, almost everyone, Martin, are postmodernists right now, just like most of the Catholic and Orthodox I know are also Protestants. It's these things come through the world and transform us. And every time I talk about how postmodern Jordan Peterson is, a group of people, no, he's not. It's like he is. He's also modern. Yeah, I there's a friend of mine who's a Baptist and we argue back and forth about like justification and salvation and that kind of thing. So I wrote him a little screen and I use the catechism because I'm Catholic and he read it and he's like, oh, that's basically exactly the same thing that we believe. And I'm like, what do we so the Catholic Church basically took Protestantism absorbed what it wanted and threw out what it didn't want. And we're all just sort of sitting in this muck of we're basically the same, but we're different. And everybody's been changing each other, especially people that are locked in conflict. People locked in conflict change each other all the time. So you're talking about what would you say then that the original science in the Western tradition, which is ancient Greek. Is that what they would say? That's what Stansky meant. Right. And you can see it. You can see you can see somebody within the middle of the Enlightenment. Somebody that people must read more. Spinoza. What did you say? Anybody want to catch me up on what we're talking about? I've only got a few more minutes, so I'm going to keep them going until they laugh and do a little bit more commentary than I'm going to drop out of here at five thirty. So, OK, trying to recover that sense of science and integrate it with the emerging sense of experimental mathematical science that was happening in the Enlightenment. And Spinoza is trying to say we don't have to set these against each other. We can actually dip deeply into weave them. Read Carlisle's books, but knows his religion and that if I could recommend one book on Spinoza that it's a recent book and it's brilliant. It's brilliant. And that's what you can see Spinoza saying. He's saying we don't that ancient Skiancia and modern experimental mathematical science don't have to go their separate ways. They can actually be deeply, deeply interwoven together. And that is the culmination, by the way, an attempt to bring the Neoplatonic tradition probably via, you know, Maimonides and via Kabbalah and other things. It's hard to tell with Spinoza, but it's coming into Spinoza in that fashion and not to be pretentious. But that's what I see my project as being trying to do exactly that. Get the older Skiancia and the modern the modern in the archetypal sense of modern mathematical experience. And I think that's a really clear articulation. And it's interesting to how it takes us a while to figure out what we're doing, even while we're trying to do it. So, so that would mean and that's I think that's a great project. You know, I mean, more than great. I think that that is a necessary project if we're going to, you know, if we're going to do it. And I think that's a necessary project if we're going to, you know, if we're going to allow science to do what it's supposed to do instead of going off the directions that we see it going off in. Like you said funding or like you said corruption or like you said, very much, very much politicization is what we're seeing now. And so if you're doing that, that is again, a reorientation of science in the same way that maybe neoplatonism can reorient us, you know, this this neoplatonist tradition can be all manner of human endeavor being straight of it. So, so, um, to go off of that. I was thinking that let's just say, let's just say you've got this neoplatonic God. Let's say you've got this neoplatonic God. And again, set aside the ontology. I think the idea of God, how God functions in all of our system is just so useful. You never get rid, it keeps coming back. It keeps resolving the equations. It's sort of a matrix like way. It's just inevitable. And I think that's, I think they're kind of laughing here because this is where we keep circling back and winding up. Sorry, that's just a fun sentence. That's just a fun sense. It sounds like we bumped into him at a bar. I think that's what you've been for the past 2000 years. Boy, we sure needed you. Where have you been? Okay, so you have the one. And the thing about the difference, I think, from with the one and with our modern thinking oriented around more. I think, I think I'm going to have to listen to this whole video, but the to the degree that I understand the neoplatonic God. It's too high up. I think part of what happens with Jesus and why Christianity really gets going is God becomes one of us. He's down here. Remember that song that was out, you know, 1520 years ago. What if God were one of us? It's, it's just too powerful for us. What's that? Just a stranger on the bus trying to make his way home. Yeah, yeah. There's issues with the song, of course, theologically. But I think I think that's part of Christianity just takes, you know, a lot of the a lot of the stuff from neoplatonism and just, you know, connects it down so that as Peugeot says, you know, your grandmother can participate in this. I think it's Lewis says almost the exact same thing and a severe mercy that he was once he was into theism, then it was sort of Brahmanism versus Christianity. And he saw that they saw the disconnect in Brahmanism between the high theology and the practitioners in the in the village sacrificing a goat. And what he saw in Christianity was the whole thing was much better seamlessly integrated top to bottom, which is what Peugeot always talks about in terms of Jesus just filling up the hierarchy and connecting heaven and earth and all those things. So you don't even have to be literate to go to church. No, no, you don't. You don't. And that, you know, early on my, you know, when I talked to John about it, the scalability. Why does God become one of us because we need him. And that's the only way grandma and the philosophers can be in communion because every philosopher has a mother or a grandmother who maybe will never read Heidegger or Plato or anything else. And grandma and her brainiac son or daughter need to know each other and find each other in a way that both grandma needs and the brainiac son or daughter need. Because that's how you know it's so cliche. Oh, we're all one. Well, how can how can the brainiac philosopher and the and the and the mother who put her through graduate school cleaning other people's homes. How can they have a connection that goes beyond instrumentality or sentimentality. And Christianity does that. And I think we'll continue to do it and we'll do it successfully. So, yeah, truth isn't an abstract concept. That's right. Aloysia, he sends me such good stuff on Twitter. It's not an abstract concept at all. It's a person. And, and that's why, you know, all the thinky talky stuff we do. It all has to be in the service of embodied incarnated love, because there. That's when it all comes together and that's what we want. If it's merely a a vision or an idea. Insufficient. So, all right. It's five thirty. Hey, thanks Casey for being available. Thanks, Eric, for dropping in and T for tech. Thank you for dropping in too. And thanks, Chris. So for me, sometimes when I've been fighting through videos or dealing with pastoral issues or working on my sermon, this is kind of a nice way to just touch base with some of you and end the day. So thanks for dropping by. Thanks. All right. Take care.