https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=pY9Unl6p9mk

 Hi, this is Paul. Jonathan, today it's Friday. I usually record my Monday videos on Friday. Jonathan released not a very long video on ritual. And this is one of the most interesting aspects right now in terms of this whole conversation of belief in God and let's say efficacy in religion. And so let's let's it's just a short video. Let's let's watch it together. Take fun of the strange hat of a pope or of a bishop and you think that that's funny, but somehow you still understand why you need a uniform to play sports. You know, it's like these are all different levels of the same reality. And religion and religious behavior is because they tend to want to isolate religious behavior from other human behavior. And so they have this little category here called religion, and it's broken off from all the other things that humans do. And we've talked about this a lot. They're sort of religion S, which is sort of the secular definition of religion. And new atheism sort of not capitalized on this and said, yeah, religion is this specific thing. Now, what's going on in Israel and Gaza is, of course, not just about religion, but it is not religion is not uninvolved either because religion pervades life. Religion is the default operating system about how our ideals are pursued. So as one of the things I think about as I'm watching this, this Gaza business going on is the recession of modernity. What was sort of nicely compartmentalized as religion is not that compartmentalization is going to be tougher and tougher to maintain. And that's going to be difficult for us. In some ways, secularism created a weak Christiany boilerplate that much of the world could sort of work from. And it certainly had its deficiencies, but even the, let's say the segmentalization of religion over in a corner for all of the difficulties that that possessed, there were some advantages to it too. And so you could have fairly functioning societies often, again, with Tom Holland's argument, often with a a floor of commonly held Christian beliefs that afforded a lot for the society. All of that is breaking down now. And so all of these conversations about Christian nationalism, Islamism, and all of this, this is all coming to the fore because modernity continues to recede. And ritual then comes into that. But the fight over religious ritual was a far older fight. And of course, that fight is deep within Protestantism because Protestantism as a precursor of the Enlightenment cast a whole lot of doubt on the efficacy of certain what today would be called religious rituals, let's say the Catholic mass. So because of that, the religious behavior can appear arbitrary, superstitious, ridiculous. That is the dismissal of it. It's arbitrary. And arbitrary is a key word here because now as modernity recedes, this little corner, Jordan Peterson, Jonathan Pigeot, John Vervecky have all sort of forced us to recognize, and I think this is a big part of sort of Peterson's breaking into was that all of what had sort of been dismissed as arbitrary, this religious stuff, not so arbitrary. Tom Holland's work, same thing, not so arbitrary. And of course, Jonathan Pigeot's work has been, you know, not arbitrary. The patterns are not arbitrary. Sometimes also people want to reduce religion to a set of things that you believe rather than understanding it as a coherent set of behaviors and beliefs that kind of go together. Now, the video I was working on, but sort of sometimes I'm just not feeling it, even though I think I should do it, the video on confessionality. So on one hand, you've got Jordan Peterson saying, religion isn't just a set of propositions when he's, Pierce Morgan is going after him about whether or not he believes in God. And Jordan is basically hitting back against propositionalism. And Kristen Cobes du May on the Holy Post with Sky Gittani says, basically, she says, she doesn't say it very well because she doesn't have the language. If she'd listened to more videos from this little corner, she'd have better language with which to engage these issues. But basically people are trying to corner her with respect to propositional issues. And she doesn't want that because what Jonathan just said is true. Religion goes beyond propositional and that's where religion is, our ritual is much more part of the other three P's. It's procedural, it's participatory, it's perspectival. See, I got them all. It's all of those right there. And in that way, religion is in some ways deeper than just the propositional. But the propositional is itself vitally important and useful. And that's why propositional isn't going away. I found that the best way to understand religion from a secularist perspective or from a, even from a purely materialist perspective is to see it as an extension of other types of behaviors and even, I would say, as an extension or similar in nature to some behaviors that animals have. And so now this is a gutsy move on Jonathan's part because there, I've noticed among some of the orthobros, there's a still, even after the modernist fundamentalist wars that tended to focus on evolution. You know, this is sort of scaling up from animals to people. Certain people get real touchy with respect to that. One of the things that I've noticed is that looking at the way that animals ritualize behavior is actually a good way for humans to understand why it is that we ritualize behavior and what it is that ritualizing behavior can do. And so the first thing to understand is that actually all behavior is ritualized. That is, anything which is moving towards a goal has to be ordered. And so if you don't like the word behavior, let's just use the word ordered. So ordered behavior will happen as you move towards a goal. So if you... Now this stuff is super helpful what he lays out here and it's basic and it's right. And once you do something, let's say there's a goal you're pursuing and you've tried to pursue that goal three different ways and you found one way to be better than the other two ways. So then you repeat the goal. And children do this all the time. Children watch their parents, their parents have tried things a bunch of different ways. They repeat it, talk to people who have learned to cook from their parents and their parents say, I always do it this way. And so they do it that way. This is so deep in us. And so Jonathan's description is right. Have a purpose. The things you do, you know, you'll probably experiment a little bit at the outset, but at some point you'll realize that, you know, if I want to get to the river, this is the best way to go. At first maybe I'll zigzag, I'll do this, but then a trail will set itself up in the forest to go to the river. And then that behavior, going from the village to the river, for example, will become ritualized in the sense that it will become ordered and will have kind of reduced itself to its best, to its best line, you could say, to get to the river. And so now, and remember he begins sort of saying this line between religion and not religion in the secular worldview is not what you think it is. And I often bring up the, the, the Greeks, let's say, because we would look at the Greeks and see their temples and see their sacrifices and see their stories of the gods. And we would look at the Greeks and just about everybody in the ancient world and say, they're highly religious. And in some ways they would say, religion, what's that? We make sacrifices to the gods. We follow these sacred paths. We do these things. We eat this way. We do all of these things because this brings us favor from the gods. And then we find success. And this is where you get into, let's say, god number one, where this is just the arenic god. And these are, these are the rules of how things work. And so if you do these things, you will prosper. And it's sort of an open, it's sort of an open arena. And once the rules are discovered, if you do these things, it will go well. And technology is, is within this too. And so the line between technology and ritual is, is not very far. Drew Johnson, who's written on some of this stuff, you know, once made the comment that if you, part of what is not fully captured, let's say in the Torah, it is actually all of the procedural knowledge that went into, let's say, the sacrificial system. Now, when I say that, you can read plenty of procedural knowledge in the Torah about the sacrificial system. But one of the things that you recognize, if you ever try to assemble something with enormous detail and precision just from written text or an audible text or an audible description, there's so much you don't know. And that's especially true in terms of religious matters. Now, when you look at something like, so orthodoxy, Catholicism, these very ancient traditions place a lot of, place a lot of stock in succession. That now part of what is behind succession is that just like with the child and the parent, you learn a lot of procedural knowledge, of perspectival knowledge, of participatory knowledge by being there. You also learn propositional, but by being there. And so if you watch, let's say, someone from a highly sacramental tradition, celebrate the mass, the Eucharist, just go to, you know, sometimes, you know, for a while, Saint Elijah in Oklahoma City had a, their priest was doing a real cool study on the Gospel of John. And so that got into my YouTube algorithm. So every now and then their service will pop up. And I don't watch very much of it, but I'm just sort of fascinated by, you know, the doors and they go in and they go out, all of this. If you were to sort of devote all of that to text, so much would be lost because one of the things that you pick up on is how to walk, how to move, how to move the things, where they go, what feels right. I mean, that's where combinatorial explosiveness meets the limitations of a divine, of a defined text. And so what Drew Johnson was, the comment that he was making about the Old Testament is that in some ways, if you could go back in time and watch the priest at the altar of the temple, in terms of its procedure, it might not be that far from, let's say, a surgeon in an operating room or a tech worker doing assembly in a clean room. All of the procedures are directed in order to achieve an outcome. And it's exactly the question of the efficacy of the outcome and the causal linkage that deism and sort of the clockmaker universe basically looked at religion and says, is this like technology? Does this achieve its outcome? So this is something which happens in all types of behaviors, whether it is the way to hunt or the way to prepare food, all of these will become ordered, not like 100% order, but there'll always be a little aspect of variability on the margins, but the behavior will become ordered. And so you And you can see this in music, because if you, let's say, watch a student, you can see, let's say, musical apostolic succession in a lineage of artists, but you always know just as Jonathan said, there are just these little variants. And of course, Jonathan would be more aware of this because part of the reason he went to Africa was to learn craft. And so artists know this, and we also know this in terms of even the propositional teachers of one another, you always pick up something from your teacher. You could say that when you order behavior, the more you order it, you do it in order to avoid the cost of the behavior. So, you know, it's like if I could get to the river by going all around and going in circles and doing all this, and then I get to the river, and it's like, okay, but that's very costly, it takes a lot of time, it takes a lot of effort. And so what I'll do is that I'll start to order my behavior in order to reduce the cost that it has, you know, in terms of energy, in terms of time, and all of that, and in terms of consequences, you could say. And now, and when you look at the beaten path from the village to the river, in many ways, that beaten path is an artifact of the ritual of going from the village to the river. And so you can imagine that this is something that happens even in animal ritual behavior. So think of, for example, ritualized conflict between— And you can find game trails, okay? Same thing. Animals, the animals will ritualize their conflict and will ritualize their capacity to recognize who is the superior and who is the inferior, and they will do that to avoid the cost. Because if they go all out and they fight it out, then that becomes very costly, both for the one that ends up on top and for the one that ends up submitting to the higher power. And Jordan Peterson made this point a while ago. And so because of that, the animals develop this kind of ritualized version of a conflict, which looks like a fight, but isn't complete, does it, reduces the cost towards something like meaning. And we're going to use the word meaning for now. We could use other words, but purpose, maybe we could say, is a good way to think about it. As you move towards purpose and meaning, and as you kind of encompass, you know, the reason why the fight is there in the first place, then you can ritualize it in order to avoid the cost, all right? So you can understand. Now, it's also helpful to know that, let's say, the wolf can't articulate the meaning of the ritual, but yet that doesn't mean the ritual isn't working in the wolf pack. If you ask the child about the recipe that they got from their parent, the child might not be able to say why the parent did it that way, besides this is the way they always did it, and it works. And so this business about ritual touches on the fact that meaning and knowledge and practice, we struggle for the words, craft, excellence, can be transmitted without the conscious explanation. The conscious explanation, and that's really important to think about because, again, we're so surrounded by ritual and all of these things that the conscious explanation might be lost for a very long time, and this is where you sort of get into Chesterton's fence. It's the same idea. I understand how that is true for going to the river, as it's especially true for animals that will ritualize fighting behavior or animals that will ritualize a type of mating behavior as well, which is that the animal will have certain type of dance or certain type of colors that will make the choice of a mate less costly than it would if those things weren't there. Like I said, all aspects of behavior are ritualized. They're just different levels of ritual. So you could understand that if you extend that into the human sphere, then you can see how we of course do the same, which is that we've developed shortcuts, shortcuts of meaning in order to avoid the cost of something. So a good example is when you meet someone, we shake hands, we look into each other's eyes. We have found ways in order to encounter someone in a manner that cuts to the chase, gets to the meaning of it, which is that we're meeting, we're not in conflict, we recognize that there's a kind of peace between us, there's a certain level of communion, and so we've ritualized that in the type of behavior, shaking hands, all the other ones that we have, which reduce the cost of figuring out who this person is, what it is that they want for me, trying to move around, asking questions. I don't know what type of other types of behavior could exist in order to figure out the intentions of the person in front of you. So my wife and I have, during the pandemic, for sort of TV at night to do something to unwind before you go to bed, sometimes we'll watch TV that, I can watch almost anything and fall asleep on it, but she usually wants something kind of calm and soothing, and Survivor sort of works for that because in these last seasons they're just in Fiji, so you see the fish, and you get a little bit of interest in terms of a little bit of drama, but it's a game. But of course Survivor is all a game about lying, and they're always lying to each other, and they always say, you just hear them say, you gotta go with your gut. Why? Because what's happening when they're lying to each other, there's all these tiny little tells, it's like a poker game in that sense, there's all these tiny little tells, and you might not consciously recognize it, but you get a bad feeling about it, and often the feelings are wrong. I mean, many times in Survivor someone gets voted out because they got paranoid, and they start walking around saying that they're gonna get voted out, and then everybody's like, okay, we'll vote you out, even though they weren't gonna vote them out. So we're super sensitive to this, and again, it's not necessarily connected to our conscious mind. A great recent example of this, this got shot up on my feed, was this conversation between Alex O'Connor and Peter Hitchens, where Peter just after, they talk about drug legalization or something, I don't know, but Peter Hitchens has had enough, and so he stands up, and he monkeys around with the pillow, and they have words, and this is just all full of ritual. It's all full of ritual. The camera work, you know, the way the thing is set, and then Peter Hitchens, by what he says and what he does, communicates how I actively dislike you, and of course, but now nobody throws a punch, nobody pulls out a gun or a knife, there's no bloodshed, words will be passed on Twitter, on and on it will go, everybody will sort of pay attention to it, and who knows where the drama goes, but we all pay attention to it, and again, because in a realm of combinatorial explosiveness, ritual shrinks the world down into manageable size, and once we can master a ritual and engage in the ritual with each other, then suddenly we can be far more effective, and as Jonathan said, it's far less work to manage our world. You can imagine that these types of behaviors, shaking hands and all this, you know, was chosen out of a set of possible behaviors that were maybe a little more costly, okay, and so as you move towards more and more contracted behavior, what you do is you move towards something like meaning, and so what happens in that type of behavior is- So the meaning of Peter Hitchens standing up was, I actively dislike you, that was the meaning of that. Now, it wasn't evident immediately, words were important, you know, if let's say they didn't have words available to them, then you'd be reading facial features and you'd be reading all of this, and maybe he's having a digestive moment, or maybe he's got back pain, or maybe sitting too long hurts him, or something like that, but yeah, we're surrounded by ritual. What happens in religious rituals, especially those that we consider religious, is that the meaning becomes more and more compressed, and more and more pure, more and more crystallized, which is that, you know, if there's a manner in which, let's say, we eat together as a people, and so we come together, we eat together, and what that does is it binds us together as a people. We notice that if we eat in a certain manner together, if we sit together on a table or whatever, there are multiple ways to do it, but if we aim towards that purpose, there's a limited amount of ways that we can do it, that it binds us together, that it makes us also share in the food, makes us share in the identity, makes us recognize each other as one, for example, then we realize that, wait a minute, if I can scale that up and so if I meet together with my family or with a friend and I eat, you know, that does something, but if I have like a banquet at the city, or a marriage banquet where we all kind of come together, or some ritual where it's a bigger meeting, let's say we have a banquet to celebrate, you know, the 30th anniversary or the 100th anniversary of a city, then all of a sudden we realize that this type of behavior, these ritualizations of ceremonies of coming together bind us together towards higher purposes and so you can understand then at some point people in that- Okay, remember I said before that this stuff isn't necessarily conscious, it's in our guts, sort of like lying on survivor and that's where of course this gets complex because on one hand part of what Jordan Peterson sort of cracked open and John Vervecki certainly has pursued it and Jonathan has is we are bringing, we are bringing to awareness, to intellectual awareness, to propositional awareness some of the dynamics of these rituals that have gone on for a very long time that people have participated in and now we have a better understanding of why they work, let's say, and why they work towards ends that we desire, but they also, it's being done in a context where for many people they have stopped working. I made a video a while ago about from Ready for Harvest when they had that video on the Orthodox Church and it talked about the Orthodox Church is in an interesting place because via conversions they are growing, but via defections from immigrants that produce a large number of their people they are shrinking and when it gets into the question of de-churching, of people leaving the faith, this gets very interesting because if we look at the Enlightenment critique and say these rituals are arbitrary, a lot of the work done in this little corner has been, no they're not arbitrary at all, but you can understand them from the bottom up. Again, that's been Jordan Peterson's big contribution because Jordan Peterson makes these things accessible from the bottom up and both Mark LeFavor and Adam Friend did, I mean the points they both made to me about Jordan Peterson is like, well you religious people, you keep working from the top down, Jordan Peterson works from the bottom up and that's why he's so effective among people who don't believe that there's a top and maybe works from the bottom up until they believe there's a top and then they keep going and then there's that little video by Destiny. Did he really change his name to that? I don't know. I wouldn't recommend that, but maybe he did. Maybe that's just his YouTube name, I don't know, but anyway, when Rationality Rules did that video about Destiny and he said Jordan Peterson basically builds this stairway all the way to the edge and then the people walk up it and then go right over into, well now we're into levels above the line where they fully believe that things come down instead of just being built up from the bottom. So a big piece of this corner has been opening people's eyes to the power of ritual and for that reason we see people who have been starved of ritual now with, let's take a 1970s phrase, now with their consciousness raised with respect to the power of ritual, they now see the efficacy of ritual and they participate in it and they don't just participate in the ritual that they know to be efficacious by virtue of a few little arguments, but they enjoy going into ritual that they find to be efficacious and meaningful even if they don't know the arguments. In other words, they take these things on faith and off they go and that's been a big part of this while at the same time people come from the old country and they come to America and what perhaps was meaningful in the old country no longer has so much meaning in the second generation. We see that with say Korean Protestant churches that I work with, you see that with children of immigrants who grew up Orthodox and then walk away from it because it just doesn't, it just isn't meaningful even though it was deeply meaningful for their parents. You see this in immigrant patterns where people take the culture of their immigration, the culture of the country they leave or at least the ideals from the country they leave and they bring it here and they transplant it and they try to reinstantiate it and then they don't understand why their children walk away from it. Evidently started realizing that the more you ritualize it and let's say the higher you aim, the more it binds reality together and so religious ritual is an extension of the lower rituals or lower behaviors all the way up so that you're like oh wait a minute if I offer this up to God, if I offer this up to something which transcends my group or transcends you know the things down here then I am in some ways bringing together all these little meals that say let's talk about a sacrifice of food, all these little meals together and so I'm giving you know I'm pouring out a libation or I'm giving up food to the ancestors or to the gods and what I'm doing that especially think about the ancestors for example is a good example it's like if I give something to the ancestors then I am doing more than if I eat with my parents because I am binding myself to something which is bigger, something which holds us all together and so if I kind of play that out at some point you realize that giving up to the gods, giving up to principalities which are higher above whether it is something like paying taxes to the king that if I pay taxes to the king then it binds us together as a society but if I pay taxes to a higher level, if I take my things and I bring and I give it up to a higher level then it basically binds me up higher and higher and you can imagine you can see how people realize that at some point that kind of moves up and up towards more and more meaning until we reach something like the infinite source of all things right the infinite source which is the you know the god that is being and non-being, the god that is love which binds the universe together you know the manner in which the monotheists start to talk about omnipotence, omnipresence all of these infinite qualities which end up binding everything together and so if I act together with others you know towards that then I realize that it's an extension of you know paying taxes to the king and also you know binding together as a family but also even within yourself so it's important to kind of see how ritualization in terms of... Okay and so what he just ran through all the way up was again in many ways how understanding how religious conversion is seeing on a new level and it's understanding and it's understanding by participation and it's sort of all of those it's participation, it's a new perspective, it's procedural, it's understanding how all of this goes up and now suddenly I am not let's say putting something in the plate I'm not putting a coin in a wishing well there's an enchanted little thing but I am participating in something much larger you've sort of leveled up in terms of your religious consciousness and now there's a coherence to the world that was not there before. Of religious practice is has to be seen in let's say the the scope of all other types of behavior which are ordered now once again as I say this you have to remember that all behavior is ordered and so it's not like religious behavior is ordered but this other regular behavior we do isn't no that's not true it's like as you move towards religious behavior it's more and more ordered more and more containing meaning and as you move to the more common space then it is ordered maybe less and the trade-off is the trade-off between meaning and power or meaning universal meaning and particularity that's the way to understand the trade-off and sometimes you actually need to make that trade-off it's not you know if you ritualize brushing your teeth in the same way that you ritualize the Eucharist or you ritualize sacrifice to to the gods then then you would lose some of the particularity and so you would it would actually become a it would actually not be the right fit of order behavior and the thing you're doing. An example of this which is going to give us one in a minute but I think a way to understand what he just said which I think is probably a little challenging is someone with obsessive compulsive disorder with respect to hand washing. What they've done is that they've made hand washing an ultimate I've got to wash my hands I've got to wash my hands and then that which is higher up that which is much more ultimate and consequential is forgotten and so what a properly ordered perspective means is that particularities are in their own place and the ultimate is in its own place and that order is well put together from top to bottom. Example of this a good example to understand this is to understand the way that martial arts develop themselves so you can imagine that martial arts start as fighting right you might people are fighting fighting and they realize that if I order my fighting if I if I have a technique then I can beat the other person because I'm kind of I'm I am contracting my behavior towards a certain thing but then there's also a meta thing which starts to happen which is that if I understand certain rules certain ways of doing martial arts then I am also going to limit the all-out cost of fighting you know just even very similar to the way that animals ritualized behavior so people notice that in tribal warfare for example there is extreme ritualization which means that there's still a fight but often the fight because it's so ritualized it will avoid massive massive casualties because the ritualization you know and and it's kind of not even doesn't even have to be conscious people just kind of learn this behavior and perform it the ritualization will be able to show who's winning the fight without completely decimating everything. You know there's even an element of this really goes back earlier in the video where if you listen to soldiers they keep talking about relying on their training relying on their training because one of the things that the military does is it ritualizes all the way down and this ritual is going to keep you alive this is how you clean your weapon this is how you and technology is full of rituals they're full of checklists and it's all of these nested rituals and but Jonathan's Jonathan's example is great. You can imagine that even in the world of martial arts that will happen where certain behaviors are there to manifest you know let's say a kind of imagine like a knight's the way that the knights had certain ethics about fighting it's like the gentlemanly way of fighting right you don't hit someone in the back you know you look at them in the face all of these types of behaviors are there to avoid the massive cost of fighting and push it towards more meaning but still keeping within the the the arena of beating your opponent. Now you can imagine that in the world of martial arts especially in Asian cultures people started to notice that you if you ritualize martial arts more and more it can become it can encompass more and more meaning to the point where it also almost becomes a type of ritual behavior where it it is almost metaphysical in the way in which the movements are capturing more and more meaning you know if you think of putting Taoist principles into certain Kung Fu Kung Fu moves and Kung Fu forms all of this is happening and so it moves towards more towards more meaning so that actually at some point the martial artist is transforming himself he is he is learning about reality he is moving towards higher and higher meanings as he is practicing his martial arts now. So then of course you begin to recognize that what is true in the little is true in the great that there's intelligibility that there's that there's scale and the whole idea of that is I mean we see it in nations all the time what's go what what goes on between uh principalities let's say the principality of Israel and the principality of Iran. Now Hamas the principality of Hamas is a little bit different that's why they talk about asymmetrical they talk about terrorism because is Hamas a nation state well they were elected in Gaza but um and and so and when people figure out well what's the right thing to do well you can't let Iran get away with it well you're talking about Iran like they're a person and they are a person but they're not a person but they are a person and and so then you see this scaling and this transmission from the small to the great. One of the things that happened in the 20th century is that somebody realized that that in terms of power it was losing power as it was moving towards ritualization so if you look at what the MMA fighters did is that they said no forget all these forms forget all of these these these flighty things that you're doing when you're prepared when you're doing your your martial arts forms it's like get to cut to the chase use what you need to use in order to beat your opponent and so what happened is that they the the MMA fighters were able to make a trade-off between ritualization and power and they move towards power now this is something which isn't there's nothing it's like well and and let's also bring in the context here because the ritualization of martial arts wasn't about winning a war because very quickly the gun the missile the tank replaced the fist and the sword and the spear or the staff and so mixed martial arts comes along and it's in a different arena okay the if if you look at if you look at different ways of fighting and judging they're not judging whether how badly you hurt the guy or whether you make him unconscious their karate you can watch you know karate kid and and uh cobra kai you know they're they're looking at points and in boxing they're looking at they're counting points because they're counting something different than the the arena has changed and when the arena changes the rituals change because again the rituals are tied to the arena it's not that one is better than the other to be honest it's just that it's a trade-off between ritual and power so think of an animal well and the arena has changed it's it's an agent and it's an agent arena shift and that's partly behind what's going on with let's say the orthodox convert and the second generation orthodox immigrant the arena for both of them is quite different imagine it out in the world of the animals where the animals have a ritualized behavior and they understand and they're they're kind of dancing where one person show you know that i don't know the wolf shows its neck and the other one kind of comes and kind of puts their their paw on the other and and to show that they're the one is submitting and the other is dominating now imagine if there was one wolf who is smart and said man forget all this rituals it's like when the other wolf thinks i'm down and i'm showing my neck and and he's put his paw on me i'm just gonna go for the throat and that wolf would win in the moment that wolf by breaking the the ritual would actually increase his power tremendously and so that and so but what would happen is of course that would also lead to to uh uh let's say in the long term if if a lot of a lot of wolves did that it would lead to the all-out conflict between between the wolves and again this is sort of where the jordan peterson revolution comes in jordan peterson another and biologists argue that the the wolves flourish because of the ritual and for a wolf to go for the throat doesn't adequately engage the arena the the wolves are operating within an arena and part of the key to power and wolfdom is the pack not the animal and so for for a particularly strong wolf to let's say begin to dominate and decimate his tribe or his pack that wolf then becomes vulnerable to let's say a mountain lion because a mountain lion will avoid a pack but a mountain lion can probably take down a wolf if the mountain lion's hungry enough and so that's again where the arenic context comes in and that's where the ritual is tied to the arena and again this is where sort of the jordan peterson moment broke this open i think in our consciousness to give us a different vision of you know oh my rituals are part of the arena and again this is where jordan peterson's god number one comes in because the real again if even if you listen to jordan peterson's pierce recent pierce morgan conversation the god that jordan peterson has brought into the world is what i call god number one or the arenic god and in the bible the arenic god is always assumed just simply assumed that god is arenic and so and so the wolf that goes for the throat might win the battle for today but evolutionary biologists would say loses the evolutionary race because that wolf doesn't understand that the pack is more powerful than even the wolf's jaw and so this is the same thing that happened with mma and the by the way with mma you end up having now a new ritualization which is that as you move towards more power you have to have rules in the fight because obviously you don't want to kill your opponent and as you move towards power that possibility of just killing your opponent with one hit or in the right doing the right thing to kill your opponent becomes more and more possible and again because mma is within an arena and if you kill your opponent not only are you no longer going to be able to fight and earn money and fame and glory and all of the things that status affords you as a male you'll also probably lose your freedom and you'll destroy the arena of mma so that's how ritual is tied to the arena so there the type of ritualization that happened in kung fu or in some of the in some of the more ancient martial arts gets re-incapitulated in the meta rules of the fighting game which is that you're not allowed to do this you're not these things you're not allowed to do because you're just going to kill your opponent so the ritualization re-establishes itself in another way but what's important to understand is mostly to see just how it now this gets into even let's say world war two because the ritual within japanese society got you know went all the way up to the arenic level okay it goes all the way up to the arenic level but that arena then has to come into confrontation with well the chinese arena as they're fighting this world and their their arenas are closer but then the american arena because you know as as many in as many in japan understood when they picked a fight with the united states they were picking a fight with something of a whole different class and they sort of made a they sort of tried to mind read the united states within their own arena and said all the americans love their luxury and they're lazy and all of this and so they're not going to bother to come all the way across they're not going to bother to come all the way across the pacific and when they'll just kind of sue for peace and they'll leave us with our pacific empire and they really didn't understand american culture enough that certain elements of american culture have a lot of pride and after what they did to pearl harbor and especially after what they did in the philippines that the united states was in fact going to come over and destroy them which it did is to think of to understand just this relationship between ordered behavior moving towards more meaning and then finding the balance of order and power you say in a behavior in order to accomplish what it is you want to accomplish and if you do that then you can understand everything from brushing your teeth to going to church because all of these ordered behaviors kind of stack up and scale up towards the transcendent towards the infinite good that binds the universe together then all the way down to when i'm learning something new and i don't know how to do it and so i'm experimenting and i'm kind of fiddling you know i'm trying to figure it out so i'm it's messy and it's and it's uh it's experimental and then when i figure it out i try to order it at the right level so that i can accomplish what it is that i need to do moving towards the purpose of what it is that i'm doing and so and it's again nested in an arena and the purpose of the ritual is to participate in the arena in an effective way and that effective way both molds us and changes the world hopefully this is helpful to kind of help you understand a little bit how ritualization works and how how it is better and it's more productive for us to understand religion in relationship to all the other behaviors that we do rather than isolating it when we isolate it then we we just look at these weird types of behaviors and these strange hats and and you know strange costumes and we're like what you know what's the what's the point but if i can tell you that you can make if you you can make fun of this strange hat and this is why this is why in riverside i would have happily have said to the priest at the at the uh at at saint andrew's why don't you let jonathan explain this to me okay um i have nothing against you my friend um it's it's your place i know but jonathan jonathan i told him i said if jonathan had given me a tour just like uh father eric did when we were in washington dc at the washington dc event um we had this in this this beautiful catholic uh this beautiful catholic space and you know father eric and i went through and he's pointing out this and pointing out this oh okay i'm understanding the ritual i'm understanding the arena i understand the story i'm putting it together and and this has been i think a huge part of the power of of what's been happening and again it's interesting that it was peterson who sort of cracks it open from the bottom and then i think gives people the intelligibility and the plausibility that if these first steps are coherent and make sense then maybe it makes sense for the other steps beyond which i can understand hat of a of a of a pope or of a bishop and you think that that's funny but somehow you still understand why you need a uniform to play sports you know it's like these are all different levels of the same reality but people have participated in sports and when they can understand the you know if you're watching players that you don't know that's why they put a number on them in big numbers and they put their letters like their last name on the uniform and the uniform has color so you can distinguish the teams again it's all a function of that arena and part of the difficulty is that a lot of a lot of the religious symbolism we've we've we're disconnected from it and when you understand it which Peugeot and Father Eric and others when when they sort of bring it into intelligibility and connect it up to the arena or at least some arena qualities it's like oh and then it's much more attractive and then it's much more engaging and then and then you can begin to make you can begin to make decisions with respect to how you will participate the procedures that you will take with respect to this other arena and why you would want the policeman to wear a strange hat because you want the policeman to be recognized in his role in as an authority but you don't think that's weird but you think an authority in an arena that that the pope wearing a funny hat is is hilarious and superstitious and ridiculous that's how if you were able to connect all these things together then you'll be able to understand more appropriately why it is that religion looks the way it does so hopefully this was helpful to understand this to understand things and don't forget Jonathan you're always helpful yet folks you know if you love what we're doing if you appreciate what we're doing supporting the symbolic world at the symbolic world.com we've been growing quite a bit in the past few years you know i have now hired several people full time to kind of do this and so all your support is there to make this grow as much as possible so thanks everybody and i'll talk to you very soon that's it so that was a great video but i think understanding it with respect to the arraanic aspects is super helpful so uh leave a comment let me know what you think