https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=GP-8m7O2wrA

 Well, all of these religious groups in America that came into the middle of the 20th century with all of this spiritual formation, but many of these groups are set against each other. So a denomination like the Christian Form Church is, you know, deeply all of that anti-Catholicism is very much in there. And I would imagine from the other side, the, you know, all of the Protestants and Catholics after a number of centuries are sort of still pitted against each other. What happens in this great movement in the United States is that they all become, you know, brothers and sisters in arms to fight the Japanese and the Germans, etc., etc., etc. And all of the formation, and I think when we're talking, I mean, because what we're really talking about is formation. Yesterday on the Freddie and Paul show, so I used the first question and answer of the Heideberg Catechism as my conclusion to the sermon this week. And of course, Nancy, Nancy will watch, Nancy watches my videos. Nancy riffs on that and her little tell kit, tell comments are really important if you understand her story, because she says, and she's right, when she was a little girl, she's basically a boomer, when she was a little girl every week, in addition to the Christian school that you had, you also had Catechism class taught by the minister or an elder, and grades were assigned for Catechism class. I mean, and so this process of formation was deep within the Christian Reformed Church and all sorts of things followed from that denominational identity, denominational confidence, sacrificial giving on the part of people for the denomination, devotional practices at the home. Now again, this was fairly sectarian. I mean, people would comment in Western Michigan, evangelicals that, oh, the Christian Reformed Church, they think they're the only ones that are, you know, if you're Christian Reformed and you get, you know, Jesus welcomes you in, if you're Reformed Church of America, might have to do some proving, but of course, all bets are off on everyone else. And so we have these themes of confidence and formation. Right. Anyway, go ahead. Okay, yeah, so this is great, right? So when in the Christian Reformed communities, when did, let's say, when was it not the case that a kid went to Catechism class with a pastor or an elder and received grades? So sort of using that as the kind of the funny model. When did that stop? It all depended on where those churches were within the urban monoculture. Ah, okay, good. Okay, keep going. When I was a seminarian in the 1980s, I, as part of my seminary field education, I had a job driving to Hudsonville, which is now a bedroom community, was an agricultural community outside of Grand Rapids. I drove to Hudsonville and I taught on Sunday morning. See, that was all, it was sort of a tradition. First you had it midweek. Right. And then it went to Sunday morning instead of Sunday school. Ah, okay. And in fact, just recently, CW has been pestering me to do more dog fooding. And so this was a book. It was basically a commentary on the hypercatechism. So the Christian Reformed church used to just teach the Catechism as such. And then it started creating materials to sort of help, you know, because they thought the Catechism was just going to be, again, in the culture of the 60s and 70s, the Catechism was thought to be, first of all, pedagogically, it was archaic because it was rote memorization. Teacher asked the questions, students memorize and gives the answer. And you're graded on how you can memorize the answer. My bet is what I'm saying now, there are perfect analogs in Catholicism. I was just going to say, I'm looking for my copy of the Baltimore Catechism, which is, you know, in many respects, the fellow traveler here, you know, you and I like to talk about this notion of opponent processing. And just the idea of a Catechism itself, to me, is fascinating. And I'm kicking myself not doing a quick Google search before we jumped on here. But my guess is that there was a a rush somewhere around, you know, 1520s or so to push out a lot of Catechisms, right? Because all of a sudden propositional concerns took the forefront in the wake of Luther sort of sparking it. I mean, you and I could go for days and days and days on all this in a different time. But my guess is that Catechisms proliferated and have continued to proliferate. Now, so do you have a rough date on the Heidelberg Catechism? Yeah, 1560s. 1560s. Okay, right. So which would then, you know, the corollary in the Catholic world would be the Trent, the Tridentine Catechism. And, you know, I don't know all the permutations of it. But the one that would have been preeminent here in the United States of America, which is based upon Trent, is the Baltimore Catechism. Baltimore, because Baltimore is the oldest diocese in America, and still has a sort of a position of prominence in that regard, even though it's not as big as some of the other ones now, of course. Because Baltimore was, I mean, Catholics didn't really come to America very early. And so Baltimore was sort of this strange... Yeah, Maryland. Yes. Maryland. So then, like, for instance, so my mother was born in 1944. And so she would have been steeped in the Baltimore Catechism. And it's a series of questions and answers, very similar to what you're saying here about the Heidelberg Catechism. And it was wrote, right? You memorized it. And so like, to this day, I can probably poke an 80-year-old Catholic, and I could probably get those verbatim answers from them, even though it is essentially abandoned wholesale, essentially overnight, 65, 66-ish in the wake of the council. But it's the same kind of thing. And that's why, again, I don't want to sidetrack us here with discussions about the council. We've done that before, but that's not the point of this conversation. But it sounds to me like in our various traditions, right, there was something that occurred sometime in the 60s, right? 60s, 70s, let's call it, in which this kind of focus on a catechism, a kind of axiomatic, starting from, you know, arguing from axioms, you know, like a catechism or like Euclid or, you know, any of those kinds of things, that that got abandoned. And so then, what are you then? Like, what do you do? So I can sort of, you know, what in the CRC tradition, as far as formation is concerned, once it moved away from the explicit instruction in the Heidelberg Catechism, what took its place? I think we have to talk about pedagogy, which is interesting, of course, because you are a teacher. It's one of the things pastors do. I think a big part of, you're exactly right. Last time I taught the Heidelberg Catechism to my Sunday school class, that was pre-YouTube days, I was always, before my father died too, I wondered how this was going to go in my Sunday school class, because I had a lot of people with no CRC backgrounds, and they loved the Heidelberg Catechism. I was really sorry. I talked to my father, he was still alive then, he said, every time I taught the Heidelberg Catechism at Northside, people loved it. I thought, that's interesting. But now, when the whole reason for the emergence of these kinds of books, now, it was so funny, because I remember seeing this book around when I was a little kid. It was a little ahead of me. But reading it now, it just drips of, you know, you have kind of 60s, 70s art. Oh, yeah, I could give you, I mean, again, I could give you, you know, multiple iterations of this in the Catholic register as well, right? And it's graduated, so there's like the Baltimore Catechism I, which sort of upgrades to II to III to IV, and IV was, I believe, of memory serves, IV was like the adult one, so you kind of work your way up to it. And like, there's the sort of the funny art from the 60s, and then the funny art from the 70s, and then the sort of the, you know, then the iterations in the 80s, you know, it's just, you know, cringe, you know, and all of that. But, you know, it was, it was essentially, it sounds to me, it was a sales document. Sorry, it was a, yeah, it was a sales document. Wait, maybe it's a catechism masquerading as a sales document, or maybe it's a sales document masquerading as catechism. I'm not sure which one, but it's a sales document. Well, pedagogy was critical in this. Yeah, okay. Because one of the things, of course, that had happened was a big critique of, you know, what my, one of my favorite professors in seminary was actually a, he had been a school teacher, and then he had been, he had gotten a doctorate in something, in religious education. He'd been a school teacher in Christian school, and he talked about mug to jug education, which was from my, from my mug to your jug. And so the point of the, the point of education was for the student to regurgitate, in this case with a catechism. But you use the word. So I just, so it just, I just want to note that it's so hard to even talk about this without adopting the language of the people who employed it to attack it. Yes, exactly. Exactly. Because this was, now, the irony of that is, of course, the fact that in critiquing this form of education, they actually used it, because I just used the word of that catechism. And the supposed dismemberment of that particular form of pedagogy, and in that particular form of pedagogy, because that particular form of pedagogy was dismissed as not being sufficient for Christian formation, because of course, what we wanted from the students is to engage critically with the material, and in that day, rephrase the material in your own words. Okay, why was that? Because I heard it too. Yeah, yeah, yeah. Why, what's the boogeyman there? You know what I mean by that? I know exactly what the boogeyman was there because of everything that was, so this, these silos of religious formation, and inter-Christian religious warfare, that, you know, had been, that basically for hundreds of years had been maintained, was, well, I mean, one of the things that we had in our documents was all about the detestable, you know, that the Roman mass was idolatrous, because of course, you add images, and you add, and so all of this stuff was maintained, and you formed children with this language so that they would get the heebie-jeebies when they went by a Roman Catholic Church. I still have that built into me today. That kind of formation works well, but I think part of what happens in the Second World War is where you have Christian Reformed youth, Irish Catholic youth, Italian Catholic youth, begin to have inter-marriage, you're looking across the bunk in your transport across the Pacific, and yeah, he's got his rosary, and you're looking at him saying, well, that's idolatrous, that rosary. You're looking at all of this stuff, but in the end, you're in the foxhole with this guy, and you eventually say, I'm not so sure he's not going to heaven with me. Yeah, that's right. And so we do, and again, this is behind the council, of course, too. You have these experiences that begin to say, maybe we need to look at the old ways and reconsider them, and I think you and I, by virtue of the fact that we have a friendship, and we're talking about this video, we're making it together, we're comparing notes, we would say, yes, that's true, but we're doing a reassessment of all of this and saying, okay, in the process, what it appears, first of all, we had a confidence in our churches that we no longer have, and part of what was lost in the transport ships going across the Pacific was that confidence, because a lot of that confidence was built on, I'm right and you Catholics are wrong, and that sort of psychologically is a very strong thing for us. And so we did lose confidence, but along the way, and I think, again, then with the counterculture, there was an American, I think the civil rights movement had a big piece of this, because the civil rights movement pointed out that it was impossible for mainliners, eventually evangelicals, Roman Catholics, to not look at the systemic, multi-generational treatment of African Americans and say, wow, did we ever miss that? And if we missed that, what else did we miss? I think there's a big part of the rise of the urban monoculture, where we now have a catechism involving racism, quite rightly, this was what I was raised in, but at the same time, all of these other questions. So then suddenly when the civil rights movement sort of becomes the point of the spear for a whole bunch of other liberation movements, well, you've treated African Americans poorly, what about women? What about gays? What about, you know, and then everything comes in and at some point you begin to say, well, where really is the center of this gospel? And, you know, along the way for the last number of decades, the Christian Forum Church has been looking at the Roman Catholic Church and thought, well, have we sort of, you know, have we sort of misrepresented the Roman Catholics? And I would say, yes, we did. Um, and, but, okay, but what then does that mean? Where then is the gospel and how do we form children in it? And I think, whereas sort of the confidence built in generations before has been lost and we're at a place where now suddenly we're looking around for confidence and identity and new centers. And, and then, you know, even pedagogically to say, well, you know what, memorization, it's a pretty profound pedagogical tool for children because guess what? You know, I can recite how many ditties from television. Now we're back to Grim Grizzland from the, from the, from the world of set, cuckoo for Cocoa Puffs, um, Frosted Flakes. They're great. I mean, and he likes it exactly. So we, so we threw out kind of the, the programmatic repetition and formation by memorization of our youth and gave it all to set. Yeah, that's right. So the liturgies, um, yeah. And so, and so they're, they're, there became all of these sort of subtle and crypto liturgies, um, and dramas that we oriented our lives around. So even something as silly as Saturday morning cartoons, right. And whatever, you know, fill in the blank, but, but no, I think that's exactly right. You know, so for me, you know, it was Dukes of Hazzard on Friday evenings, you know, we would rush home from the pizza place so that we could, you know, get up in front of the TV to watch Bo and Luke Duke, right. Or what have you.