https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=bUPBszRFXWE

 Hi, this is Paul and this is Rough Draft for Sunday where I run through the current version of my Sunday sermon. Last week we looked a little bit at the beginning of 1 Corinthians 11 where you have this chapter about head covering and we noted that this chapter has caused a tremendous amount of discussion and a diversity of practice through the life of the church all the way up until now. The rest of chapter 11 deals with the Lord's Supper or as it's often traditionally called the Eucharist and this has been at the center of Christian worship since the beginning and it's been celebrated and fought over. It begins like this, In the following directives I have no praise for you, for your meetings do more harm than good. In the first place I hear that when you come together as a church there are divisions among you and to some extent I believe it. So then, when you come together, it's not the Lord's Supper you eat, for when you are eating some of you go ahead with your own private suppers. As a result one person remains hungry and another gets drunk. Don't you have homes to eat and drink in? Or do you despise the Church of God by humiliating those who have nothing? What shall I say to you? Shall I praise you? Certainly not in this matter. Paul is very clear, he's very upset at what he hears is happening in the Corinthian Church. Now we might wonder what is his anger about? Is this a ceremonial complaint or a procedural complaint or a social complaint? Now it's helpful to remember how early this is in terms of the growth and development of the Church and what's going on in the context of Corinth. And we've talked about Corinth quite a bit as we've gone through this book. One of the things that's also helpful to note is that we're not completely, as with the whole head covering hair length thing, we're not completely clear about what's going on. We really sort of have one side of the communication and it would be lovely to have notes. And so this has been a tremendously consequential passage in the New Testament. Now we've talked quite a bit about the early growth of the Church and what that must have been like. You have these diaspora Jews, this is Jews who have been flung throughout the Roman Empire and are living in some of the major cities throughout the Empire. And some of the Jews that have grown up in this place have migrated back and forth to Judea and Galilee and to Jerusalem over the time. And Paul was such a person and Philip was such a person. Now after the resurrection and ascension of Jesus, as this Church gets growing in Jerusalem, there's a persecution that happens mostly from the diaspora Jews. These were the Jews that were named as deacons and they fled Jerusalem and we have a variety of stories in the book of Acts about Philip going out. Paul, of course, was one such Jew, although not one of those deacons. He was right there when Stephen was stoned to death, but of course he had his road to Damascus incident. These deacons go out and others go out to the Roman Empire and they go into this network of synagogues and they are talking about the resurrection of Jesus and seeing Jesus as the fulfillment of the Jewish expectation of a Messiah, but a rather different fulfillment than many people were accustomed to. Now the line between Jewish synagogue and Christian Church in many places is sort of difficult to see because as we see in the book of Acts, some of these synagogues sort of split because of this teaching and preaching about the resurrection and then some probably go on being a synagogue that is, you know, pro-Jesus in favor of the resurrection and others are against it. And so for a time these are sort of side by side. And you would imagine that the pro-Jesus resurrection synagogues are for the most part carrying on with all of their traditions, but those are going to start to change in a certain way. But then we also hear about churches like in Antioch that seem to be predominantly, if not exclusively, Gentile and they don't necessarily have all of this inbuilt tradition to build on. So how do they meet? What do they do? What are their practices? We don't know of course, but it seems that Corinth was quite likely mostly Gentile. One thing that if you read the Gospels, we read, now remember the Gospels might be a little bit later than the writing of this book and so Paul doesn't have Matthew, Mark and Luke in front of him to send to the Corinthian Church, but in the Gospels, this Jesus' last very much the setting of it is the Passover meal during the Passover time before Jesus is arrested and executed. And Luke very much sets this up on the night he was betrayed. He took bread and broke it. And this is the bread from the Passover meal and says, do this in remembrance of me. And it's clear that the new churches are in fact doing this and they're feeling some continuity with that meal. But you know, Passover happens once a year. It's not exactly Passover, but Jesus commands it and do this in remembrance of me. So something is happening and there's some connection, but especially I would imagine churches are just sort of sorting this out and trying to figure it out. So the Gentiles have less of a template and they probably have, if you read the literature on this in scholarship areas, you find a great amount of discussion about Roman meals and what their expectations would have been and those things would have probably flowed into the church as well. Now one of the things that some people have noted that in the book of Jude, you have what's called a love feast. Go to them. This is they're denouncing a group in the church or connected to the church. They have taken the way of Cain. Now notice how the old and the new are sort of woven together here using biblical imagery. They have rushed for profit into Balaam's error. They have destroyed in Korah's rebellion. These people have blemished. These people are blemished at your love feasts, eating with you without the slightest qualm. Shepherds who feed only themselves. They are clouds without rain, blown along by the wind, autumn trees without fruit, or uprooted twice dead. So now exactly what's going on here isn't what I want to focus on, but that there's a practice of a love feast. And so many scholars have said, well, there's sort of, you've got the Eucharist out there, the blood and the wine, do this in remembrance of me. And then you have this eating together. People have also long noted that for human beings, eating together is a very special thing. We have a sense of each other. It develops and communicates trust with one another. It's very much a practice by which communities are developed and grown and communities can grow together. But what's the relationship between these love feasts and the Lord's Supper? Now there's a document that is very early in the story. We don't know exactly who wrote it or what its context was. It's not a part of the Bible. But it was a very early document called the Didache, which means basically teaching or the teaching of the 12 apostles. It's probably late first century, early second century. And it was a composite of Christian teaching that sort of tries to give these new churches direct instruction about how to be and what to do and what their norms are. And it talks about the Eucharist. Now concerning the Eucharist, give thanks as always. First concerning the cup and concerning the broken bread. So you can see sort of this basic structure is already there, again, fairly early towards the end of the first century. So this could be 30, 40 years after Paul writes his letter to the Corinthians. But by that point already, you already have sort of a ceremonial ritualized practice that is going on in the churches and is being taught to the churches. But again, this is 30, 40 years after Paul writes to Corinth. And we don't know within this time how much of this grows. But you can see some of the elements that won't probably sound a little bit different. But aren't completely strange. We give you thanks, our Father, for the holy vine of David, your servant, which you have made known to us. Through Jesus, your servant, to you be the glory forever. And concerning the broken bread, we give you thanks, our Father, for the life and knowledge which you have made known to us. Through Jesus, your servant, to you be the glory forever. Just as this broken bread was scattered upon the mountains and then was gathered together. And became one. So many, your church will be gathered together from the ends of the earth into your kingdom. For yours is the glory and the power through Jesus Christ forever. Do not let, but let no one eat or drink from your Eucharist except those who have been baptized into the name of the Lord. For the Lord has also spoken, has also spoken, concerned this, do not give what's holy to dogs. So you can see already a liturgy is developing and practices and governance and borders are developing but this will develop quite quickly, apparently. Paul writes to the Corinthians and tells them this. For I received from the Lord what I also passed on to you. The Lord Jesus on the night he was betrayed took bread and when he had given thanks he broke it and said, this is my body which is for you, do this in remembrance of me. These words sound very familiar to you because I use them every month when we celebrate the Lord's Supper or the Eucharist together here at the church. I take these words right from the book of 1st Corinthians. This cup is a new covenant in my blood, do this whenever you drink it in remembrance of me. For whenever you eat this bread and drink this cup you proclaim the Lord's death until he comes and that's key because it gives us an idea about already in the church and in Paul's mind what they're thinking about, what is the purpose of why we are doing this together? We're proclaiming the Lord's death. Now the ceremonial meal again will become the foundation for Christian worship and has been throughout the centuries. It clearly becomes ceremonial very quickly, we see that in the teaching of in this document that I showed you towards the end of the first century and becomes central part of Christian practice and Paul's purpose here isn't necessarily to instantiate a ceremony, that's kind of hard to know, but actually to change the relational dynamics of the church and Corinth and he's going to do that in some ways through giving them a ceremony. So then whoever eats this bread or drinks this cup of the Lord in an unworthy manner will be guilty of sinning against the body and blood of the Lord. Now many of you grew up with this verse and well it has come to mean a certain thing. While I'm not going to cast shade on some of the ways that it's been used in the church, I want to focus on how it fits here in the book of first Corinthians. So the question is what is an unworthy manner? Is this something you qualify for? The Didache warned about who should and shouldn't be eating it. Paul doesn't seem to have that in mind right here. Are we talking about the same it as the Corinthians are thinking about? That's kind of a hard question. What does he mean by sinning against the body and the blood of our Lord? How are we supposed to understand that? Well for the rest of that we're going to look at the context of actually what's written in this passage overall. Everyone ought to examine themselves before they eat of the bread and drink of the cup. For those who eat and drink without discerning the body of Christ eat and drink judgment on themselves. That is why many among you are weak and sick and a number of you have fallen asleep. But if we are more discerning with regard to ourselves we would not come under such judgment. Nevertheless, when we are judged in this way by the Lord we are being disciplined so that we will not be finally condemned with the world. This again raises many questions for Christians. Well what is discerning the body exactly? Does that mean sort of looking at the bread and the wine and seeing Jesus' body and those elements? What about this judgment section that strikes modern people as superstitious or different in some way and it bears to remember what the complaints were. So if you remember what I began with he's talking about, well, I have no praise for you. I hear that when you come together as a church there are divisions among you. We talked about those earlier in the book and to some extent I believe it's something Paul is being sarcastic. No doubt there have been differences among you to show which of you have God's approval. In other words they're fighting for, no we're doing it right, no we're doing it right. So then when you come together is it not the Lord's Supper you eat? So already when they're coming together they're already in some ways reaching back and thinking they are in some way participating and communing with those disciples around the table before Jesus was executed. And that meal ties them to that. They become part of that by eating this meal. So when you are eating some of you go ahead with your own private suppers. What's that about? As a result one person remains hungry and another gets drunk. Well that doesn't sound good. And then when we think about our meal we think well even if we were serving wine in those little cups it's not enough to get drunk on and that little amount of bread we're getting in the ceremonial meal that's not going to slay anybody's hunger. Or you despise the Church of God by humiliating those who have nothing. Oh there's a rich and poor class social economic element to that. What shall I say to you? Shall I praise you? Certainly not. And then at the end of it he says, so then my brothers and sisters when you gather to eat you should all eat together. Anyone who is hungry should eat something at home so that when you meet together it may not result in judgment. And when I come I will give you further instructions. In other words he's not saying you're going to have this meal because you are hungry. He's saying this meal is going to be used to do something else for you as a community. So are the issues gluttony and drunkenness, inequality or lack of order? I think he's looking towards something further down the road. Now what are ceremonies for? The Passover meal memorializes. In other words it sort of brings a past element to the fore and lets us participate in it. And if you listen to the Jewish Passover the basic gist of it is that through the ceremony those who sit at the table even centuries later are connected to those who left Egypt. And this meal is intended as I said before that those who are celebrating it are now connected with Jesus' disciples and are right there at the table with him. And you hear that with proclaim the Lord's death until he comes. You make the reality of Jesus' death present in the church now. And this should impact belief and behavior. Now it's helpful to kind of get a historical context here because this was to the best of our knowledge sort of like a Roman home would be. You would have kind of public areas of the house and private areas of the house. We have those in our day to day. If you come into someone's home you might sit in the front room or sit in the living room or maybe share a meal in the dining room. Those would be sort of the public areas of the house. The kitchen is a little bit more intimate. The bedrooms, well bedrooms usually aren't part of the public area. Well the Romans had that too and they understood feasting. Now churches were likely meeting in the largest homes available or the homes most appropriate which was probably to some of the wealthier people. And you had this atrium area, this more public area, but then you add in the back a smaller dining area and if you know something about the era people often reclined for eating. And so obviously if you have couches there are fewer places to sort of sit, lay down and eat. So some archaeologists say you know you might have maybe room for seven. So if you're celebrating a meal you're only going to have a few in that little dining room and then you're probably going to have others who are sort of standing up or meeting in that atrium space. And so very quickly you're going to get a differentiation between people and who are probably going to be welcomed into the hearth of the home, the area of the home, probably the people with highest status, those who have most wealth, those who have social rank and those of lower social rank. The Romans were very conscious of social rank. Slaves, others with lower social rank are probably in the atrium. And so in other words during their meetings they're in their mind thinking about well our meal sort of puts us at the table with Jesus but only a few are really at the table with Jesus and others aren't eating at all or are forced to serve, so on and so forth. And so right away Paul senses that there is a division in the community and this community of Christ which is supposed to sort of equalize all of them as brothers and sisters isn't really going to function and this meal is actually working against this union, this one body instead of for it. Now the ceremonial meal is supposed to transform the community and I think part of what we see already in this letter, this letter probably accelerated the process of this becoming a ceremonial meal, is the meal itself becomes a powerful actor of community. All of us are together. The Christian Form Church for example, when we celebrate this, we do it different ways and there's flexibility, you can do it different ways, but the elements are distributed and we all partake at the same time. And that sort of liturgically, ceremonially gives us a sense of we are all together in this. It's sort of like singing brings us all together because all of our voices meld together and when we partake, we partake at the same time. Over enough time these ceremonies are going to shape the sensibilities of the Christian community, their expectations, their assumptions in very deep practical ways that often just talking at them won't do. That's part of what ceremonies and rituals repeated again and again and again do. This is my body. Take eat in remembrance of me and they all do it together. Now everyone ought to examine themselves before they eat the bread and drink from the cup. Those who participate should be cognizant of not just the elements themselves, but what's been happening in the home is that they're all cognizant of all of their rankings. And so, well, we ought to be thinking about how this reaches back, how this makes us together and how this connects us with God. All of those elements should be there in the practice. This is a ceremonial and a sacramental participation in the story of Christ and the spiritual body of Christ and the mission of Christ and the mind of Christ. And you can see that the practice here is moving the church, it's growing the church, it's bonding them together, it's resisting some of the ways that they were, some of the spirit that they had before and merging them in with Christ's vision for what his church should be. Those who eat and drink without discerning the body of Christ eat and drink judgment on themselves. Now, this has given a lot of people a lot of thoughts over a lot of years. A little bit later in the book, Paul is going to be talking about the body of Christ and the church as the body of Christ. In Christian circles, this is language we're very familiar with and we have a sense about it, but I think part of the difficulty that we have is that in the modern period, we've sort of lost a sense of spirit and body and what it means to be a spiritual body together. The church is the body of Christ present in the world. It is the story of Christ embodied. It is the spirit of Christ embodied. It is the community of Christ. The physical instantiation of Christ's spirit and mission to the world in an extended body throughout time and space. This morning I watched Synod and Synod is a body. We use that language quite freely. They have a certain amount of consciousness. They have a certain degree of agency, but they are an extended body. There's no one person. They all participate in it and it in fact does things. They have a sense of themselves. The longer they meet, more and more there'll be a particular sense and spirit of this particular Synod, but what happens is that, well, what Paul is getting at is all of these issues where the celebration is actually breaking down their sense of body as a church in Corinth and their connection with the spirit of God and being the body of Christ. And you might say, well, judgment, what do we mean by that? To participate but not embody in fact brings judgment because someone who participates but isn't a part of the body or they're participating in a way that is destroying the body or the sense of the body and the sense of communion as a whole, well, judgment is going to follow. You're damaging the witness presence and reputation of Christ in the world. That is why many among you are weak and sick and a number of you have fallen asleep. But if you were more discerning in regards to yourselves, we would not come under such judgment. Nevertheless, when we are judged in this way by the Lord, we are being disciplined so that we will not be finally condemned with the world. Okay, how can we understand this? For the last number of weeks in the book of Romans, we've been talking about the wrath of God and that's a rather broad term where we see sort of rebellion against God and resistance to God actually sort of rubs against the way that the universe was created and developed for us and the same things happen spiritually. Participation in the meal is a commitment to the life of the body. It's not magic but it has spiritual power. Well what is a spiritual body and how is it instantiated? Well, you can think of a family. A family is a spiritual body in a sense. And you think about what sins do in that spiritual body against the family and what they do for members of the family. And even on a purely psychological level, you will see stress, anxiety, sickness, dysfunction, breakdown. Even on a merely psychological level, you can realize this. And if that's true of a psychological level, how much more will it be true in a much broader frame of understanding the way that this world is put together by God. The church is a far larger and potentially more powerful body and lives quite a bit longer and so the impacts of not discerning the body and either participating in a certain way and breaking down the body in fact has long term consequences for sickness, health, life and death and judgment throughout the world. Yet at the same time, Paul notes that this judgment and these rubbing against the bodies can also with discernment show us how in fact to stop doing them and how to start living in step with the spirit of God. Now what was Corinth doing wrong? Well, we have the whole letter and all of those issues were true. And all of those issues were ways that Corinth was breaking down the body. They were not becoming a Christian body. The spiritual body of Christ in Corinth was not developing properly. That's the point of all of the letters going back and forth. There's infighting, bickering, conflict, divisions over wealth, rank and slavery, status games within the body, hurting the weak. Everything in the letter is about how the body of Christ is being formed among them yet they are messing it up by what they're doing and how they're behaving. And Paul is calling them to reform so that the body of Christ may be present among them. Ceremonial correction over the long term will in fact bring correction to the body. People will have a sense that, well this is the way we behave out there but when we're in this space, this is what we do. And what we do in this ceremonial, holy space, we would call it a religious space, will influence what we do out here and vice versa. You had that in the Old Testament with respect to what happens in the temple gets played out in the streets. What happens in the streets if it's not in alignment with what's happening in the temple corrupts what's happening in the temple and the same dynamic is happening in Corinth. Now they are struggling. Over time they'll begin to correct and the church would begin to function and it would be blessed as it should. Judgment can do this as pruning and this is part of where Paul says, well it's kind of a both and. You are suffering but in the signals of that suffering you can begin to address them towards correction and greater health. Judgment can do this as pruning but that discipline can also build strength and endurance. They are proclaiming the Lord's death until he comes. That's what the meal is intended to do, to remind us of the generosity of Christ given to us to inspire our generosity towards each other in the body and towards the world outside of the body. The sacrifice of Christ would begin to inform the sorts of voluntary status, wealth and loving sacrifices they would make for each other in the body. This would begin to create a community of voluntary sacrificial determined love that in time would impress the empire out of some of its old ways. And it's right there in the ceremony and that's historically how this went. The church began to get much more disciplined and intentional about the ceremony and if they let it, the ceremony will begin to influence the rest of the church overall. Ceremonies gain power as they are lived out, as the spiritual being, as the spiritual becomes flesh instantiated in the real lives, in the real relationships, in the sort of love that is committed, durable, sacrificial and voluntary. God's Spirit, through Paul's letters, through the church, begins to work in the church, through the gospels, through his people, the ceremonial, the communal, through time, through us. And so when we partake, we like them participate in this long process. We are then part of the body. In our Reformed tradition we say that these sacraments are signs and seals and in them Christ communicates it's a means of grace by which Christ molds us and changes us and makes us like him. Amen. Actually, I think I'm going to end this with question and answer 79 of the Heideberg Catechism. Why then does Christ call the bread his body and the cup his blood, or the new covenant in his blood, and Paul uses the words a sharing in Christ's body and blood? Christ has good reason for these words. He wants to teach us that just as bread and wine nourish the temporal life, so too his crucified body and poured out blood are the true food and drink of our souls for eternal life. It's more important he wants to assure us by this visible sign and pledge that we, through the Holy Spirit's work, share in his true body and blood as surely as our mouths receive these holy signs in his repentance, and that all of his sufferings and obedience are as definitely ours as if we personally had suffered and made satisfaction for our sins.