https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=1JyhCN3CpBQ

 I've got another question for you. If the American political parties were to come to you and say, you know, this whole primary debate format is really tired, it doesn't really work, Greg, we'd like you to engineer a format for presenting the candidates to the country and figure out how they could best interact with each other on television that would help the Democrats or the Republicans figure out who they should vote for. What might that format or process look like for you? If they put that in your hand, what would you say? What would you say? Here's some ideas. Honestly, so I've had the benefit of meeting and engaging closely with a lot of Congress people, Senators, presidential candidates. I'm always amazed when it's time for one question of both parties, which is, what's your plan for unity? Right? OK, let's say you can short-term scream, spin, cajole your way into office, because it's going to involve some of that, unless we get somebody who just raises their gaze to a transcendent value set. And there are some people out there who are doing that. I don't mean to imply everybody's captured or corrupt. There's a lot of really good people in government. But I'm amazed at the amount that you have to ingrain yourself right now. People believe they need to defend everything within their in-group and to define themselves against another. The easiest solution, easiest solution, the hardest, most necessary solution is always surrender. Literally, we could get America to agree on so many things if we drop the sanctimony and the moral testing. Let's say we're picking an issue of reparations. It's like there's 1,000 studies and arguments to have. So I'll get to the question. It's just going to be a bit of a funnel interaction. But imagine if we said, look, we're not going to give a ton of money away kind of wholesale to a bunch of different communities that we can't really determine who's paying who's doing it. But let's say we just decide that foundational health care is smart capitalism. It's a long-term solution for more robust communities, better public health, more people in the job market, better education, kids who are in school, less violence, and way cheaper if we can come up front of systems. Let's identify three different populations, like urban communities that have been left behind and devastated with infrastructure, Native American communities where health care is a disaster, and rural working communities that have been completely left behind. Those are three communities that reflect in some ways communities that all need help and communities that we're also beholden to because in a lot of ways, the working class rural communities, the urban communities with a lot of, let's say, African-American communities there, Black American communities, Native American communities. And we just say, let's put, pick a number, $100 billion into just health care. You get services, testing, everything else. Get healthy first. And then figure out your engagement. Is that a baseline thing that we could agree to? Without saying, it's just this one thing, and it has to be this. It's just this other thing. It has to be this. Why can't we just fix pockets and then make a choice and then show, here's the plan that we need? That's the conservative part. Here's how the money will be spent. Here's the impact. Here's why it's an investment. We want urban America to be doing well. We want rural America to thrive and be brought back in. We want Native American and Indian communities to thrive and be integrated culturally back into the country. And so for me, and then also, what's that job creation? How much money do we put to it? Do we train the best people? The conservative part would be, how do we track it? How do we chart it? What does success look like? What's the time frame? How do we make it self-sustaining? How do we train people in those communities? What's a 10-year, 20-year plan that doesn't run on a presidential schedule? And so I would present almost, I would make almost competitive, collaborative conversations. So instead of being on stage and saying, Secretary Clinton, here's Trump. Here's all the ways his plan's bad. Here's all the way my plan's good. It's like, well, here's a notion. How could you come up with a plan that sounds appealing to people who are voting for Trump? Donald Trump, how would you come up with a plan that sounds palatable to what's happening? Can you guys talk about it? Where could you get if you're actually working together on stage? Can we judge your debate performance by what you can kind of realize or arrive at? And to me, solutions abound. If we start dealing with environmental or climate chaos and we talk about ocean biodiversity, there's kind of hard and fast numbers on that. Can we start there instead of starting with these sort of litmus tests that are defining our groups and then insane virtue signaling? And part of the fragmentation of this, I think that a lot of the debates that we have in the culture are designed to be like little annoying ratty dogs that bark at the perimeter of fertile ground where solutions and compromise and negotiation need take place. So if there's no notion of any discussion you can have about different cultural groups or different needs or idiosyncratic means or gender or race or immigration or different value sets and what's this and what's that? The minute that we deter it with language. So the first thing that happens is you've got your language. That's why I just went back and reread Animal Farm. Make language not safe. What do words mean? If I say some words, what's your emotional reaction to it? If I say patriarchy, if I say meritocracy, if I say gender, if I say hunter, how many words become immediately unsafe? Iceberg. Then you make certain arguments no longer capable of being discussed. Like it's just unacceptable to discuss nuance within. Fill in the blank then. Can we talk about, and again, this gets back to the thing where most Americans agree on everything. We really do, but if you can't talk about immigration, if you can't talk about different lifestyle choices and what's appropriate in private and what's appropriate in public and what do we want taught in schools, if we just make that impossible. So the first thing is you capture words. The second thing is you capture topics of acceptable conversation. And anyone who wants to raise their hand to say, wait, I have a different view about security at the border. Uh-uh, you can't discuss anything. Hey, I have a different view about healthcare and transgenderism, one side or another. Uh-uh, you're immediately done. Go conversation. And the third thing is then we capture sources of information and data. So where are sources of information and data? Online, captured. Cable news, captured. President of the United States, captured. Celebrities, captured. Experts, captured. Where do we have any sources of information we can agree on? And so we've scattered these pieces. Words aren't safe. Words have been politicized. Whole sets of arguments are taken off limits. And our sources of information have now been scattered. And to me, the biggest point of true leadership is somebody who is willing to point out, not just that the emperor has no clothes, but there's confusing and difficult conversations that we need to start to have. And so if anyone leader, leaders are desperate, I saw Republicans are desperate to, exaggerate, vilify, and extort the issue of transgenderism. Right, that's a hot picket. It's a hot button to be said. Liberals on the other hand seem to have zero thought or parameters or notion of any reality that this is affecting anything more than a tiny cross section of people. And to me, a leader from left or right is to say, look, everyone's aware that anybody in America who wants to make personal choices should be accorded dignity and privacy and the same rights as every other American. Right, we're also clear that this discussion is having a lot of problems in terms of how it's affecting the language and schooling and in certain regards is getting out of hand and causing a great deal of confusion. That's a really hard conversation to have, but I'm willing to have it. I'm willing to be an actual leader and show how we can sort of have and negotiate that conversation. Also, pick anything, COVID response. I mean, in some ways I feel like President Trump's initial reaction was so incompetent and careless to say it's gonna disappear, it's gonna be no problem, that much of everyone who was a step to the left of him snapped into a completely rigid opposing opinion and then this is what we're faced with. We're faced with two different, you know, and imagine if we could have said, look, we wanna get this right. There's a big threat, we don't know what it is early days, right? As the information comes out, the threat to kids, like we need to be able to talk about that same way, right? If we're gonna believe science, what science? Child psychology, evolutionary biology, supply chain economics, what are all the sciences we're discussing? Long-term diabetes and health, who should be unmasked? How do we protect with care our vulnerable communities, who we should care about, right? How do we talk about them humanly? How do we also open up school and protect children and make sure that different communities are moving at different paces? There's so many conversations that are just hard to have because basically everyone's terrified to have them because the risk of reputational financial damage is so damning that, you know, I mean, look at it. You can be J.K. Rowling, who is as close to a literal wizard as anyone in the world, right? Came from borderline homelessness, abusive relationship, no money, and dreamed up an anchoring mythology and sold 600 million books. There's a generation of readers around the world who she started, and then she wrote more and more and more kind of sophisticated books so that she could grow young readers up. I mean, at certain times she kept the printed word in publishing industry afloat with her immense talent and vision, right? She's given, her brain's given rise to movie theaters that are cathedrals, right? Like what's more wizard-like? Amusement park rides. And here's a woman who writes about courage and deep understanding of morality, acceptance of different people, feminine strength embodied in female characters, male strength embodied in male characters, respect for all of that, who's articulated, she's had a ton of money into protection, tons of charitable money for women and children, gay rights, and who has literally said on record, if somebody is discriminated against for being transgender, I will literally march with transgender people to protect those rights. And then just beneath that threshold for her personally, where her line is, is there biological differences between men and women, we need to have a much more robust discussion about what identifying people, how that works in the prison system, let's say, right? Or in certain other circumstances. If the totality of who this person is and what they've done in the culture, if that little piece, right? So someone who literally will march with trans people to protect their rights, but this piece means no longer suited to participate in a broad swath of the culture, careful how many spoilers you put on a list. Like really, if she's the enemy, what kind of perch are we standing on then, right? And likewise for Jordan, I don't like a lot, Jordan tweets, I've been very public with it, he and I've had arguments about transgenderism, I make fun of him, we have discussions in private and in public. Jordan tweeting at times in a tone that doesn't make a lot of sense to me and oversimplifying stuff or getting angry and not giving stuff enough thought doesn't really differentiate him from most anybody else who's on Twitter. Does he have a bigger responsibility? Sure, well, what's he doing with that responsibility everywhere else? There's hundreds, if not thousands of hours, you know, of recorded lectures and tapes and books and engagement and therapy and working on all sorts of different projects, right? But it's like, oh, this one piece is here, you're no longer someone we can deal with. And our elimination of people and it works the other way, it certainly works the other way in terms of who's liberal bona fides or forget it. You know, when I talk to Jordan, I get some influx of, you know, globalist Jew, you know, socialist cock, like, you know, there's incoming you're gonna get all the time. Right, that's the internet. It's out there. That's the internet. That's the internet. But the point is, is like, gosh, if you think about all the things we agree on, think about all the things that everyone agrees about with the JK Rowling thing, you know, all the way down to everything. And so I think what a lot of it is, is our political leaders and in fact, a lot of our leaders, there's just been an abdication of people being able to concede. It's like, we know what Americans think. And increasingly, you know, we know, we did a bunch of polling. We know right where Americans are comfortable with, to give you another example, on abortion. We're between 80 and 97% of Americans think that abortion should be first trimester, give or take two weeks, life of mother, viability of fetus, rape or incest. Now I understand and have, it's like, I think it's impossible not to have respect for people who are pro-life advocates for that viewpoint that they hold. But the notion that for some of these things, if it's incest, rape, you know, and life of the mothers at risk, we go to 97% of Americans. The notion that that can be impressed upon Manhattan or San Francisco, rather than that people who are advocating pro-life need to win over or advocate that in different ways in the culture. We can't have minority, I'm being inarticulate. Let me stop and back out. These are such hot water issues. I think part of what I'm trying to say when you're asking about how we would have debates is, we really know where a lot of Americans think about a lot of things. And I believe that those things could be enshrined with reasonable political leadership to say, look, here's a baseline. Here's a baseline of what Americans hold to be fundamental rights. We're not gonna all of a sudden have no such thing as gender anymore. We're not all of a sudden gonna have no abortion anywhere in America anymore. It doesn't mean that we do things by crass democratic polling, but I think if the political leaders are properly reflecting the differences, we could agree on a sort of baseline of where Americans are. And we are broadly in agreement, I will say again, 80% of us on almost everything. Then there can be differentiation in other states and communities beyond that baseline of kind of guaranteed rights or guaranteed freedoms, right? And dignity for different groups. That's what I mean to say. Forgive the earlier kind of tangent that's dead end, but we just see it again and again and again. And we just think there's a path in here that calls for a certain sense of structure and a certain amount of allowing of grace for idiosyncrasies. And grace for idiosyncrasies doesn't always mean whether those idiosyncrasies are of left or right or extreme views that represent an extreme minority or left or right. It doesn't always mean that they're represented in the complete legal and cultural and educational landscape in full all the time or no one can focus or learn anything. So I think we have got to get back to these basics because where you put your attention is how you move the world, right? And you know that. And the more we're focused on abortion and transgenderism and illegal immigration and all these things that we're just focusing and pouring all this attention in instead of going, guys, take a step back. What's the 20, 30, 40,000 foot view of, how can we share in a community that's America where everybody has room to negotiate within a shared core of what are considered American rights? And I would put candidates up to solving those problems to say, how would you talk about that? How do you wanna talk to a community that is vehemently pro-life, placed in context with the country and with different blue states that are skewed elsewhere? What's your solution for how you talk to everybody? And the fact is, is all these different groups, we can't flatten them into the worst thing that any one of them has ever said. Oh, a lefty activist, here's six of the terrible things they said. Oh, a far right evangelical Christian, let me find six things that a far right evangelical Christian said that are awful or tone deaf. These groups are very complicated and they're not monoliths. And we learned this a lot when we were polling. We have this notion that, one of the jokes is when Democrats were writing very high on the Latin vote and saying Latin X instead of Latino, we went out, if you look at the polling, it's like 2% of Latinos like the term Latin X and 60% hate it. And I wanna say someone who grew up in California with Latino family members and friends and community. And I mean, it's part of my core culture and community. I'm always like, have you met enough Hispanics? Like have you met Mexican grandparents? Like, how do you even think this works? And I just wanna say that constantly to people, have you met actual hunters who are real hunters and talk to them about the environment? Like really, you think they're just every asshole who flies on a helicopter and goes and shoots wild prey without any notion. Do you also understand how even the licenses for big game hunting in particular regions are what pay all the anti-poaching? And it's like, people don't even understand. They don't cross pollinate enough to understand all this nuance. And there's so many shared parts of these communities. And so anyways, that's my long-winded answer is how do you talk to everybody instead of what's abortion? I'm vehemently for abortion 100% in all circumstances. And there's nothing more to it than getting a mole removed by dermatologists. It's like, nope, that's a fail. That's a fail to address America and all of its sub-communities, all of which are internally differentiated.