https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=tcyb37FR4JY

 How are you today? I'm well, I have to admit I'm really excited to talk to you. Good, good, good. Well, why don't you tell me a little bit about yourself? What do you think would be important to know? I talk a lot, so I don't want to take away from the conversation, but I'm... Tell me about growing up. Did your parents bring you to church, not bring you to church? Yeah. My... I remember going to church to a lot of different churches. My dad was born and raised in San Antonio, Shreveport, Bossier City, Louisiana. Okay. So, I shouldn't say San Antonio. He's an Air Force Academy graduate. So, that's my connection to the San Antonio thing. I was born in San Antonio. Okay. So, you moved around a lot? I don't know. There were times where we... It was kind of a joke, not a joke, but something that my parents sort of bragged and complained about at the same time that we had moved 13 times in one year once. But that was very specific. It was kind of part of a job thing. Anyway, regardless. My dad coming out of the Air Force was, you could probably say resentful or disgruntled, because he really poured himself into it for a variety of reasons, including just the timing of his service, because Vietnam was no longer... They didn't need pilots anymore. So, even though he excelled in every way, didn't get the opportunity to really do what he wanted to do, which was be a fighter pilot, right? Yeah. Yeah. So, after that... And I think he describes himself as an outlier in the military because of his... I don't know if you would call it free thinking or whatever, but he voiced his thoughts, and that can get you in trouble in the military. Sure. And at the same time, it's kind of the only way to experience any reward in life at all. And so, here I am on tangents already, but... That's OK. I like tangents. At some point in Colorado Springs, there's Air Force there as well. He met my mom, and their story is just ridiculous, as are so many stories in generations past where people meet each other and marry with almost no knowledge of each other. And so, something like that happened. And so, they end up, after he's out of the military, getting a school bus and some goats and driving from San Antonio to Montana, where her family was, and she had, in their marriage, been given some property. And so, here we are on this 100 acres on the top of a mountain, just wonderful way for three young boys. I was two at the time, so from about two until four or five. And so, he had, in his military experience, gained enough education to teach. And so, he taught at the local school, and that was not a good mix, because really it was a logging community. And so, people were very resistant to conventional education, as he knew it, and they were upset that he was... And of course, it was weird, I remember seeing the paddles that they used at school, these big, three-quarter inch thick paddles with holes in them and stuff. And it was just a completely foreign world to what anybody would think of today, especially when the community of Eureka, Montana, where he was teaching, maybe had a population of 300 or something like that. Yep. And so, anyway, he didn't make close relationships. I shouldn't say that, maybe he did, but he wasn't particularly popular. And so... But he ended up connecting with some church. And so, I do remember being... To the extent that he ended up pastoring, or getting on that career track, and I have no idea what denominations he affiliated with or anything like that, except that he ended up, at some point, being sort of... Pursuing a career with the Seventh-day Adventist Church. OK. And so, that was what led into that period of a lot of moving around, because it was kind of his training time, and whoever it was that he was, he was sort of shadowing on property, and so that's where we lived, we're in his apartments, we would go in and we would clean them and paint them, and then go to the next one, and anyway, I don't know. And then my mom, much later in my life, informed me that they had a prophet, a female prophet of some sort, who was debunked, and so that just wrecked his faith. And so, I don't know if it was simultaneous with his own pursuit of, like, some kind of seminary studies at the University of Montana, but all at once, he left the faith, got involved in all kinds of, like... You know, the university is a wonderful place to get somebody wrapped up in the meeting crisis, you know? Yeah. And so, without divulging too much about the things that... I'm not pleased about where my dad went. He traveled long distance between these two towns, so to go to school, and for us to live where we lived was... He was only home, not even maybe three days a week or something like that, and of course, with the exposure to that campus culture, it was so much more exciting than the HIC culture of our town, and so it didn't take long for him to just be drawn away from the family, and so by the time we eventually moved to Missoula to be part of that new... Yeah. My dad's really weird and very much like me in the sense that it's hard to... For me to stay focused in any one area. I love new ideas. I'm a... Novelty is one of my deep, fulfilling... I don't know what you call that. And so, he never really... I couldn't tell you what he does or ever really has done as a career, except for his experience with the Air Force. He's had jobs. I think he sold cars in Shreveport for a long time, and was exceptional at it. But in any case... In any case... You asked about my spiritual experience. My mom maintained her faith through all of that, and we had been exposed because we would travel back to his family's in Louisiana, so I got to experience just that... You know, the kinds of knowing that Rebecca talks about all the time? Yeah. The experience of worshipping with a black church is so much different than a hick Montana church. Because in Montana, they were very much proper and reverent. Nobody said, amen from the crowd or anything like that. And it was a party down south. Like, from go, people were moving and yelling and... It wasn't Pentecostal, whatever you pronounce that word, where they're speaking in tongues. Right. I've been to those in Montana. But in any case, my mom's faith maintained because what... She basically did something similar to what I ended up doing in my sort of young adult years, which was saying, in order for God to be a God that... That would be able to serve my deepest needs, he has to be loving and he has to be able to do miracles. And so, whether that's us doing the... You know, creating our own God or not, she did that. And she definitely conveyed to us as young children who were deeply needing hope, because dad was gone, mom was an emotional wreck. Life in Montana for a single mother was not... There wasn't a place for her. Women didn't have a place in the professional world. And it's strange to think that that did happen. Like that formed itself within the... Between when I was about 10 and 20, women were now common in the workplace in my community. That seems so rapid. Yeah. In any case... So, my mom would hold us all when there was a catastrophe, like our power was gonna be shut off or our water was gonna be shut off or something like that. She would say, don't worry, we'll get through this, God loves us. And we needed that. And I knew that there was something deeply true about it, because it always was true. Yeah. And so, there you go. Oh, that's so... Did you go to college or you go to work or what? How did you leave the house? Well, because I was... Because my mom was working from the time I was about eight until... Well, from then on, mom wasn't really home. She couldn't be. And you could tell she was just... It tore her up. Yeah. Because we needed so much more than she could possibly give. I remember... Oh, man, there's so many just tragic things. A couple of years back, I wrote a thank you letter to one of my science teachers. I can't remember how I saw him on Facebook, but I expressed my gratitude for him being in exactly the right place at the exactly the right time in my life, for me to see that there were men who I wished my father had been. And it didn't mean he could do anything for me in that role, but he was that person that I needed to know existed. Yeah. So anyway, we were un-parented. And so all through from about... I shouldn't say that because it cheapens my mom's effort, but... We were... We were free, like Lord of the Flies. And so by the time I was 12, I had experienced all of the kinds of... ...extreme interactions with the meaning crisis that a human being can and not be a direct victim of evil. And there were people around me who were. I knew, like even members of my family were horribly abused. And I escaped that. And I don't know how. It wasn't my doing because I put myself in plenty of positions. I did every drug I could get my hands on. I was... You asked how I ended up leaving home. Well, I was involved in adult relationships very early. Both my brothers are older than I am. So I made fast friends with all of their older friends who had access to all of the things that are dangerous. Yeah. And so... When I was a sophomore in high school, I got my girlfriend pregnant. And... I convinced her against everyone's wishes to marry me. I was not able to convince her to terminate the pregnancy, which was my first instinct. And it was just a simple question over the phone. She called me, said, I'm pregnant. And I said, are you willing to get an abortion? This was like, it was just that fast. She said, no, I am not. And I said, mom. Because I was on the corded landline phone at my house. And she says, what? I went back to the bedroom and I said, guess what? I'm gonna be a daddy. She's like, I told you. And so... You know, like I said, I was able to convince her to marry me. But because it was completely a compromise, like she didn't want to be married, she didn't want to be a mom. Well, you're so young. Yeah, yeah. Well, thankfully, she was a senior. And so she didn't have to be pregnant at school, at least not visibly. But I was still in school for two more years in high school. And then I ended up going to the University of Montana because the universities give you free money if you're in that situation. But as soon as we were legally divorced, they took all my financial aid. And so I was like, well, I don't wanna pay for this. And so I don't know. I don't know what other details you might wanna know about. You did a lot of living in those first 20 years of your life. And so many people don't have... It's so strange to think of the traumas as blessings, but... And maybe more, I should say, the forced responsibilities, but you're forced to choose. Am I going to... And in a way, my dad's... My experience of not being fathered made me passionately committed to, I am not going to let this child come up without a father. Yeah, yeah. And if I didn't have that, I probably would have been in the same boat as some of my friends who also were having adult relationships with women young and didn't have that conviction. And... Yeah, yeah. Yeah. Wow, wow, wow. Wow, you've got quite a story. And... I really wanna be careful not to focus on it because I so bad whenever... Oh, what do you wanna talk about? I'm so hungry for these conversations. Like, you have so perfectly articulated so many of my thoughts. I like, Makiya's like, be careful. Don't just like love bomb this guy. But I love you so much, Paul. Like, I can't... You have made my life. Like, I am so, so grateful for you. And... Why? I'm curious about that. I mean, what... See, and I don't just ask, you know, fluff me up here, but I wanna know what's helpful for you. What has been helpful for you? I don't know if... I tried to send you a little bit of stuff and you must have so many things to read, but I've sent you various different things and you don't need to read it now. I don't know if you could possibly do it. But... Which way did you send it? On the sign up here with the Calendly thing? Because there's a bunch of it here. Okay. And so I've sent you... It's hard to remember who sends me email. So let me check my email. I've hit you from every angle. I even wrote you a letter on the letters wiki. Let's see. It doesn't matter. Because really writing was for me to try to clarify my own, like why do I love you so much? And what's funny is all of the questions that I thought to ask you, and this is the thing, I don't wanna ask you questions as though you have some prophetic answer, even though in many ways, I feel like you have been that prophet. The... Like you and Verveki are... You are my sources of language and thought structure to solve so many of my internal conflicts and meet so many of my deep unmet needs. And... Over the last maybe week that I've been trying to formulate, well, what kind of a coherent question could I possibly ask Paul that isn't asking him to solve a problem that clearly if it was solvable, somebody would have done thousands of years ago, right? Sure. And... So I've always been a little bit scared when these meaning crisis conversations are engaged in, because I know that it is necessary for me to maintain connection with whatever aspect of meaning is the divine. Like there's something, like whenever it's just purely academic, it's... And I'm not really good at quoting chapter and verse, but it's missing the divine. And it makes it powerless. And... When you say divine, what do you mean? Oh, goodness. I don't... I feel so unqualified to go into defining any term. What I mean is when somebody starts talking about fluffy things like love, it kind of muddies the academic conversation. And you found ways to say, well, what if we parse out God one and God two? What if we look at the... I mean, all of us, including Verbecky, I think, owe a great deal of gratitude to Jordan Peterson as well, right? Because without the catalyst, where would we be, right? Yeah. But that symbolic meta, whatever that is where it's like the... Is it Brett that talks about the directional or the truth that doesn't really even need to be propositionally true, to be valuable? I don't know how he words it. It's hard to talk Verbecky language without a lot of practice. But you have so... What is it? You call it colonizing, right? Yeah. I think that you have a gift. Well, you have multiple layers of gifts. The reason why you are so critical for me is you maintain a... I don't feel like I have to... I don't have to risk betraying or abandoning a deep value that I have in order to entertain a truth that may on its face seem contradictory to it. Every interview I've seen you done, you do, you done. I think that there's... I'm gonna just go off on a complete tangent here. Compound interest applies in our thinking, in our... Like all of the ways of knowing, in my opinion. And I think that because you are a third generation pastor, minister, whatever, you have so deeply been affected by that mindset that you're able to work in the world and with people in a way that is not even accessible to people like me or even academics who may have had good parents. Because it's not just being... It's not just having a dad. It's having a dad who's committed to a certain kind of relationship with other humans. And through osmosis or whatever it is, maybe you wouldn't even credit your dad and grandpa with this. But you are at a level that I am in awe of. You're somehow able to sort of detach yourself from being triggered by, I don't know, people trying to bait you into arguments or whatever. And you're able to just be with them and express regard for them and value them, not feel like you have to win them over in any way. There's no proposition that you're fighting for them to adopt. And yet, there's... I get the sense that your intention is still there to win their heart. Yeah, yeah, yeah. No, that's very good. That's a little scary hearing you lay it out because I'm thinking, I'm thinking, yeah, he's right, he's right, he's right. And we can't see ourselves very well because we're all full of ourselves. But that was really helpful. That was really cool. Thank you. That was really helpful. Huh. Huh. I have so many questions about your vision for church. Okay. And I hesitate to ask you because, I mean, I want to, I wanna know what your thoughts are. But I also know that there isn't an answer, right? This is how church ought to be. Yeah, yeah, yeah. For all people, you know that that's... Yeah, yeah. We may have a sense of things that are missing or ways that we might be specifically equipped to engage or something like that. But to say, this is how things ought to be, is how productive is that? Yeah, yeah, yeah. And yet, so I wanna have that conversation, but something that you have revealed over the last several interviews you did was... So these people, even today, I gotta ask you this too. The post that you did today, how long ago did you compose that? Because it seems very relevant to what's in the news today. I did it yesterday afternoon. So that's... Okay, and not all of your posts are that quick, right? No, no, no. Many of them are, but Friday I post on Monday, so there's a few days, but sometimes there are. And I moved that one up because I wanted, because it was very much of the day. So this is what I hear you saying in your... So I love the knowing. I wish that we could bring the conversation about the kinds of knowing into the design of church. This is what church is for, is to help us train in knowing God and one another through these realms. And so many people could say, well, they don't actually exist as separate. Totally, I get that. But if you don't recognize their sort of unique elements, then there's a good chance that you're just not gonna give them the attention that they deserve. But this is what I heard you saying. I heard you saying that... Well, maybe I should say it this way. I want you to hear me say, I know you love me. How could I possibly know that? How could I possibly know, Paul VanderKlay, a person I've never seen or spoke to in real life, I mean, this is the closest we've ever come. I know that you love me, that you would sacrifice for me, personally. Like in a way you kind of have just by allowing a rando like me to take your time, right? I also know that as insane as it sounds, not only do I know you love me, but I know you trust me. How could I possibly know that? And I know it deeply, I know it. And I know why. And I think that maybe, particularly in just this last video that you made, you have sort of formulated a way of conveying that that is similar to what I'm doing to you right now. Because I'm saying this to you, you are seeing proof that it's reciprocal. How can we do that? What is the magic that's happening here? And I don't know how to transfer it. I don't know that it is transferable because I wouldn't be who I am and you wouldn't be who you are without a whole lot of experience and exposure to different kinds of thinking. And you've been different people at different times to a degree, right? My understanding and affection for God one and two is the connector that allows me to say and to know, to experience everything that I'm perceiving about you. In every way that that happens, I don't even know how tangible Paul is to me, but all the signal you're sending and I'm receiving is resonating with he loves God and he loves his neighbor. And that's enough. That's it, that's all I need, full credit. And how my desire, like of anything that I could possibly invest my energy, my life essence into, it would be building a community of trust. And I'm so heartbroken that even this church that I go to that is full of people who are deeply committed and just wrecking, maybe not wrecking themselves, but just pouring themselves, banging their heads against the wall of the traditions and the sort of the feudal efforts that we've managed to carry on, who knows how long, like given any, you walk into any church and they're doing things way different than each other. And yet some of the stuff seems very deeply connected to Jesus. Like we don't know. You hear these people talking about, well just, the Bible says things very clearly. Who are you talking to? Who are you talking to? No, like if you could say there's a clear sort of essence to it after you've read it a hundred times, you can say, no, I think I get what it's gesturing toward. Okay, I'll go with that, that's clear. But you go to chapter and verse and say, what this means is you should do such and such. Oh. So we all have to figure out how we're gonna conduct ourselves. And I am really curious about what your practicals are in how do you build trusting community within, and I know this is an effort at that, what you're doing with me and what you're doing. Yeah. And it's working, and like I was saying, it's working so profoundly that I was like, initially thinking this isn't enough. And you and I both know it's not enough, right? Yeah, yeah, yeah. What you're doing with the guy who sleeps outside your door, what you're doing in your day to day with your family, that's necessary, right? And at the same time, for you to be able to communicate to me, and I am certain thousands and thousands of other people that you love God and your fellow man enough that I can deeply, like you can even, I don't know if you can hear this lump in my throat right now, but I know you love me, I know it. And that's special, and it's creating an influence in the world that is priceless. It's bringing people to a conversation. It's saying, hey, all you people in the street who are clearly hurting, let's do this. Let's do it. Let's call it what it is. Yeah, yeah. No, that's very good, that's very powerful. It's very real, it's very true. The problem I see is that we're so childish. Like I am so underdeveloped. I am embarrassed that I don't have anything except my heart to contribute to this conversation. And that's something, right? It's something. Oh, that's so much. Amen, and I appreciate that. That's so much. I mean, because, I mean, one of the things that the conversations have sort of stuck on is this question of good faith. And you just articulated that with your heart in this conversation. You're saying, you're coming to this conversation in good faith. And in my experience, I would rather have a conversation with someone in good faith who, you know, whatever scale of other things, that that is so valuable compared to the smartest, best read, highest status, yada, yada, yada. They come to that conversation not in good faith. The conversation is completely devalued. If there's good faith, there's potential for value and meaning and community and love and all of those things. So that's a vitally essential part of the conversation. And at this moment in time, when people are really, suffering in the streets at various levels, if I, you know, I think, you know, when it comes to the question of should police join them on the knee or not, I think what the protesters are asking for is, are you avatars and representatives of authority and power coming to us in good faith? And when I see, when I see national guardsmen or police officers putting an arm around, seeing them as an individual, going down on knees together, they're saying, yes, I'm seeing you in good faith. You and I, I want, we may differ on what's good in terms of the actions that should be taken or policies or all of this, but I do want the best for you. And so that's the negotiation. The difficulty is that, because we're two different people, there's still that difference between us that I think, okay, loving, and this is what we have all the time, loving you looks like me saying this to you. And the other side, loving me, someone who loves me wouldn't say that to me. I mean, these are the things that we come into contact with all the time. And so that good faith piece is absolutely vital and completely essential because without it, there's nothing. So that kind of takes us into the sort of the realm of the pragmatic, right? So there's this sense that I have that in a lot of the efforts that I've made to invest in building trust, that there's a blind leading the blind sort of thing. And there are personalities that are attracted to leadership. And it's necessary. I was speaking with my pastor just yesterday about how sad I am that part of taking that role is accepting that you will be lumped in with everyone that's ever abused that position. And it almost forces you to take a defensive or a sort of a posture, of maybe not apathy, but callous. If you've seen, I imagine if you had a conversation with Dr. Jim, I don't know if he's a practicing. He's a cardiologist. So you talk with somebody about what that experience is like day to day. And there's so little gratitude and opportunity and opportunity to, I could reference all kinds of studies and Ted talks and stuff about how people get into that initially, almost any aspect of the medical field in order to serve their fellow man. And that connection is intentionally broken down and also not intentionally broken down, but still broken down over time because people don't really take responsibility for their own health. They don't want to. Who wants to take responsibility for anything hard? Nobody. And so for people who are willing to take a position of leadership, it's just slow wearing down of their passion. And without three generations of training and seeing how does somebody recover from a real deep wound, how do you go to God for that refreshment and that spirit to like that, the why, the motive, how can you keep doing it for the right reason and not be diminished and worn down by not being appreciated, not having your valuable efforts take effect. I was in charge of certain aspects of the children's ministry in our church several years back. And I was just crying on the shoulder of the previous person who had that position about how difficult it was to get people to invest themselves in teaching and respecting all the people that needed to work together to get that job done. And the man was so wise and just, God, I love this guy. He put his arm around me and he said, you know what, you're the perfect man for this to fall apart on. And I was like, why? And he says, well, because everybody knows what you're trying to do and why. You're not telling people what to do. You're not expressing anger. You're just heartbroken that it's falling apart. And if it's gonna fall apart, that's how it should fall apart. And the consequences of it falling apart will be felt by all and it'll find its way back together because we all want a functional children's ministry. That's exactly right. That's exactly right. I was like, you're not helping, Dave. Yeah, that's exactly right. But it did help. It let me say, okay, things fail. Yes. And not because of my heart or my lack of effort. Yes, yes, yes. As a matter of fact, because you've colonized me, I can say it actually brings glory to the failure. Yeah, yeah, it does. It does. It does. That's very true. That's very true and very wise. Wow, wow. Also, let me quickly ask though, how do we get from knowing that it's, okay, you are less blind than others in the areas where you have this experience and this just like this accumulated, a compound interest of just knowledge and wisdom. And I don't know what you call what that is. There are many of us. I am a bit of an outlier in my community having the kind of past that I have. I shouldn't have access to the people that I have access to, right? They love me and trust me. And because they only met the me that loves God. Anyway, regardless, I still have so many issues that I am not qualified to lead in many ways. Now, I'm so grateful for it. I'm so much more qualified now than I possibly could have been, not necessarily to lead, but at least to be useful in certain kinds of conversations, right? But I think that we are starving in churches worldwide for people who have enough faith in God, particularly, well, whatever. I'm not gonna define that. To not force people into propositional agreement with one another. How can we get people to trust each other first? And I don't see anybody really even making that effort in a sort of like, this is what we do first. This is our first priority, is to teach people how to be trusting and trustworthy. We need an economy of trust. And if you come in here, this is one of the terms that in one of my things I wrote to you is that I think that churches are structurally counterfeiting the currency of trust. Because they're implying, they're obligating people to give credit to people who are not credit worthy. You're saying, no, accept their false currency as valid within our trust economy. No, no, we need to have, I'm like, if ever there was a place where we need to have like a gold standard, it is in the community of trust. And you can conduct, you have, you've proven that you can conduct yourself in a conversation with someone who is not communicating in good faith and maintain your trust value. And several of the people that you talk to do that. Like, I am so grateful to when somebody says, well, what do you think about such and such? I don't have to have an opinion. I can say, you know what? There is somebody who has so much more information and expertise in this area that is engaging in good faith. And you've connected me, like my YouTube channel list is ridiculous. And that is such a gift to be able to say, I know somebody who can talk to you about the real, I loved, is it Eric Weinstein's talk about superposition? Who can somehow handle, he can tell you that both of these things are true and not true. And they're sort of antagonistic towards each other. And it's necessary to be able to acknowledge the existence of both and some strange hybrid third, like so many people that listen to you, I'm sure accuse you all the time of betraying their doctrinal beliefs. Yeah. Yeah. That's okay. Well, but there's no other way to say, I love both of you. Yeah. Yeah. Tomorrow I'm going to post a conversation I had yesterday with Preston Sprinkle. And there's a lot of what you're talking about in that conversation. It's over two hours. I haven't read enough of his work. Yeah. Well, he's, you know, but we get into, you know, the topic is of course, the same sex marriage debate in the church, but how you laid it out today, which I think was very profound and correct and articulate and insightful is a lot of what's at the heart of it. Because churches have, and many organizations too, try to figure out how to scale up the trust. And that's really difficult because, you know, one of the things that didn't really make the video today too much, but I was thinking a lot about yesterday was how in Sacramento, there was a police shooting of an unarmed black man over a year ago or so hit the national news. There was some protesting in Sacramento after that. The guy's brother came into a degree of status and profile for going to the city council and giving a speech. And that same brother a couple of nights ago when it looked like a crowd was gonna go in a bad direction, kind of stood up and was able, he had the trust of the crowd because his brother died. And so the crowd was able to listen to him and he was able to take it in a different direction. It's also true that the police were able to take the case in a different direction. It's also true that a few days before this whole thing erupted, I caught in the press that same brother was in court on charges of domestic violence, beating up his wife or his girlfriend or someone. And I thought of the fact that, you know, this is where we're all stuck. This is a very big deal in church things because we are, you know, we ordain people because we trust them. And it's really interesting if you read in the Pauline lists of what church leaders should have, it's very interesting that most of the items on their list don't necessarily involve a lot of theological education. They're what I call shopkeeper values. They're values of trust. And, you know, will this person not take a vulnerable situation and bring harm to it? Will they show up whether they feel like it or not? You know, it's all the kinds of things that if you're working just about any job and you look around at your coworkers, you immediately know who you can rely upon and who you can't. And even the ones you can't sometimes have roles to play in the mix because they can be relied upon for certain things. And so they've got their value there. But it's, so no, and I think you've, I think you've very, you've laid out a lot of these things very well in terms of, you know, I was thinking, and I just kind of touched on it at the end of today's video talking about Brett Weinstein in that when I listen to Brett and Eric, I often think by the nature, by the nature of our political structures, which are necessary and in many ways work fairly well on the scope of human history, that is not the platform that is going to help these guys find what they're looking for. And I often think that church has in its potentiality, the kind of freedom and breadth to accomplish, to accomplish what a lot of what our hearts are needing. And I think your story about the children's ministry falling apart is a good one for that. And the wisdom of your friend there who said, yeah, it's gonna fall apart and you're the right guy to lead it. Because you're trustworthy, because you have a sense of what the children's ministry is for. And the truth is that in the age of decay, this cycle of rise, peak, corruption, decay, this cycle is part of the patterns of this world. And wisdom says that we intersect, we intersect these things in different stages of the cycle. And there needs to be stewardship. And by stewardship, I mean that loving, trusting ownership of a special but vulnerable thing, even if it's not a special thing. A special but vulnerable thing, even if it's a mess right now. Because that's what our lives are. They really are. And that's, our lives are all important, value-filled messes at some place of either aspirational building or decadent falling apart and we need leadership and stewardship for the different places in the cycle. So, no, and it's hard. For each of us, we know our flaws and we have some sense of our strengths, but we really only are informed of them from others. Oh God, yes, this is why so badly we need people who can see our backside. I mean, that's exactly what you just said, is you can't see your back. Yeah, yeah. Well, if you can't see it, how can you possibly fix this gaping, bleeding wound that you're continuing to claw at, because it itches, you know? Yeah, yeah. Yeah, ugh. So, I mean, we have an hour, we're almost done with it. I would love to hear you in the future, maybe share your thoughts on how might, from your experience and maybe within this community of trying to tackle the meaning crisis, how might people, I don't know, try to structure a trusting community? Because I don't see a functional model yet. And then the second one would be, when you think about your responsibility to God, what do you think that is, particularly as it relates to building a community of trust? What, I would add kind of a little third, little bit on here is, what do you think is possible within your lifetime and the foreseeable future and maybe the existence of mankind? Because we know that perfection isn't it. Like somehow, like if you read the Bible, it is, I was reading Ezekiel, oh my goodness. And yet we're being called to sound the alarm. Because like we'll be held responsible if people who could have been loved and engaged in that knowing and being known by God and one another, if they miss out on that, because we didn't say something, that's on us. So how do we hold that responsibility without somehow making some ugly human franken church, right? You know, and I think, boy, those are all great questions. And I think in some ways, I try to answer them every day by what I'm doing. And I pastor and I'm, my occupation and my job is pastoring this tiny little church on Florin Road in Sacramento. And I've been here for 22 years. And you know, when I first got here, I had all the energy and ambition of a much younger man. And took a bunch of things off the shelf because lots of vendors have things on shelves that they're very interested in colonizing churches with. And so we did a bunch of those things and some of them were helpful. And you know, I, in some ways, you know, it has come down to what I've done with this YouTube channel and the things that have come as a result of it. You know, when I like how you, you know, to try to structure a trusting community, I don't think there's any other way than the conversations, than the seeing each other, than the hearing each other, and then the watching each other do things for each other. You know, trust, oh wow, I was watching, so I'm watching The Wire, I've never seen The Wire before. And there's this guy in it, McNulty, who is a cop and he, you know, he's a passionate cop but he doesn't have a case. He's a drunk and a womanizer. And you know, and he's sitting there on the porch with his estranged wife, they're not legally divorced yet. He wants to patch things up and make things work and part of her does too. And she just looks at him at one point and says, I can't trust you. You know, and part of her wants him to be there for the kids, for their two sons, and certainly it would be easier financially if he lived there and in all sorts of practical things, but I can't trust you. You know, and I just, the conversation I just had before this fun conversation with a musician who was talking about how he, he was a musician and now he's much more in the management side of things. And he says, you know, being a manager of a band is sort of like trying to manage a dysfunctional family. And then he had these lines that I could have, I've never heard a pastor say but they were just full of pastoral wisdom. He says, you know, these people, these musicians, they take snapshots of things in their life and they put them on the wall and that then defines them. And they have elephant-like memories if they feel like they've been wronged and in a reframing way that brings back that little snapshot, that worst common denominator, they organize their life around the grievance. And, you know, and part of that is connected with being a musician because I noticed this a long time ago about people with good senses of humor. I never knew someone with a good sense of humor who also hadn't suffered, suffered for being wrong-colored. How can you laugh about it? Yeah, yeah, yeah. And, you know, when you began this conversation and we, you know, we looked at, you know, he's talking about your life, part of what you develop after a degree of chaotic, insane suffering where you've been hurt is a sense of humor because it's like cry or laugh and laughing, maybe crying can build community, but laughing can sometimes do it better, at least if you're not laughing at someone, but we're all laughing at the absurdity of our situation. So I've, you know, people will sometimes ask me, you know, they'll want parenting advice and I'll say, you know, try to be the person you want your child to become because that's, I don't know that you can do more than that. I know that you can screw it up, but, and I think it's the same way of trying to build trust in community. One of the, I've been enormously gratified by what I've seen happen on the Discord server in terms of, I don't post that much, but I do lurk a lot. I lurk sometimes, but the way in which people are engaging one another in an internet chat forum, which is notorious for, you know, these little games of, you know, mocking people or putting them down or, and I watch people in there, you know, someone will come into the Discord and they're bringing all their game from the other places in the internet and they try a trick like that and it doesn't work on anyone. And what I mean, it doesn't work on them is that people don't instinctively do it back to them. They absorb the evil and they give good. This is exactly what Jesus says. Don't return evil for evil. When someone gives you evil, give them good. The thing is that takes a tremendous amount of strength and this is the strength that we get from Jesus and this is the strength that the Holy Spirit gives us. And so I think, you know, part of what was really good about Vervecky's stuff is that he's always pointing at these in-between things. And, you know, it's again, it's like I was talked about school spirit in some of my recent videos and we can learn something about the Holy Spirit in that way. But school spirit is something that none of us control, all of us participate in. We can either be building it or tearing it down. I remember when I, before I became a missionary, I went to this one place that they often send foreign missionaries to called Missionary Internship. And they had all kinds of cross-cultural training and things like that that my wife and I were doing. And I remember one of the things that one of the teachers there said is, you know, when you're working in this cross-cultural situation, ask yourself, is what I'm about to do going to build trust or undermine it? And that stuck with me. And I found that to be a deep, deep truth. And it's not the case that in every circumstance, we have, well, let me say it this way. There are times when we have to do things that strengthen our trust. We have to do things that stress the trust in order to gain a deeper thing. Yep, we gotta fight. We have to have conflict competence. Yep. But in most cases, in order for that to happen successfully, you've had to have built the relationship beforehand. And all of the mundane, boring, showing up for work when you don't like it, taking care of that kid when they have a cold and they pretty really should have kept the kid home. Just yesterday, things in terms of my little homeless encampment outside my door here, I'm always just managing that thing. And there's sort of a tipping point when I have a high degree of tolerance for chaos, which anyone who walks into my office at work can see. I have a high degree of tolerance for chaos, but there's a tipping point. It gets to be a tipping point. And the woman who runs the childcare center knocked on my door and she's like, not everybody has my degree of tolerance for chaos. And she's like, pastors, okay. I said, but you gotta tell your workers not to fill my garbage can with your stuff because I need my garbage can to handle this mess. And so I cleaned up what one homeless person called the foundation of the Lord, which is what I go, it's right outside my office, the foundation of the Lord, which there's a whole hilarious story behind that. But anyway, so I cleaned up the foundation of the Lord and I took most of the worldly possessions of a couple of individuals and I piled them in the garbage can along with some of their feces and drug paraphernalia and cigarette butts and empties and all of that. And I knew exactly what would happen because sometime in the middle of the night, they stumbled back here and this is where they would sleep and they know I only put this, when I do do this, which isn't very often, I put it in the garbage can and if they really want it, they'll kind of, it kind of forces them to, the stuff they really want comes out of the garbage can. Again, that's their salience hierarchy. It's the bedding and a few of their possessions that it goes back onto the foundation of the Lord and I came into work this morning and I knew exactly, I didn't know if Billy would be in it or not, he wasn't. And then it's like, am I gonna clean this up today or am I gonna leave it for today or, and so, you know, and I don't have, unlike some of the other homeless people around, I don't have a lot of experience with Billy. I've got a lot of other trust built up with other people because we've had lots of low level interactions for years and all those interactions are built up such mundane things, do I make eye contact? Do we speak to each other in a respectful tone? Do I understand boundaries and do I respect theirs? And with some people like Daniel, I mean, Daniel has, it's so funny because if he, depending on where he's at in terms of his mood cycles and his, what degree of inebriation or sobriety, you know, he'll come at me with all kinds of things and he'll cuss me out and, you know, all kinds of things threaten my life and the next day he'll come back and, you know, well, why does he come back the next day and why doesn't he expect a baseball bat in his teeth, which is some days what he deserves? Well, because we built that trust and because he knows if he comes back, he can look at me and he can say, you know, pastor, I called you some things yesterday and yeah, I'm sorry. Wow. Okay, all right. And so, or maybe we'll talk for a little while and it'll get to the point that after talking for a little while that he can, he's able to, because if you're living on the street, that kind of show of vulnerability, not a lot of space for it on the street. So, you know, and so communities of trust are built over time and with decency and again, good faith. I mean, and I'm not sure we exactly know all of the ingredients of what we mean by that, but it's sacramental enough that we have a sense when we use that word. And so, no, so that's, and I don't, a lot of people, you know, people can come out with best practices lists and that's cool. And those are really helpful things. But, and I've seen that there are other people that they violate most of the items on that list, but still kind of do it. I liked what you said about how in a workplace, you trust different people to be who they are. Yeah, yeah. Like you don't trust them to do things that might stereotypically qualify as trustworthy. You trust them to be sort of consistent in their nature. Right. And so. And to have a place in the ecosystem with that consistency, sometimes despite everything else. To me, that's what you have done a really good job of revealing in the way that you conduct yourself with people is that you can have this unconditional positive regard for the human and also call out, which is why I respect so many of the people that you have engaged with IDW or otherwise who will respectfully say, that's baloney. Like, come on, let's engage with this without the straw man. I can steel man your side, come on. Let me say what I think is real about what you're bringing to this game and see if you can agree with me on that. And then let's take a step forward. Like, let's do this together. And so it is, I don't know who wrote the book, and I don't even know the title of the book, but one of the takeaways from the book was, the most important thing you do as a manager is hire and fire. Because it shows what you can be trusted to do. Because when you're asking for somebody to put their self out there, to invest the precious energy that they have in something, if you don't protect them, if you don't stand up for at very least the cause that you're investing in, they're not gonna do that again. You have forfeited what would be required for you to lead in that task. And there are a lot, I haven't yet found an environment professional or spiritual where the hiring and firing seems to be reliable. And it's not, I'm not even looking for it to be correct. I'm just wanting to be consistent. Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, it's hard. When I think about what's, it's really important to remember that the internet is very young, and it's young in a lot of different ways. And what I think, part of what I see happening in this IDW space is, are some things that I've known and seen in church spaces long before the internet. But it's just coming to that wisdom is just now sort of seeping in here because what happened first was a lot of the low hanging fruit. A lot of the, there's an anonymity, and so people are getting away with stuff, but I think part of the quality of, and I think Jordan Peterson had a big part to do with it. He certainly was the one to kind of open, break open the space, but to be able to have these, the quality of the good faith conversations across some of these no man zones in our cultural battlegrounds, and to be able to go deeper. And then to, one of the things, to have it recorded and out there in the public. I mean, I didn't plan my, I mean, what's so dangerous about me trying to answer your questions is that to whatever, for the most part, whatever good I've accomplished, I've sort of stumbled into it. That's, I think that's often true, and that's certainly true of the YouTube channel, and it's certainly true of, I mean, if you had asked me three years ago that starting a YouTube channel, I would have deeply meaningful, sincere conversations with people who basically sign up for an open slot on the internet. I would have thought I'd be talking to a bunch of Nigerians telling me to give them my bank account number, so they'd send me millions of dollars, but, and I wind up talking to people like you, and there's this weird thing that has happened, and I know, because I've been on both ends of it, having watched Jordan Peterson videos, a lot of them before I started making my own, that, well, you can really sort of get to know somebody if you listen to a few dozen or a hundred hours of- Thousands of hours. Thousands of hours of them talking on the internet, and if they're, yeah, they're not perfect, and they have their issues and their problems and the things they get wrong, but that's why I so often, I so often don't value when people are talking or when people say things, well, Jordan Peterson is a grifter, and I thought it's possible I could be fooled, but I've seen grifters, or John Verve, I mean, anybody who imagines Vervecky's a grifter, I think, I don't know what his grift is. You know, to me, he's speaking in earnest good faith, and yeah, you might not agree with everything he says, but find another human being where you can't talk for a couple of hours and find some substantive difference between you, and I know that from the church. To me, that is the most heart-aching part of it, is that I want to invest everything. I want to be, I wanna run as hard as I can toward what I know is good, and I just, and I know that's part of the problem, right? It's part of... You hunger and thirst for righteousness. Oh, but yeah. But again, and this is why, this is why I can never be a modernist Christian, because I will not live in a world where your hunger and thirsting for righteousness will not one day be satisfied. That, to me, is the bottom line, and so. Yet we know it's not gonna happen in this realm of flawed human grifters, right? Not in this age, baby. No, that's exactly right, and that's that every time I run through my own calculations of doubt and belief, I always come to this place where I say, with C.S. Lewis, I cannot believe that this world that looks so much like it's a portal to a better world isn't. And I'm, you know, I'm, there I'll stand, I'm not budging from that place, because, and I don't think I need to, that's the crazy thing, because I look at Jesus, and I read the Gospels, and I don't think it's just all made up stories, and I, you know, that's why I continue to be a Christian, and I continue to, and like you say, you know, and I also, and I think you said it very well, on one hand, I'm not going to try to manipulate or coerce or try in some way arm twist someone into saying they know things that they don't, because that's just a silly game. But at the same time, I do have my beliefs, and, you know, all of the questions about, about, okay, how will God, how will God finally judge the world, and what will he do with us? And I can finally say, number one, I can't tell you that, I'm just a human being, and I'm really aware of my own limitations, but number two, I have no other option than to trust that God can and will, and so on that score, he will make things right, and that's, and I understand people saying, I can't trust that, I don't believe that, yeah, I get that, I get that, and based on what this world shows us, I understand that, but that's what I believe, and it's my story, and I'm sticking with it. So, and, you know, and your story, I think, is powerful, and I'm, you know, the heartbreaking thing about these little video conversations is that, to me, they're like the samples you get at Costco. You know, you want more, you know, when you taste something delightful, you want more, and that's exactly what you're saying, I want more, and I believe we will have it, because right now, in this age, we've got our limitations of time and space, but I think we, I think those who hunger and thirst for righteousness will be satisfied, and the meek will inherit the earth, I really believe that. Do you think it will get better for what, and we haven't asked what you define as the body of Christ, but do you think we will get better or worse? Like, because as I read the Old Testament, there were times where there were good leaders, and they created a culture of trust, and it wasn't trust in one another so much as it was trust in God, and that's how you trust somebody, is you see them exercising their trust in God. So, I don't wanna say I'm just, I'm not satisfied with the best that I see in the Old Testament as being the best that will be available to us, but. Well, it's a fair question, and it's a good question, and you know, there's a reality, Christianity is a progressivist religion, because from Moses to Jesus, there's progress. Jesus says, greater things will you do than you've seen me do, and when I look around the world we're living in with the electricity's on here in Sacramento, 24 hours a day, it wasn't in the Dominican Republic. There's antibiotics, there's, you know, there's all kinds of really wonderful things, and Bishop Aaron is right, this is God working through the world, and so, but moments of foretaste are often lost, and C.S. Lewis, I think, that line that he says when he says, you know, God is absolutely profligate with good things, you know. People who shouldn't be playing around with it enjoy sex. People who have done everything to destroy their family sometimes have children who bless them. You know, we taste joy so readily in this world, but what we can't find is security, and Lewis says, that's because this world is designed to be, or at least in this dispensation, this world is basically a sacrament of the world to come, and Lewis says that God gives us the, God lets us know, we're not going to find our rest here, and so, no, things often do get better, but just like with your children's ministry, sometimes in this age, they're in the falling apart cycle, but here's the crazy thing, you will learn things. You know, if things never decayed, you wouldn't get the chance or the joy of the world, you wouldn't get the chance or the joy of the glory to build things and to build trust and to have your hand at it, and so usually, you know, usually it's not so much like a cycle, but more like a spiral that hopefully, and they can spiral up and spiral down, but hopefully, as that children's ministry gets built, the wisdom that you learned in its destruction, now you know how they fall apart. That's really important in terms of figuring out how to build a robust structure, because, and when you ask me how to build one, I say, I know a lot of things that kill it, and so a lot of what I do is I don't do this list of things over here because I know, that won't get me there. I can't give you a formula for success. I can tell you a lot of things you don't want to do, and then we'll follow our intuitions and listen to each other and maybe be able to do something. Amen. I've recently enjoyed playing around with the concept of dying well, because like of all the things that Jesus did, he died very, very well, and it's kind of the climax of the process of our proving our trustworthiness. And so I've kind of put things into that framework in the same way that you were asking, does this contribute to or diminish the community? Does this contribute to or diminish the idea of dying well? You hear the cliche all the time, dying to yourself. All those things that you know don't work were hard to let go because you thought they would work, and that sunk cost to let go of something that in all rights should work. Well, maybe another time it will, who knows? And then the other thing that I've been thinking on is that so often the most loving thing that I could do was be still and quiet and not try to fix things, not say anything. And it fundamentally contradicts with, and this is contradicts with, boy, my language. I know there must be some superposition there where, because I've always known that love was action. Kind of that, is it Pauline, is that how you describe things that come from Paul? So his clear description that you're known by your action, your love is experienced by your action. So it doesn't really count. Even the good things that you might do without the love in them, I mean, that's not Paul, but whatever, you see what I'm saying? And so to try to reconcile that surrendering and giving up of wanting to feel useful and fun, of wanting to feel useful and functional and contribute. Like I want, like it's part of my identity to be useful, to put my energy into a positive direction. And so to just fight every urge that I have and just be still is so challenging and so hard even after the fact to say that was love? To just let that fall apart? To just let that person learn the lesson without me trying to soften the blow of consequence? Ugh, I don't know what to do with it. Those are hard, those are hard. Eastern religion seem to sort of teach that as the ideal role is to just sort of stay disengaged. And I can't fully embrace that. I know that there is something good about really going all in. Yeah, yeah. And yet, yeah, whatever. Yeah, well. I've worn you out, I can tell. I'm tired, I'm getting tired. I've been doing this all morning, so I need a break. I love you Paul, thank you so much for this opportunity. Thank you Shane, this was a delight, this was a delight. It really was. What should I do with this conversation? I'll send it to you, but do you want anything else we've done with it? Because it's been lovely, it's up to you. Uh, in any way that you might think it's valuable to anyone, use it. Part of me is a little bit excited about people seeing it. Well, it was beautiful. You, I'm deeply touched and I feel loved. And it was a lovely talk. So I'm really glad you signed up and I hope we can talk again. Where do you live? I live in, it's called Port Orchard, Washington. Washington State? Yep, it's north of Tacoma, across the Sound from Seattle. So. Okay, so if I can come up there and do a meetup, we'll get to meet face to face. Oh, I was so excited, I was kind of, I mean, things happen, right? Yeah, yeah. I was gonna meet you. Well, I'm hoping that that trip happens at some point, so I look forward to it. I will do everything I can to make it wonderful for you. Okay, thank you Shane, God bless you. You too. Bye.