https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=CMHaznUBmFE

 Hi, this is Paul and this is Rough Draft for Sunday where I run through the current version of my Sunday sermon. Now, I know that I just got back from Europe and I told a bunch of you that there wouldn't be a rough draft this week, but John Van Donk lost his passport and so didn't make it home on the plane. And without him on the plane, I had plenty of time to work on the sermon because he's a distracting fellow as those of you who met him might have noticed. It's a good distraction and we had a tremendous amount of fun together in Europe. We were together for almost the trip was almost three weeks long and we were together the whole time. Let's save a couple of different separate little outings that we took apart from each other, but it was a tremendous trip. So I had a lot of time on the flight and it was a daytime flight so I was awake pretty much the whole time. So that's where I worked on the sermon and usually I like the sermon to have four or five days of sort of percolating to soak in, but didn't have that. So let's give it a try. Two strategies for getting through life to win or to escape to win. Well, it's really help if you're born to the right people at the right time and the right place. If you work hard, if you are careful about addictive and addictions, if you don't get sick, if you use your brain, whether that's educate yourself or pay attention or be self-educated to take care of your body. So again, you don't get sick and along the way you should gain wisdom and gaining wisdom is sort of about living well and winning in life and getting out of life what you want. Another strategy for life is escape and this is often for the vast majority of human beings who aren't necessarily born at the right place in the right time, who have to work hard but don't get anywhere for their hard work, who maybe suffer from addictions and maybe got sick, maybe just life has dealt you a difficult thing. Well there's a lot of sort of escape religions. There's the hope of heaven, which certainly is a Christian belief. Hindus escape the cycle of rebirth. Buddhists resist attachment and the modern path has all sorts of things, entertainments, hobbies, drugs, all these ways to sort of get through. Now most of these life strategies are really sort of religions and in the ancient world they might not have been seen as religions even though they had temples and altars and sacrifices and all of those kinds of things and most religions sort of fall into two categories. You sort of have nature religions, which is all about winning, and escape religions. Nature religions are often seeking perhaps a hidden knowledge or communion with the gods or favor from the gods or something to achieve success. You're seeking power to conquer or prevail or at least endure and seeking wisdom to navigate the complexities of this world in order to achieve your goals. Escape religions assume sometimes that the world is illusory or nonsensical or just plain too chaotic to allow attempted pursuit of sort of nature religions to get there and that there's no interpretive structure or key that can make sense. Now this is where we get into this word logos, which is actually going to be pretty important in the passage that we're going to talk about. The religion delivers strategies to distract and escape. You go to a place where there is order, maybe immigration, or you escape from whatever manifestation of being that you find distrustful or untasteful and that might be life, it might just be seeking the refuge of a monastery or something of this nature. Now Christ profoundly alters the nature renunciation. There's the old, I edited it on the plane. This is a rough draft so I still have to edit. Christ confounds sort of the nature escape paradigm. Sometimes he looks like a nature god and I read the rich young ruler who says, how can I inherit eternal life? And Jesus says, follow the commandments. You see sort of in some ways sort of a karmic implicit nature type religion in the Old Testament in the Deuteronomic code. If you do these things, if you obey the covenant, if you obey the commands, life will simply go better and Jesus doesn't deny that at all. And Jesus in fact seems to be the conqueror in this way. He displays enormous power. He does miracles. He offers wisdom. He mentors disciples. And he stands in the line of this Old Testament rather karmic path that follow my commandments, do perform, achieve the covenant and you will be blessed. Read the end of the book of Deuteronomy. But then of course the rich young ruler says all these things I have done and Jesus looks at him and loves him and says, one thing more you should do, sell all that you have in a sense cash in your nature religion and come follow me. Well, that sounds sort of like renunciation or escape. And well, the man goes away because in a sense he's still committed to sort of the nature path. So is Jesus sort of an escape renunciation religion? You find both of these themes in the Bible and in what Jesus has to say. Now we've been looking at Paul and Corinth and the Corinthians are living in sort of a proto consumer culture that they're at an important nexus in the Roman Empire and they probably all moved to Corinth for economic opportunity. They've been chasing wealth and they're looking for success. And the Corinthian church is probably one of the more wealthier churches that are emerging in the network of Christian churches around the Eastern Roman Empire. What we might recognize, what we what we might recognize as religion or religious is sort of the biggest game in town. They had sort of a Winter Olympics of philosophy where they had competitive rhetoric speaking going on in the in the region, wisdom Olympics and then Winter Olympics and have skis and ski jumps, wisdom Olympics. Now some of the things that we look at vices or desires were in some ways instantiated in temples. Of course, they have the temple to Aphrodite there. Now section sexual pleasure has long been known to be a an escape out of the commotions of life. It's instantly pleasurable and can be deeply meaningful. The Greeks of course had understood in their Olympics you know the physical excellence and prowess. The Greeks were very much into that sort of excellence and nobility. And of course economic success and good fortune is commonly pursued by people. And these are big in Corinth that Paul is trying to engage with. Now when Paul got to Corinth there are indications that he perhaps was at sort of a low point emotionally. I think if you read his letters you'll find that that Paul swings high and low in terms of his emotions. Sometimes he can be tremendously excited about what's happening and other times he seems particularly depressed. Now we met Priscilla and Aquila who were also there having escaped Rome themselves and they were there starting sort of to seed and start the church there in Corinth. But Corinth partly by virtue of where it was placed in sort of the the Roman cultural and transportation network had the benefit of some of the biggest and most high profile and best preachers on the Christian circuit if we can sort of imagine it like that. Peter came through and Apollo came through and and and Paul came through. And so Corinth in that sense got a chance to listen to the very early churches best preachers and apostles. Now this is sort of the curse of privilege and it's probably lesser cities would be less given to sort of trying to employ Christianity as a nature religion. Affluence opportunity tend to breed a real bias towards nature religion. Several years ago there's a very interesting video where someone decided to to rig a monopoly game and use it as sort of a psychological social experiment. They gave some people the normal fifteen hundred dollars and two dice and they played against another group of people that had half the money and one dice and because basically you win in monopoly if you can get around the board more and buy more properties. Of course the people with the more money and the greater mobility won the game. What was interesting in the psychological experiment is that even though everybody in the game understood that some start out with enormous advantages over others the people who had more money and two dice when interviewed basically felt that it was their skill in playing monopoly that brought them success in the game. So we often think about nature religion as well this is this is for trying to win our way in the world and find a good place. Well people often feel that well they deserve it because they're more skillful or somehow more deserving. Now I think people in more difficult situations then tend to go look for escape or renunciation religion because they just haven't been dealt the cards that those who have been given a real winning hand have been given. But the gospel then in the hands of the Corinthians has sort of become a tool a nature religion tool that the Corinthians are banking on. Now also Paul's relationship with his church has sort of reached a low point. They some of them in the church they follow Apollos or they follow Cephas or they follow Jesus they don't have much to do with Paul and Paul is seeing trouble in this church and he wants to address it with them and not everybody in the church really wants to hear what Paul has to excuse me wants to hear what Paul has to say. Now Paul Paul wants to do of course is arrest the slide that this church is in and address it now in many ways the problems that the church had were for our benefit because if the church didn't have these problems in this up and coming nexus of a city well Paul wouldn't have written the letter or these two letters or at least two letters it might actually be three letters within the two and we wouldn't have all that we have. So last week if you remember Paul says is Christ divided was Paul crucified for you were you baptized into the name of Paul. I thank God that I did not baptize any of you except for Crispus and Gaius so that no one can say you were baptized in my name. Yes I also baptized the household of Stephanus. I don't remember if I've baptized anyone else for Christ did not send me to baptize but to preach the gospel not with wisdom and eloquence let the cross let the cross of Christ should be emptied of its power. Now again I left there three weeks ago actually the last time I preach I left it there and said we're going to say more about that and in fact a lot more about that as the book goes on because what we're about to deal with as I mentioned before is often with these letters fairly soon after you get the thanksgiving and the salutation and the prayer then Paul basically says what the letter is about and it sounds strange that he's not preaching with wisdom and with eloquence even though he's obviously someone who gives wisdom and he's obviously someone who spoke with eloquence but then he says lest the cross of Christ be emptied by its power and so you might ask well how does wisdom and how do wisdom and eloquence compete with the power of the cross. Now Corinth was a vital cultural economic and transportation nexus that had rhetorical compositions who can woo the crowd who can dazzle the group with philosophies and ideas that either promise to bring success nature religion or lift the audience to experiential heights sort of escape religion. Paul says he's not going to play that game and he says he won't do it because that would and the language here is a little difficult in English but not too difficult this would somehow render void or empty the cross of its power. Now the power of the cross sounds a very like a very strange thing for those of us 2,000 years later there's songs about the power of the cross on and on and on we don't think a thing of it because we don't have crucifixions in our streets. Rome and others use the power of the cross to humiliate to intimidate and to oppress those who would resist Roman will. This is very much not the power of the cross that Paul is speaking about and so for Paul to try to get to try to pass along these ideas to the Corinthians well it's going to be a challenge. It was the power of those crucified it was the power of those who crucified in other words the Romans or the other nations practice crucifixion as well that people understood what the power of the cross was not those who were crucified. Those who would have been the most these would have been shocking words to the people crucifixion is about losing it's completely the opposite of nature religion crucifixion is about suffering it's about everything we want to escape and try to get away from and Paul says well this is the power of the cross and then he says this in verse 18 I'm just going to leave the this greek word where it is partly for those of you who followed the Jonathan Peugeot John Verbeke Jordan Peterson conversations about sort of the the renewal of the word logos in our imagination and you'll notice that various English translations try to render it in different way but but sort of word or message doesn't really get along doesn't really communicate everything that this word would really like to communicate. For the logos of the cross is foolishness to those who are perishing but to those who are being saved it is the power of God and one might say that this is in fact a good potentially a good theme sentence for the book of first Corinthians. For the logos of the cross is foolishness to those who are perishing but to those of us but to us who are being saved notice this ongoing we're being saved it is the power of God in other words this power of the cross is at work in our salvation now and producing in us the salvation that it is intended to produce. Now this word logos can mean word or message as it's often translated in a lot of your English Bibles it can also sort of mean logic or key or let's say perhaps an illuminating guiding thread through the chaos and difficulty of the world. The logos of the cross is something that Christians carry with them as they go out into the world and act like Christ in the space of the world. It is in a sense the interpretive key to understanding both the ordered nature and the chaos of the fallen world another typo it is a way that you move forward as it is seen and lived. For it is written I will destroy the wisdom of the wise and you can think about Greek philosophers with their big white beards and their esoteric knowledge all of this wisdom that and again wisdom is a fine thing you can learn a ton of wisdom from Greek philosophers. I will destroy the wisdom of the wise and the intelligence of the intelligent I will frustrate. Now this is an Old Testament quote. Where is the wise person Paul says who really has navigated this world in order to be the winner of everything? Where is the teacher of the law? In some ways as I sort of mentioned Hinduism and Buddhism as sort of escape religion well I think in many ways the Old Testament very much had the understanding of nature religion that if you follow the law these are the keys by which you can live a successful life and and do well in this world. Where's the philosophy of the age? Who is the person that's telling you exactly what to do and exactly how to live so that you can live your best life now and have great success and have piles of money and to and to have everything go exactly the way you want it to go? Has not God made foolish the wisdom of the world? That's a really complex phrase because sometimes those on top of the world read Mary's song. God casts down and the lowly of the world God exalts. This is a way in which you find the limitations of nature religion. You can do everything right find yourself at the bottom of the pile. You can do everything wrong find yourself at the top of the world. These issues are engaged most obviously in the book of Job but many of these struggles you can find in the Psalms and in the Hebrew prophets in the Old Testament they're always asking it Lord why is it that the wicked prevail and the righteous are there at the bottom? When will you come and exalt the righteous and bring them to the highest place? That's the question. Now again in many ways nature religion is not just denied here but it's always shown as being insufficient and the insufficiency of nature religion is seen in Christ even though in another way it's validated because in the resurrection of Christ well he in fact succeeds yet it's a very complex dance that Paul is going to have to lead the Corinthians through in understanding exactly how Christian discipleship transcends this distinction between nature religion and escape religion. For since in the wisdom of God the world through its wisdom did not know him and you can look at my my Romans class we'll be restarting the Roman Sunday school class in October again after all of my trips are done and I can settle in and we'll get that class up and running. But we talked about sort of God number one and God number two and path number one and path number two and well ever there's wisdom in the world and finding wisdom is good he's certainly not recommending foolishness but many people with great wisdom in the world didn't know him. For since in the wisdom of God the world through its wisdom did not know him. God was pleased through the foolishness of what was preached to save those who believed. In other words this bringing up and these tearing down God participates in and shows that he is beyond our capacity to build a wisdom tower of babel to go up and look him in the eye. Jews demand signs in many ways they're working sort of a nature religion and Greeks look for wisdom in that way they're sort of parallel but we preach Christ crucified a stumbling block to the Jews and foolishness to the Gentiles but to those whom God has called both Jews and Greeks Christ the power of God and the wisdom of God. For the foolishness of God is wiser than human wisdom and the weakness of God is stronger than human strength. You can see actually Paul is playing on a number of themes that you find in the book of Isaiah. Miraculous signs are a testimony in some ways to nature religion or the comic logic of the Old Testament and this of course is critiqued in the book of Job. Greek philosophy not as sort of abstract modern philosophy that we find today their philosophy was far more practical and involved practice but Greek philosophy neither does that achieve exactly everything that we want out of this world. Following the law you can be successful but you won't beat death you might forestall it. Being a Greek following Greek philosophy you can be successful but it doesn't finally conquer the elements of this world that continue to frustrate embedded in our rebellion against God. The revelation of God in Christ at the cross is a break. That sentence doesn't make any sense I gotta fix that. The revelation of God in Christ at the cross breaks the human ambition of nature religion. Brothers and sisters think of what you were when you were called. Not many of you were wise by human standards. Not many of you were influential. Not many of you were of noble birth. Remember if you want to play the winning game be born to the right family at the right time in the right place be high in intelligence be physically robust and and do all these things but even if you have all these things the age of decay will still take you out. But God chose the foolish things of the world to shame the wise. God chose the weak things of the world to shame the strong. Remember Mary's song. God chose the lowly things of this world and the despised things and the things that are not to nullify the things that are so that no one may boast before him. This is why he elects Israel of all nations. They're not the Babylonians they're not the Egyptians they're not the Romans they're Israel. It is because of him that you are in Christ Jesus who has become for us the wisdom of God that is our righteousness holiness and redemption. Now Christ becomes this for us and you can begin to see that the nuanced engagement of nature religion and escape religion all in Christ whereas it is in fact Christ who shows the way earns on our behalf and in fact opens us up to participate in him and this again is at every level. We will in fact be redeemed from this broken and fallen world and be restored so you have elements of the escape. We will in fact in following Christ in some cases and in some ways as in the Mark passage that I read before succeed and receive in this life with persecution and in the age to come. Both of those elements are in Christianity but not just as sort of naked mercenary pursuit. Therefore as it is written let the one who boasts boast in the Lord. God chose the weak vulnerable exiled enslaved Israel to display his power which is why the life of Christ looks like it does. He gave them wisdom he gave Israel wisdom he did miracles for them. The point was not that they could achieve their own salvation but that salvation is of the Lord. See the book of Jonah chapter 2 verse 9. This must be the center of the Corinthian churches identity and their consciousness. So it is with me brothers and sisters when I came to you I did not come with eloquence or human wisdom. I didn't come here to sort of show you how to speak so give you the keys to life so that you could all sort of be wealthy and prosperous even though again if you follow the ways of Christ you will probably do both and we've seen this throughout history. But he didn't give you sort of escapist sermons that you can sort of float away although yes beautiful sermons can give you a vision for our salvation in Christ and what he has prepared for us that is there too. For I resolved to know nothing while I was with you except Christ Jesus and him crucified. The manner of the cross was the way Paul decided to live amongst them so they could have the power of the cross not the power that the Romans had but the power that Jesus displays in the cross in the way that he triumphs over the world. My message and my preaching were not with wise and persuasive words but with a demonstration of the Spirit's power so that your faith might not rest on human wisdom but on God's power. As we go through the book we'll see this explicated. Now as I mentioned before Paul was at a low point when he got to Corinth and you can see this with the vision that he had. One night the Lord spoke to Paul in the vision, do not be afraid keep on speaking do not be silent for I am with you and no one is going to attack you and harm you because I have many people in this city. Well Corinth was a city of success. Corinth was a city where you know those who had power and money and position and status and opportunity demonstrated to the world well just all the advantages that they had and as with the Monopoly game they imagined that well they had these things because somehow they earned them and deserved them. Then maybe they earned some things and maybe they deserved some things I'm not going to take that out of the equation. So Paul stayed in Corinth for a year and a half teaching them the word of God. Also see 2nd Corinthians 12 where he talks about this thorn in the flesh. Remember how many times Paul was run out of town beaten in prison tortured reviled Paul's ministry exemplifies the ministry of the cross. As one person said the problem however in Romans when when the book of Paul says in the book of Romans present yourself as a living sacrifice the problem with living sacrifices that we keep crawling off the altar. You see we want to win via nature religion and again having wisdom is good. Having self being self-disciplined and knowing how to pursue life well these are all good things but they're finally insufficient to actually compete with and engage the things that stand against us. If we don't feel like we win we're winning then we tend to turn to escape religion and that religion might not look like religion but it's practiced here and there all throughout the world and here and there all throughout America. The secular American varieties of escape religion however can get quite meaningless. Paul sees that in the cross of Christ you sort of get the benefits of both with persecution but in an unusual way there's a meaningful self-denial in Christianity and there's a widespread societal well-being in Christianity and I mentioned in my speech in my appearance with Tom Holland in London I was worried about his publicist wanting me to take down all the times that I used the cover to his book on my on my rough draft for Sunday and he said no that won't happen because in many ways Tom's book exemplifies how in some ways Christianity has performed in very broad strokes in the world like a nature religion. Our lives are better and the things we value are all around us that have been given to more and more people throughout the world because of Christ because of his crucifixion and I think the book Dominion lays that out quite well. This is all seen as a gift from God it's God's action on our behalf that goes all the way down into our life into our lives into a meaningful participation in the cross of Christ. Now Sunday is communion Sunday at Living Stones and of course here on a video I can't really break the bread for you. As often as you eat this and drink it you remember me. Certainly it's a cognitive thing but the body of Christ when it eats and drinks it remembers we come together as members of Christ we remember him. This is a gift of God given to us. We participate in it as we respond to his invitation as we live out the meaning and purpose and the way of life that he taught us. If we participate we propagate it to others and they then come into this communion in him in his body and his blood and his presence goes out to the world and we continue to pursue that day. We practice the self-denial of the cross and we receive the blessings and the glories of the cross. Amen.