https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=_wxPqFVEsco

 the transition more into, I don't even know what to call it, an influencer or self-employed or how did that work for you? It was a catastrophe. Like my employment history has been just a constant catastrophe. Before COVID, I was working at an office job that I really didn't like and it was, you know, that sort of thing sitting in the cubicle. It wasn't going well. They weren't giving me what I needed to do my job. I kept saying, you know, I can't create these materials if you don't give me the information. And they said, oh, it doesn't exist. So just make stuff up in it. And then we wouldn't win the contracts. And they blamed me for that. And it's like, well, you know, it's like you're asking me to make an omelet, but you can't have any eggs. So I saved up some money and I left that job. And I was doing Lyft and Uber and I was, you know, following passions and doing pretty well. I was doing pretty well. I was, you know, going in the direction that I wanted to go. When COVID hit, it just sort of destroyed it all. It sort of burned it all down. And I didn't, I no longer had the money, although I was on unemployment. So I got quite a lot of unemployment and I lost all of my social connections. And I, you know, suffered quite a lot of emotional trauma from that. I didn't get the shots. So there was one point where they're saying, if you don't get them, you're going to never have a job again. That was extremely stressful. I remember that one, like that one still has an effect on me. And I was living in a city very far away from where I am now. And I just was there for two years after COVID happened, after the beginning of it. And things were not getting better. I wasn't getting better. And I didn't have the unemployment anymore. And when I went out to go do lift and Uber, people were intolerable. They were a lot worse to be around. They were very controlling and they would say things that they know you don't like and dare you to say something back so they could give you one star and get you fired. It was like just this constant, like emotional abuse, constant torture. So I didn't have any way to support myself. And I moved back home and lived with family in a spare property. And I was just, I had absolutely nothing, absolutely no prospects. I was sending out applications, getting no answers, living in the middle of nowhere, not in a good job market. And then one of my videos blew up. Scott Gottlieb Talk to me about, did you, like most people I know, they try a bunch of things. Were you just sort of playing with YouTube or what were you doing? I was just sort of laying around at home, not knowing what to do. Like I just, I had, I had like a few dozen thousand dollars sitting in a bank account. And there was some video popped up on TikTok. And I responded to it in kind of a lazy way. Like I just did the, you know, the scribbling, the one to 10 guys and girls thing, the, and then I explained to her where all the men are. I was like, they're all down here. You're ignoring them, right. And that one got 3.8 million views. And so when it, when it started, it, like it took off right away from just one video. It's, I didn't put in any effort into like building a channel. One video just blew up and I said, well, I have all the skills for this. You know, I know how to do the graphics. I know how I'm a competent speaker. I'm funny. I can, I can explain all the ideas. And so I just started posting eight times a day until I got a half a million followers.