https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=uC5q8NWpLKI

 Hi, this is Paul. This is perhaps a stub of a video. We'll see. It's sort of the first draft of PowerPoint of something that I've been thinking about, but I wanted to get it down and maybe get it in shorter form, because if I do manage making this video, it'll be in longer form. I've been trying to ... I've got jury duty today, which may or may not interrupt my week. We'll see. I've been trying to vary the lengths of my videos. I know I started that clip channel. Still not quite sure what I'll do with that clip channel. Still want to use that clip channel for clips from my conversations mostly, and question and answer some of those long videos that are harder for people to get a handle on, because they're a different frame. Also varying the content of my channel in terms of ... I'm obviously doing the slow walkthrough Machu Pajos book. Thanks, Bern, for the continued advice on how to say French names. Lots going on, and again, continuing to try to perfect and make this channel more useful for me, and hopefully more useful for you too. Like my blog, the channel's always been a tool of mine, more than necessarily content production. The content production serves the tool nature of the channel for me. This morning on Twitter, I saw a tweet by Wesley Yang, New York City Public Schools are telling white teachers they spirit murder their black and brown students. I'm always a little reticent to post some of this stuff, because I think Wesley Yang is a competent source, because the state of the woke, anti-woke wars mean that there can be misinformation or exaggeration on both sides just for the sake of their tribal point scoring. It goes like this, police post anonymously, my school is requiring us to discuss our whiteness and how we spirit murder our black and brown students, children every day, because we can't see their black joy and black humanity. I am told I have to participate in this. It seems wrong to come at it from this angle. I know and see the effects of systemic racism all the time, but I know I'm not a part of that. And again, if you go back to the Jordan Peterson, Greg Hurwitz video, one of the takeaways I had from that is that part of what's happening in this language is that the extremes of both sides are basically doing policing and language boundary patrolling, and they're just trying to heighten the puritanical element of their movement. And so I basically woke, can people not see the logical outcome of this way of thinking is simply woke apartheid? This will become the new Jim Crow first classify everyone according to group, black teachers for black students, brown teachers for brown students, gay teachers for gay students, but this thing can't last, it can't go on because very quickly people are going to run into all sorts of contradictions such as, well, let's have Robin DiAngelo, a white lady of whom most elementary school educators in America are white women. And so if you take all of them, either you have to get all of the black and brown and gay kids out of the system, or, you know, this just, I was thinking about making a video on all sorts of insane ideas I have that if you really followed this purity logic to its own conclusion, you'd have to resegregate baseball. You should, because jury duty is on my mind this week, because I'm on jury duty, you maybe no longer ask white people to serve on juries. And the thinking of that is, it just goes to ludicrous places, this puritanical spirit. You know, would you rather have Robin DiAngelo teaching or Glenn Lowry? Because if you're deep into the church of the woke, Robin DiAngelo, of course, but now you've got a white woman and you're preferring her over a black man, this thing just falls down. Things will inevitably purify down to confessionalism. And what creedal system do you embrace or promote? And then you have, you know, codes of, it's again, and I'm part of a confessional Protestant tradition. And so I know something about confessionalism, and I know something about total depravity, and I know something about where this all goes, because I've seen this stuff working itself out in conservative confessional Calvinism for a very long time. And what happens is that there's all sorts of ways to sort of blunt it, but this constant working through of purity and compromise, again, you know, so much of Vervecki's language comes in handy. There's sort of an opponent processing that have done right, sort of can maybe keep institutions in play. Demographic identities have little relevance realization to a lot of what's going on here. It made me think of Martin Luther King Jr.'s decrying that 11 a.m. Sunday morning to be the most segregated time in America. Part of this was prompted this morning because I saw a video, whatever happened to Tim Keller, which was the reading of a piece that basically a bunch of people are going after Tim Keller, and they're taking critical race theory and sort of plastering it on some people in the 70s like Tom Skinner. And I can understand why they're doing it, because if you take the language and look at it, but I think there are some significant differences between second wave anti-racism and third wave anti-racism. I mean, I grew up and am a product of second wave anti-racism. I grew up in a time when white Americans intentionally tried to plant and develop churches with black Americans in order to address the civil rights movement and to live out the dream of Dr. King of kind of a colorblind society. And so that's sort of where the discussion is right now, because colorblindness very much won the day. But of course, in this opponent processing pursuit of purity, well, more colorblind somehow sort of flips around and looks like woke apartheid. So it's very interesting watching these conversations develop and just thinking a lot of this won't happen, because you just get so pure, things get unreal. You know, race and culture are tremendously difficult for us to suss out, to sort of disentangle. An article that I want, so lately I've been reading some things on my channel, much to the horror of my wife, because I'm not a particularly good reader necessarily, partly because of my dyslexia. But, you know, critical moments in this development. There was an article recently in the anxious bench on on on Pathios on how the civil rights movement converted liberal white Protestants to secularism. And that, of course, caught my attention. And a friend of mine back from the CRC Voices days sent it to me and posted it on CRC Voices. And, you know, I was all over that article. So I will probably spend some time reading the article and sort of dissecting it, because I think he starts with a strong thesis, but it gets weaker as he gets going. I think it's important to note that this awakening, and I think he's right, this was another one of the American great awakenings. But the relationship between this and secularism was was, I think, really key. And you can follow some of these tracks in both the Jordan Peterson Douglas Murray conversation and also in a really, what I think is an outstanding conversation between Tom Holland and Andrew Doyle. And again, these are things that I want to bring up on my channel. And I, you know, you all are complaining, you all get nervous about my content and the bulk of it. Well, I can produce a lot more. And I don't know that it's necessarily good or, or, or helpful. But there's there's just so much interesting stuff out there right now. And I'm trying to get better at figuring out how to do it in a way that actually works. So, you know, the counterculture had had everything. So basically, the black civil rights movements, you know, really comes to culmination in the 50s, in the late 50s and early 60s. And then you have the counterculture movement on the heels of it, but they're, they're usually sort of put together. And I think so his thesis is really important, but they're really quite distinct, which I think Tom Holland is helpful in, in terms of teasing out because the counterculture had everything to do with institutions. It was a deeply anti-institutional. And so this is where, you know, where you've got someone like Dr. King, who eventually begins to migrate towards calling out the Vietnam War. There's, there's, there's elements in there that the civil rights movement was very institutional. I mean, the civil rights movement was in some ways very evangelical in that it spawned parachurch movement. And so if you look at multiple of these threads, if you look at the evolution of church and the evolution of consciousness, as it were, in terms of the, the rise of, of the civil rights movement, and then the counterculture movement. Now the counterculture movement, this is where I think the thesis of this author, Daniel Williams, I couldn't find him on Twitter. No, if he's on Twitter, Twitter is just a really easy place to sort of keep track of people. Boy, that sounds nefarious. The counterculture had everything to do with institutions and, and the civil rights movement was very institutional in practice and objective. And so then the counterculture coming on the heels of the civil rights movement, drawing deep skepticism onto institutions, the Vietnam War. And, and again, this author brings out some of these things that they sort of went into secularism and that secularism sort of began to take an anti-institutional path. I think in many ways, you know, Rod Dreher is such a poster boy for some of these things. And, and as we're seeing them play out now, because the current institutional squeeze of woke and conservative Puritanism, and now I should probably put Puritanism in cults and quotes, because it's not really Puritanism. It's this, it's this purity movement. You know, Rod Dreher didn't find the Catholic Church pure enough. And so went to the Orthodox and, and Orthodoxy in America kind of has the advantage now of both being fresh and ancient because the, the, the, the fresh and ancient thing has been alive and well sort of in the, the emergent movement, which pushed back against the seeker movement and church, because the seeker movement basically said, can we use business practices in the church? And the emergent movement said, no, but it, but it sort of split into the countercultural, secularized element of progressive Protestantism and in some cases the young restless and reformed, but they too tended to be reformed Baptists and they too tended to be non-denominational and they too tended to be congregational. And so we see this splintering throughout movements and churches along these lines. And so institutions under generational assault have, have taken a beating and the Roman Catholic pedophile gay priest scandals have, have simply dedicated, have simply devastated because we have this, this new demand for purity and what institution, especially as large and as long and ironically as multicultural and multiracial as the Roman Catholic Church can possibly stand up to these demands that the church embody the purity of its message. And, and you see that same demand on the left. You know, the teachers, you cannot, I mean, schools in certain areas have been following this woke train now for a few years and that train has mad acceleration skills. That much is obvious. And those mad acceleration skills are simply going to, going to find themselves derailing the entire effort. And I was thinking about this partly because part of what happens in an institutional church in terms of this moderating, can't we keep the family together? Ethos is that it, it, it's sort of, so you've got this Jordan Peterson, I've really got to bear down and spend a couple hours finding that video clip because change too fast and you lose everything. Don't change fast enough and you lose everything. That's the dilemma that institutions are in right now. And, and part of what institutionalization does is sort of puts a, puts a governor, puts a break, puts a, puts a, puts a, puts a, puts a weight on it that, that, that doesn't allow movement too fast. This is exactly what's happening in the American political system because if there's one thing that you look at the American political system, what it was designed to do, it's, it's to not allow change to happen very quickly. Okay. And, and in fact the, the shrinking away from the filibuster is, is, is a function of that because the filibuster was designed, okay, let's, let's keep a majoritarian ethos in at least one house of Congress. It's, it's good to let the House of Representatives sort of flit about with their every two-year voting cycle and their, and their, and their massively democratic representational structure. But the Senate is supposed to be sort of the, the big weight that's harder to move. And, and there's, so there's a deep conservatism just in the functioning of the body. And of course, this is tremendously frustrating to progressives who have all kinds of schemes about maybe dividing California up into three or get Puerto Rico or other, other, get more states in so you can tinker with the composition of the Senate. So, you know, there's, there's all of these, all of these forces are at play in so many different levels. And of course, institutions are seeing what they can handle. Institutions are sort of finding what they can bear. Now, Protestants have been, you know, working this live experiment for hundreds of years now. And, you know, Protestant denominations themselves are, are on really hard times. And, and sort of the Protestants are always facing this uncomfortable dynamic of, well, us and our little local church and what we think in terms of who we see in our little sphere will be, will be, will be pure to be just us. We can trust us. And so we'll affiliate selectively in sort of a consumerist approach. And, and that has always been there in terms of evangelicalism, which has always been somewhat of a marketplace rather than the other. And so institutions are, but now institutions are attempting to maintain some kind of high moral standards and they simply get exposed. And part of this obviously has to do with scale because, well, these kinds of scales break down all the way down into marriage. And, you know, I, I simply cannot be paired with someone who doesn't, who doesn't simply mirror my thoughts and desires and opinions whenever I do. And so then we wind up with this rampant individualism, rampant loneliness, and on it goes. So you can, I'm hopefully being a little bit clear in terms of how this all plays out. I was watching, Marcus did a conversation with Carl Truman and said, Paul, I'm sure you can get them on your channel. My channel is smaller. I got them. And yeah, I want to finish reading his book first. But part of what I, part of what I, the thought I had when I was watching some of that conversation was the conquest of the assumption of historical evolution. You can have Protestants all over the place complaining about biological evolution, but, but wholeheartedly swallowing historical evolution. And, and Carl's Truman, Carl Truman's book is, is a clear example of it. You know, my thoughts were basically these. Isn't it strange that even as deeply conservative Christians have completely embraced the practice of historic, historical evolutionary thought development, we're doing thorough, we're doing it through evolutionary math. We find we come to a place where error is believed to be, is, is believed to be truth. And so we sort of use the Bible as a checksum, say, okay, same sex marriage, wrong, abortion, wrong. Or you do it on the other side. Resisting reparations, wrong. And, and here's the Bible because the Bible is all about justice and reparations are justice. And so there we have it. And so we sort of use the Bible as a sort of a checksum. Okay. And of course, Jacob had a few interesting comments on my, on my sermon last Sunday about, about, you know, sabbatarianism. And actually, maybe I should make a little video responding to some of Jacob's thoughts because there were good thoughts or maybe Jacob and I can talk about it. But, but, but that's sort of how this leads. And so we say, okay, well, even though we don't buy biological evolution, we certainly buy historical, cultural, religious, social evolution. And now that we have the modern science of history, we can try to track this evolution or we'll, we'll narrativize it, which is almost always the case. We'll have a narrative about how we got here. And we can see now that we ended up in a bad place. So let's, let's basically work this out, something like a mathematical equation and find all the steps we took to get, all the steps we took to get here and find out where we went wrong. And so then we can maybe, you know, use CRISPR and insert some DNA code into that and maybe fix this, this path where we got into the wrong place. Well, the difficulty of course, is that most of us doing this are sort of at the margins and the mainstream seems to be going in a certain direction. And, and in some ways I compare this to another part of my channel where I'm really wrestling with, well, an ancient would talk about the practice of the gods. When you watch Christian denominations wrestling with this checksum approach, you realize that they're, you know, they usually, well, let's just leave it up to the Holy Spirit, which is sort of, let's see where it goes. And that doesn't always go well amongst certain people. You know, we see it and we feel satisfied when we can sort of construct our math and construct our narrative, but we can't do anything about it, but decry it, or maybe tinker a bit on the edges, which again, back to Rod Dreer, I think, I think Dreer in many ways has had his finger on a lot of these pulses. And so, and has anticipated a lot of them. I think that's part of the reason he's, you know, I think he's been so prescient in many of these areas, but the Benedict option in some ways also anticipates this because, but again, we're sort of like my conversation with Sally, we're all Protestants now. This is very Protestantish. Well, we'll just hunker down in our little small community and ride this out. Don't, don't, that's congregationalism 2.0. I don't dare be part of a larger movement, but if I am part of a larger movement, the minute you all go astray, I'm going to back out and go my own way because me and mine, we're the only pure ones here. And, and then again, if you look at my sermon from last Sunday, you have the Judean culture war. That's sort of an Essene strategy. We're going to go off into the caves in the desert and write our books and put them in clay jars and, you know, wait for the Lord to finally smoke all y'all, you evil people and the accommodators that are sort of going along with it. Or, or maybe we'll do it all right and the light of our movement will grow viral and Christianity did that and, you know, took about 300 years, but hey, Constantine saw the light or exactly what light did Constantine see? You know, will there be crosses and lions and stakes? Well, of course, I just don't want to be on a cross or a stake or be fed to a lion or maybe I do because then that will be validation of, of who I am and the purity of my cause is zealotry off the table. You know, maybe then, you know, we see this on some, you get far enough to one side and well, by all means necessary, including the blood of my enemies. And that of course has been on the table in many eras. I think one of the, one of the realities of why Christianity has managed to endure is the, the, the impetus to not go there is simply so strong by the example of Jesus. So this is sort of where we're at and I do want to read that, that you might take a look at how civil rights movement converted white liberal Protestants. I do want to spend more time on that against Dreher, I think anticipates so much of this stuff. Yeah, it's just want a little, little video, some of these thoughts, maybe it's not well formed. I think for the most part, a lot of what a lot of you get out of this are just sort of the, the little random insights that I have along the way. But this is where I'm thinking and maybe I'll deep dive into that article soon. In a minute, I'm going to be talking to Andrew Root, who's written three big books on Charles Taylor and trying to apply it in the church sphere. And Andrew Root comes at this from sort of a mainline ish Lutheran position. So I think that could be an interesting conversation. It's only got an hour though. So maybe that's good. Maybe it's bad. I don't know. We'll see. But anyway, thanks for watching.