https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=hozWrWD-YYE

 Since globalization, so part of what I heard you describe was the realization for a variety of reasons that many long established religious traditions have, that they know that certain practices and ways of going about things are either unsustainable or no longer likely to achieve what these practices had been designed to achieve. And I think all around the world, different religious traditions are realizing this technology in particular over the last couple of hundred years and sped up over the last hundred years and think increasingly has has disrupted all of the usual technologies that religions used to at least achieve many of their goals. And, you know, whether those be rituals or practices, you know, information technology, mass media at the beginning of the 20th century now, the increasing power of the internet in the 21st century. So much of the views for Vickie's term psycho technologies that religions have deployed have been seriously disrupted and religions. I think about John Verbeckis conversation with Rafe Kelly, religions have have by no means known quite what to do with this. Now, as with many disruptions, there's a few things on the menu that religions often turn to and you can look at let's say the Essenes, you know, go out into a cave in the desert, where there's no internet access and we and our group will huddle here and, and maybe we'll be left alone but after globalization. I mean, you can't you can't go into the Sinai desert and lose politics. Not for long periods of time for a while it was Israel and back to Egypt and the, you know, canal is around there and I mean it's it's that's just not going to happen. So I think, I think religions are struggling and religious leaders and authorities are struggling and can't avoid the struggle. And I think part of what has happened in this little corner of the internet is, in a sense, we are. We're sharing a corner. We all know we have our little flags and so we've got our little Christian flag and then our other little Christian flags and there's a Jewish flag and not a lot of Islam, not a lot of Islam in this little corner yet but we've got atheists and various kinds, and we've sort of said you know we're not going to, we're not going to play the game of rushing into your circle of chairs and tearing down your flag. That's not the game we're going to play. And we're also not going to forefront necessarily trying to raid, you know do kidnapping between people. We're not going to play that game either. You know if people decide they want to go sit by a different flag, you know, okay, but the, we're not going to we're not going to play any manipulative games with people we're going to try to as best we can within the The behavior that we have highlight conversation. It's not going to be anti rational but it's not going to be rationalistic either. We are going to respect metaphysical claims. We can challenge them and we can talk about them but we're going to respect them and understand that Christians, many Christians believe in the physical resurrection of Jesus and the Islam and and Jews have questions about the Trinity and the Christians have questions about God, and what on earth that that term should mean or any of that. So we're all going to say we all know that these issues are here. And these issues have dominated our attempts to speak with one another for a very long time, and we don't feel like that though the domination of those issues have necessarily brought a lot of fruit. In other words, we all have problems in some ways driven by something outside of us that has overcome us all the technology and change and all of these things, and it would just It would just lead us well to have reasonable conversations between each other. And, you know, it doesn't mean that some of the traditional things like Trinity or not are off limits we can talk about those, but we're not going to make that the center of this if you really want I'm debating the Trinity, go off in a corner of this corner and do it there but that's not going to be what this corner is about we, we all know that we are we are all facing challenges. At the same time, and we might all benefit by comparing notes, and you know some of what you brought up already and that could this be part of a of a much of much greater progress to address some of what separates us. Sure, and I think, I think many of us would be would welcome that because the, the, the tribalistic games that we have tended to play. Most of us are not that interested in the tribalistic games, I will be friends with Jacob, even though Jacob, you know, has opinions about This or that or this or that. I will still be friends with him I believe he's a good faith partner. I believe he's, he's, he's someone worth talking to, we can be friends. And even though we differ let's say on Paul of Tarsus and the Trinity and the resurrection of Jesus Christ. I still want to be friends with him, and I still learn from him and I still accept his challenges to me and at me. Because I think what that those express even, you know, in Jacob's own way. Those are ways that he expresses his love for me. And hopefully the way I deal with him are ways that I express my love for him. And that love. I think, you know, it's filet it's brotherly love I think in this little corner of the internet is in some ways, what I think all of us are desiring and all of us understanding that you need a foundation of this love in order to actually have productive and enjoyable conversations.