https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=7o_7t3fzRFk

 A lot of people saw very cognizant of the fact that my audience is a lot younger than I am generally speaking, there are few that are older, but many are younger. And one of the things that has happened in America that I think you documented nicely in your book I really enjoyed your chapter on fourth press in Chicago, because you were able to in a fairly succinct way, demonstrate what you said initially about that. There was a day not that long ago when the Protestant establishment was the establishment. And, of course, the neo evangelicals came on the scene with Billy Graham and Carl F. Henry and, and that whole movement but all of the public attention is now is now pointed at that movement and the heirs of the evangelical fundamentalist movement. Recently, a couple of years ago I picked up Jack Jenkins book American prophets the religious roots of progressive politics and the ongoing fight for the soul of the country which tried to highlight the realities of the main line. And I think again as as trip said I was I was really impressed with how the honestly, the honesty with which you have pursued this topic that something has happened to the main line it is, it is nearly gone. And so for many people who either a do not participate in church at all, or identify as atheist. And you might hear about Unitarian Universalist they might see United Methodists PC PC USA churches. I mean actually if you look at the numbers, there's a tremendous amount of legacy churches in America today that still are part of the main line, even though their numbers are cratering. And I, you know what you just said now was quite interesting in terms of a lot of the talent, I mean, so I'm a minister in the Christian reform church which is sort of in the middle. And there's a lot of these ethnic denominations that is currently basically being pulled torn into, and that might happen this year actually over same sex marriage, but torn into over these issues. And so what's happening in the Christian reform churches that it's either being assimilated into the evangelical fundamentalist, or the, the main line and so then you have this new dynamic which has opened up which David Brooks just wrote about recently of the splinter of the neo evangelicals. And that gets into I think the emergent movement. And I've tried to do a little bit of talking about that because there's an amazing amount of similarity between Mark Driscoll Rob Bell and Nadia bolts Weber. And you would say well what on earth would Mark Driscoll and Nadia bolts Weber have in common. They're sort of like opposites those two, and she has now become the basically the, the, the flagship pastor for a particular segment of the Lutheran Church in America, they're all pointing to her and saying, she's the future. And of course, not too many years ago, you know, I think Tim Keller and and john Piper sort of had a never Trump moment in dealing with Mark Driscoll it's like, is this the future of our movement, because he certainly is taking all of the attention and And so, you know, this is a church planting movement so before we really dig into the Mark Driscoll, I'd love to hear, especially for our audience, a retrospect a bit of a retrospective in terms of the power that establishment Protestantism had an America, and And it's really the big, the big story over the last 50 years in terms of church in America is really the collapse of the mainline, because prior to that, when you have the history of let's say coming out of the Civil War, which was a complete victory of northern American Protestantism. And then of course you had the rise of the progressive movement. Once we get into the middle of the 20th century. The slide begins, and there's, we've, we're seeing nothing out of the mainline Protestant movements today that suggests there's anything arresting that slide, Nadia bolts Weber, not what's standing. No, yeah, I agree. I mean, whatsoever is, I mean she's interesting. I watched her as a kind of a young pastor and has her, she has her own charisma. And you wanted to believe that this was the future of the mainline. But from my studies, you're exactly right, Paul. The, the diminishment of the mainline is so dramatic. I was up for. I'm not going to tell you where but I was up for the presidency of a possible presidency of this mainline seminar. And I, I looked at the books and I looked at actually the students you know what's the quality of the students. And was frankly shocking. I was like, I'm not going to tell you where I'm going. And, and I think that it's simply not, you know, attracting talent. But I mean she's talented, she's a charismatic talent. But you can't lift an institution. And an institution is constructed by many people not just by the charismatic types. When you think of her, you don't think Lutheran pastor, although I think she uses that as kind of a ploy to say hey, I'm so weird on the Lutheran pastor. You know, and it is totally weird. And most people don't even know what the mainline is, Paul. Right. It's invisible in America. It's invisible. You know, I walk around my campus and there's there used to be these mainline churches that were on the borders of our, our university campus, feeding and helping and serving the students. They're either blown up or dead or empty. So then Mark Driscoll comes into Seattle and builds a significant church with networks, you know employees media, and I thought the rise and fall of Mars Hill laid this out fairly well, employees media to do significantly to gain significant influence in a certain corner of the church in the United States. And the fact that he did so I think in a city like Seattle. He capitalized on some of the, some of the, the cultural potential that actually some of the cultural potential that Donald Trump was able to capitalize in terms of his rise to power. So, talk to me about the Pacific Northwest, and Mark dress Mark Driscoll is charismatic. Mark Driscoll has a terrific sense of humor. He's a let's excellent speaker. He's a smart man. He's all those things obviously got some pretty significant character flaws but how, how, how, why did he succeed, and why did he succeed there. And yet, I would imagine, no significant political figure in Seattle or Washington was necessarily going to really try to capitalize. And basically when it comes to public policy of Washington, or the city Seattle boy I better call Mark Driscoll and see if this, see if this idea is okay with him. That's not going to happen. Guaranteed he had more influence in DC than he did in Seattle. 100%. Yeah, that's an interesting statement. And I think right. Yeah, I mean, you know, in a sense trip can answer these questions better than I can but I think, you know, he sort of, he sort of caught Seattle in this transitional moment, you know, moving from a working class city like you kind of mentioned, Paul, to becoming kind of this high end high tech type city. And in between it, you have a lot of lost. I'm not talking about you trip but young men who are kind of searching for meaning for purpose. People, young men who are very smart, sophisticated in certain ways, and kind of wondering like how do I create a life. How do I even, how do I even find a woman. What do I do with my life. And Driscoll kind of comes, you know, sort of storming in with this really powerful ability to speak into young men's lives. And he did it with with what music. And with culture. And with kind of a little bit off color. And with, with the idea of the Jesus was was no soft hippie. He was a working class guy like you and me. And he wants to save your ass. And he wants to make something of you. And I'm going to demand something of you. And I'm not going to be ashamed of the gospel. I am, and I'm going to do it in an hysterical way. I mean the guy was funny as hell. I mean I don't know if he still is but answer, and any news, you know, he knows the Bible backwards and forwards. And. And I think he kind of the, you know, he kind of found something that was, that was really amazing. I don't know, Tripp, does that explain? I think that's right. I think that, and when you said all that in the backdrop of, like, I mean we've been talking about the death of the main line. You know, in Seattle that's that was, it was the most unchurched city in North America. Like, so like you're setting, you're doing that in the backdrop of a lack of any other options that you didn't have, like, if you're a Christian like I'm moving from North Carolina, moved there in 2008 to Seattle. Right, so I'm an evangelical conservative Christian moving from North Carolina to Seattle. What are my other options, exactly. Really, like, what are they. There's no other place that will make me feel like, is this actually a church. Do they actually believe the same things that I believe like, like what it's, it's going to be so disconcerting. So there's that so you have you a part of that where you're just like okay, you have some kind of group of people who are in Seattle who are underserved by the church, because the death of the main line which is really all that existed. Right. And so you have this one church with this one charismatic leader who is like actually not backing away from some of the core things that you believe that he's not embarrassed about it and in fact he's making it front and center and like in the most controversial way. In a way he's being the controversial figure that you don't have to be. And so I, I've reminded of a, of a, an article that been, I don't know Paul or Jim if you guys have read any of been six myths stuff. But he has a. He has a really good article called the sad irony of celebrity pastors. And then he's like, I'm talking about Carl Lentz, that, you know, and specifically, and so he's like, my problem, his problem with Carl Lentz is that he's almost too normal. He's almost not controversial enough for him. And so, he's, he has been is not a Christian. But, you know, his last paragraph, it's always stuck with me. The last paragraph says, I am not religious so it is not my place to dictate to Christians what they should and should not believe still, if someone has a faith worth following I feel that their beliefs should make me feel uncomfortable for not doing so. And so, I'm like, I'm 90% of my lifestyle and values and there's nothing especially inspiring about them, instead of making me want to become more like them. It looks very much as if they want to become more like me. That Marshall had that, but the opposite. They weren't trying to conform to Seattle cultural standards or politics or anything else. They stood out in that way they were at least like, you know, the way they view themselves, it was a city on a hill. Right, it's, it's a light in the midst of a bunch of darkness and so you had that combined with a culture that was not telling boys like oh, I'm not going to be a Christian. Boys like a lot of, you know, yeah, a lot of these, a lot of the guys that were in community groups, and I did Bible studies with they had no fathers figures they had did not grow up in the church. They hadn't like, this was a father figure to them in a certain way and the church was fulfilling that role and Mark was fulfilling that role of their lives and so they were going for it like this was the city on the hill for them and so they were drawn to it. And the fact that they weren't backing down was actually an attractive elements to Marcel in Seattle, that's that honestly I don't think it would work. I don't think that if Mark Driscoll had done this, and, you know, Alabama, it would have been nearly as successful. I don't think it would have. I think the fact that it was in Seattle, or maybe he could have done in Portland but like the fact that it was there, that he was doing this was in fact part of the, the secret sauce that made the whole thing kind of work in a certain way. Yeah, I was just thinking, he, he demanded something from me. Yeah. You know he he and he didn't underestimate who you were. Right. He may be even overestimated what you could do. Not you in particular. But, you know, trip, I mean, the same for the same reason when I picked up the cost of discipleship to teach Bonovers book. You know he basically said to me, through that book and I, and I still think of it today. He said when Christ calls you, he calls you to come and die. You know that's, that's a no shit Sherlock point of view, that is, you know, the, the, the gospel is demanding. And it demands not just your pocketbook, your whole life. Take up your cross and follow me. And so, you know, for young idealistic young men, or at least kind of potentially idealistic young men. Wow, that's, that's kind of a real message. And it's always been, you know, and that's, I've always been. If I'm a Christian. It's because of Dietrich Bono. It's because he basically said, take up your cross. And just follow me, and if, if necessary, you must die for me. And, and what, who else are you going to do that for. And I actually think I actually think that's a message that resonates on all kinds of those. It's why I think that Peterson is so popular with young men to like is why when Peterson came to Seattle to do his you know one of his, you know, it's sold out theater lines around the block, you know, with all these people coming, and a lot of them young men is because that's a message that they're longing to hear that I have a purpose. And, but that purpose, it's like an adventure right it's something that's demanded of me I need to sacrifice for this I there's, there's, there's some role that I have to play here that is demanded of me it's something that I think that, especially young men want to hear. And, you know, Peterson would probably argue, you know, as he did with Captain like what kind of woman would, would you want to like what kind of man would you want to marry to a young woman, you know, it is it like a child who, you know, doesn't think that there's anything demanded of them, or do you want something else. And so like I think that that's why, like, I met my wife at Marcel. There's a reason that women were going to Marcel to it wasn't just like the young men sure. But like there were a lot of college girls at Marcel, that was also part of the appeal as well and so. But Mark, I mean he has that famous sermon where he's like essentially spending the entire sermon yelling at that. Just absolutely yelling at men. And, you know, married men single men, and like just the whole sermon is just that. It's a very weird way to, to try and attract men but it worked. It absolutely. Yes, you know, I mean, I've, I've listened to Peterson and, you know, he's, he's not my hero. But what I think you're a little old for that. Exactly. But what I try to do, you know, when I, when I teach my life worth living course is I kind of, you know, occasionally I say, this is what your life can become. But, and the question is, will you take it up with, I don't, I don't kind of use the language of faith so much as like, take up your cross follow me. But I say, it's up to you as to whether or not you're going to make the life you really want. And I still have guys who, you know, men and young men in particular, who call me up and say, Wellman, you know, you know how that goes sometimes. Wellman I just, I love that class, you know, I just love you. And it's kind of embarrassing but. I mean, that's, I just think that's just a part of what young men in particular need. And, and want. But our, but our culture is either afraid to do that, or they want to tamp down man, or they, I don't know what they, you know, I think men are really a conundrum. What do you, what do you do with men. And you, what do you, you give them beer. You sell them pornography. You. What do you do. Yeah. And, and I think Driscoll and, and what I would say is, is, you know, the Christian way, take up your cross serve, serve others. You know I have, I've had four kids. Now why did I do that. I have two young kids and I'm an old guy. I did it because I thought this is the most beautiful way to, to live a life serving the ones I truly love. And so I will give my life for them. What, and what else would I do. Go to why. You know what I mean, you could have, you could have. Yeah, you're pulling a page from john Piper right there. Yeah, you know, that's it. That's a, that's a big john Piper sermon right there. Oh, is it really, it is. Jim, the image, Jim the evangelical I knew we'd get him. Yeah, yeah, yeah. There's something to it. I mean, you know, yeah, and you want to be around men who have some purpose, who have some meaning, who have some direction, who aren't just, you know, excuse my language, but just fucking around. Yeah, well, and that's, and see this is the thing this is what also makes it a little bit dangerous and what happened with Mars Hill is that you want to be around men who have purpose, or you feel have purpose you perceive as having purpose you have like that kind of drive and that kind of call, which makes men like Mark Driscoll, like, if you can convince people if you can display that confidence that like I've got purpose for you, I can do these kind of things. And then you will get men to follow you into battle, where you're just using them for various purposes. And so that's where it becomes. It's difficult because in a certain sense I really like what Driscoll did with the with Mars Hill, I really like that he was like in certain ways he was calling men to a higher calling than what was being called by the culture of Seattle or what is still being called by the culture of Seattle. And yet, it was being called to his purposes, as well, and that's, that's the sad part about it and that's what like my big regret about being part of it was that it wasn't. It wasn't. I know. Yeah, it just, it's sad to me that it was, it was not pure, I guess, and that's kind of maybe a foolish thing for me to want in this life but that's my, my big, my big regrets about it is that it wasn't something more than what it was. No, and I hear you, I really hear that trip. Because I, I mean I sense that from you that you needed, you needed him at some level. And, and I'm not, I'm not saying that as a kind of, you know, as a put down and any, in any way at all. I just think, I think men need somebody to look up to as a hero in some form. And then, as a guy. And if they don't have that. They tend to wander. And, and, and God knows what they do in our culture. You know, I think, you know, Paul I think you're exactly right I think Jordan Peterson is a guide for men. And, and that's the, that's, and I think women look on and they go, they, you know, many do, they say, thank God you're getting my husband off his ass. And, and I like listening to Jordan, you know, I'm not a huge fan of his but, but you can see, he's, I mean, you know, you can see the passion in him. He's saying, you have a life. Don't waste it. And I mean my God, what's wrong with that.