https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=wpB7lLktwmQ

 Hi, this is Paul and this is Rough Draft for Sunday where I run through the current version of my Sunday sermon. It might be the version of the Sunday sermon this week. As I mentioned yesterday, my wife got a positive COVID test even after she was 10 days out of her second vaccination. We don't know if it's a true positive or false positive. I'm still waiting on the results of my COVID test. So I wasn't able to preach at the Good Friday service just out of an abundance of caution. If I get a negative test today, everything should be fine. If I get a positive test, then it looks like I'll be in isolation. But good news for you, my life is sort of in isolation anyway. There's nobody else here at church right now, so I just keep making videos because what else can I do? Well, I actually have to pause this now and before I start the rest of the sermon, because I've got to do two or three intros to this sermon because it might be the real church service that they splice into the service so that they can have a sermon on Easter Sunday. Jonathan Peugeot is an Eastern Orthodox icon carver and his personal friend of Jordan Peterson. And he did a conversation with Jordan Peterson with way over a million views by now, which has led to an avalanche of requests from people for through Jonathan Peugeot to prompt him to write this little letter to the Internet. Dear Internet, I cannot send your book letter advice recommendation to Jordan Peterson. I know you think if only I could talk to him then dot dot dot. But if I could just show you the hundreds of emails I regularly receive asking for this favor you would understand. And so I made a little video response to this. No, Jonathan Peugeot can't pass along your world saving remedy to Jordan Peterson because there are thousands of people out there that think if only I could talk to Jordan Peterson, if only he would read this book, if only he would have this idea, then then then Jordan Peterson would become a Christian or then Jordan Peterson's enormous platform could be used to propagate this great idea and the world would be saved. This is how we all believe the future works. It was true of the Judean culture war. It is true of our own culture war. It is nearly ubiquitous throughout human history. It's very direct, very rational, goes like this. Events cause the future. Use reason and power to provoke events or to prevent events that you believe will yield the desired future. And you do everything that you can to make that happen. This is why we long for power and autonomy because we imagine this will yield the desired future or the good future or the right future or however you want to categorize it. This is why we act, influence, fight and kill to achieve these things. Now every four or every four years we go through this in the United States, every two years for the House and every six years for the Senate where it's some monumental struggle in order to achieve or avoid some tremendous or terrible end. And it seems like every four or eight years I point this out and nobody pays an attention. Now it doesn't mean that consequences that elections don't have consequences or presidents don't aren't consequential or anything like this, but pretty much it all sort of stays the same. As much as we think we know how this works, it doesn't. And if anything, the events of the last year should accentuate that in our minds. The future keeps surprising us. Our ability to secure even what we all agree would be a better future is always insufficient. Who wants more poverty? Who wants more drug addicts? Who wants more cancer? Who wants more fill in the blank? Yet we keep trying. Now back to the focus on the Judean culture war, killing Jesus was the solution to everyone's problem. Jesus' popularity was a potential threat to Rome, although the Romans didn't seem too bothered by it. The Jewish aristocracy had to do some talking pilot into it, but eventually he washes his hands and can sense that Jesus be tried and that Jesus be executed like an insurgent. He was a potential threat to just about all aspects of the Judean liberation movements, their inability to co-opt him, his resistance to validate their particular strategies at resisting Roman corruption and domination. In other words, because Jesus didn't fit into any of their pictures and because Jesus seemed to be popular and powerful, it was better that he be killed. Enemies could agree on only one thing, it seemed, that the world would be better with Jesus dead, and so they killed him. Now in a lot of ways, the Superman stories sort of follow this, and some of the more recent DC comics Superman is hauled up in front of Congress because they're legitimately concerned about the fact that the Man of Steel seems to have more power than the United States military and you can't let that go on. But well, Messiahs are supposed to win, directly changing history like we think they should. Yet, how many times have you cheered some monumental victory in history on either side of the political aisle and you know what? The First World War ends and you have the Great Depression and the Weimar Republic and then you have the Second World War and the Second World War ends and you have the Cold War and the Cold War ends and you have the struggle with Islam and whatever it is that will be coming down the pike next. Now we all have these fantasies about the Man of Steel being able to come in and beat up the baddie and that victory will somehow resolve everything. But isn't there always another comic book? Isn't there always another victory? I love what Mr. Incredible says, I just cleaned this place up and it keeps becoming a mess again. That is history. We all think we have the political or religious or somehow the solution to everything and if only everyone would buy it, if only I could get my message to Jordan Peterson or Joe Biden or Donald Trump or Oprah Winfrey or somebody, then the skies would clear and everything would be dandy. But it never is. On the first day of the week, very early in the morning, the women took the spices they had prepared and went to the tomb. They found the stone rolled away from the tomb, but when they entered, they did not find the body of the Lord Jesus. And T. Wright, when he comments on these, knows how much they lack embroidery, as he says. These are sort of told from a perspective of someone who has just undergone a shock or a trauma. While they were wondering about this, again, you walk into your house, the front door is kicked in, your television is gone, and you look around and you think, well, a robbery has taken place, but you don't even begin to understand how that affects you. While they were wondering about this, suddenly two men in clothes that gleamed like lightning stood before them. In their fright, the women bowed down with their faces to the ground, but the men said to them, Why do you look for the living among the dead? Now, of course, any ancient person reading this would think these are gods, or a Hebrew would think these are angels. But it's just the facts here, sort of a traumatic testimony that's being offered. He is not here, he is risen. Remember how he told you while he was still with you in Galilee. The Son of Man must be delivered over to the hands of sinners, be crucified, and on third day be raised again. Then they remembered his words. But did they understand them? They didn't understand them the first time. They probably didn't understand them now. You can, well, just, you know, practice this in any of your little political Facebook debates or political culture war debates. Just keep saying those things over and over and over, and that somehow is going to, is what really? Haven't you had this experience before? Doesn't it always end the same way? When they came back from the tomb, they told all these things to the eleven and to all the others. It was Mary Magdalene, Joanna, Mary the mother of James, and the others with them who told this to the apostles. But they did not believe the women, because their words seemed like nonsense. Well, isn't that true about this whole story? You can go to your non-Christian neighbor and read this story and guess what? They're just reading me a story. I have no way to categorize this or implement this or understand what this means. Peter, however, got up and ran to the tomb. Okay, it's practical. Bending over, he saw strips of linen lying by themselves and he went away wondering to himself what happened. Are you beginning to see a pattern? Again and again and again in this text. Stuff happens. People try to comprehend it, put it within a rational framework and just can't make sense of it. Real things are like this. It was January 2020. I was here at Living Stones talking to my buddy Rick. Rick says to me, that's stuff going on in China. You think that's going to become something? I said, I don't know. They're always talking about this stuff as if it's not a matter of if, but when. And well, here, a year and so later, we're still dealing with it, aren't we? It looks like Bob the Builder had a party down there in this patch of dirt in Wuhan, China. It's a city I never heard of and well, it pretty much came to dominate the world this year, didn't it? Well, the Spanish flu sort of did that in 1918, 1919, 1920, but we all seemed to forget that, didn't we? All these consequential, rational, life-changing things that we can't get our minds around, we don't understand. Ten years from now, how will we think of this whole thing? Will we sort of be forgotten with all of the masks we're no longer wearing? Or maybe we're all wearing masks or maybe, you know, who knows what conspiracy theory will have cooked up and which ones will be validated and which ones will be debunked and which ones will be validated and then debunked and which ones will be debunked and then validated? And, you know, did it really come from bat soup or did someone have a little oopsie in the Wuhan virus lab? And how will that impact politics? Will the rest of the world demand something of China and how would China respond? And and and and and that's how history works. This is how real things work. Stuff happens we don't understand. We sort of sleepwalk through and things keep happening and we try to use our reason and our power to sort of organize things and sometimes those things turn out and sometimes they don't and sometimes there are unintended consequences and sometimes there are good consequences and sometimes there are bad consequences. But that's how life is always. But we don't seem to realize that. Now that same day two of them were going to a village called Emmaus about seven miles from Jerusalem. They were talking with each other about everything that had happened. That's what we do when stuff happens. We talk to each other because we're trying to figure it out. That's what I'm doing now. I'm talking to you on YouTube. We're trying to figure it out. You leave a comment. You talk back to me. We're trying to figure it out. As they talked and discussed these things, Jesus himself came up and walked among them. Now again, I mean, makes me sound like a skeptic, but if I were Jesus mapping this out to show up with two what seemed like random dudes trying to figure this thing out, just pop in like Barbara Eden and I dream of Jeannie. What sense does this make? Jesus came up and walked among them, but they were kept from recognizing him. And the Gospel of Luke keeps saying that. And it's all so mysterious about why couldn't they see him? But then again, I know that if I saw someone being killed and then someone shows up looking like that person, I would do a double take. After my father died in 2013, I would visit Massachusetts where my mother and father lived. And I would visit the church and people would stop and see me because, well, I've got the beard and he had a little bit more hair on top and I'm the same height and I kind of walk like him and I kind of look like him. People would stop. And when I was a young man in Calvin seminary, people would call me Stan. No, that's my father. And it's funny and sometimes we recognize people and sometimes we don't. And so Jesus decides to show up and talk to these two randos. He asked them, what are you discussing as you walk along? They stood still, their faces downcast. One of them named Cleopas asked him, no, no, this Cleopas, we've never heard of him at all. He's a rando. You can read Richard Bauckham's tome about Bible name dropping. Probably Luke's audience would know who Cleopas was and wanted to footnote this story because it all sounds so unbelievable. Are you the only one visiting Jerusalem who does not know what has happened in these days? I mean, come on. Everybody knows. We were hoping to storm the citadel and our leader gets taken and crucified. How can you be so clueless? What things? He asked about Jesus of Nazareth. They replied he was a prophet, powerful in word and deed before God and all the people. Again, this story has a ring of authenticity because that is exactly not what someone two or three hundred years later would say about Jesus, but that is exactly what a Jew at that time would say about Jesus. He was a prophet. He was full of power and powerful in word and deed before God and all the people. Jesus was our best shot at resolving the Roman problem. But of course, our leaders are our Jerusalem insiders who are always there pulling the strings, you know, getting that Roman money and Roman influence and, you know, yet for against they're always the same. The chief priests and our rulers handed him over to be sentenced to death and they crucified him. And we had hoped that he was the one, the anointed, the Messiah, the one who was going to redeem Israel, who was going to free Israel from Roman oppression. And finally, finally, Jesus would make it happen and it would all come true that the plague would come down against the Romans, not against Jesus. And what's more, it is the third day since all of this took place. In addition, well, for them, that Sunday was the first day of the week. It's sort of like their Monday. Some of the women amazed us. They came to the tomb early this morning and didn't find his body. And they came and told us that they had seen a vision of angels who said he was alive. Now what's really interesting, too, is if we just read the previous thing and now we're reading it here. It certainly sounds like Luke got this from eyewitnesses. People who, this is what they thought they saw then. This is how they interpreted it, you know, a few hours later and how it got interpreted by others. Then some of our companions went to the tomb and found it just as the women had said, but they did not see Jesus. So what? Dead people don't come alive again. Everyone knows that. Okay? Everyone knows that. If you're an adult in this world, you know what death is. He said to them, he's not very gentle. How foolish you are. Bang. It's like getting hit with a wet fish. How slow to believe all that the prophets have spoken. Oh, wait a minute. If someone would come back from the dead, would they believe? If they don't believe the law and the prophets, they're not going to believe someone who comes back from the dead. Did not the Messiah have to suffer these things and enter his glory? That was not in their imagination. That was not in any of their understanding. And that point seems clear from everything that Luke has written up until this point. And beginning with Moses and all the prophets, he explained to them what was said in all of the scriptures concerning himself. As they approached the village to which they were going, Jesus continued on as if he was going further. But they urged him strongly because this is what you do. You're a hospitable person. This is what a righteous person does. Stay with us for it is nearly evening. The day is almost over. Remember Jericho and Zacchaeus? So he went in to stay with them. And when he was at the table with them, he took bread, gave thanks and broke it and began to give it to them. Wait a minute. Wait a minute. And you have these moments in life when you don't see something and then something happens and the light goes on. That's what we say. Something happens and we see with new eyes. Their eyes were opened and they recognized him and pink. He disappears from their sight. Jesus, what kind of plan do you have about this whole resurrection thing? You know, maybe linger at the tomb a little bit longer. And then, you know, I mean, if I had to script this thing, I would have scripted it totally different. Then they asked each other, were not our hearts burning within us while he talked to us on the road and opened the scriptures to us? Yeah, but you didn't put it together then, did you? They got up and returned at once to Jerusalem. There they found the eleven and those with them assembled together and said, it is true. The Lord has risen and has appeared to Simon. Then the two told what had happened on the way and how Jesus was recognized by them when he broke the bread. What is Jesus doing? He's sort of popping in and out, appearing to people, just giving them these little slap with a cold fish and a little Bible lesson saying, you didn't really understand anything I was saying beforehand, but you'll remember it and you'll really remember it now. And so I want to sort of put a fine point on what the entire project is. C.S. Lewis makes this comment about the resurrection. When modern writers talk about the resurrection, they usually mean one particular moment, the discovery of the empty tomb and the appearance of Jesus a few yards away. The story of that moment is what Christian apologists now chiefly tried to support and skeptics chiefly tried to impugn. But this almost exclusive concentration on the first five minutes or so of the resurrection would have astonished the earliest Christian teachers. In claiming to have seen the resurrection, they were not necessarily claiming to have seen that. What do you mean that? Jesus strolling out of the tomb. You can find lots of pictures on the internet of Jesus' resurrection. The only purported even semi-ancient gospel to have that is the Gospel of Peter, which none of the churches accept because it's too late and a little too much like fan fiction because Jesus walks out of the tomb and there's a giant cross behind him with a mouth talking. And the early church said, not fan fiction, throw that away. You can read it if you want to, but we're not going to place our life on it. But this almost exclusive, in claiming to have seen the resurrection, they were not necessarily claiming to have seen that. Some of them had, some of them had not. It had no more importance than any of the other appearances of the risen Jesus. That's what we just read. Apart from the poetic and dramatic importance which the beginning of things must always have. What they were claiming was that they had all, at one time or another, met Jesus during the six or seven weeks that followed his death. Sometimes they seem to have been alone when they did so, but on other occasions, twelve saw them, saw him together, and on another occasion about 500 of them. St. Paul says the majority of the 500 were still alive when he wrote the first letter to the Corinthians in 55 A.D. In other words, very early in the first century, you could track this sucker down. You could find people who would say, I saw him. I talked to him. I knew it was him. It was weird. I'm still trying to comprehend it, but it happened and it was there and it's changing everything. How was it changing everything? See, we're still trying to figure it out. A lot of people I talk to about this kind of thing say, well, you know, okay, first of all, I don't believe it happened. Secondly, even if it did happen, so what? We would imagine that if it was such a big deal, then suddenly a utopia would have just come right out of the tomb and started in Jerusalem and taken over the whole world. It would have been a garden of earthly delights there in and there, you know, right away. That's kind of what they were hoping for on Palm Sunday, too, wasn't it? It's kind of what people are hoping for if poor Jonathan Peugeot can only get a message to Jordan Peterson. It's kind of what we're always hoping for, that we can somehow string historical events and then a new president or a new vaccine or a new this or a new that will suddenly make everything grand. And then maybe sometimes when our plans work out, things are a little bit better. And I'm certainly hoping for the that the vaccine will turn things around. And you know, we all want a better economy than a worse economy and all of this stuff. But what we're hoping for from the resurrection just never happens, which kind of leaves us skeptical and trying to figure it out. What happened outside a tomb on a road in a room 2000 years ago hasn't seemed to change things all that much. From our point of view, we still suffer and die and the world isn't rainbows and chocolates. But Jesus' resurrection changed history profoundly in the way that real things change history. And some of you who watch my sermons know I'm always putting the cover of this book in my sermons. Why would Paul do that? Well, the covers are kind of cool. Do you think Paul maybe wants to make a point about that book? Do you think Paul maybe thinks that book is important? Do you think Paul maybe thinks that perhaps part of what this book notes is that what happened in this story of Jesus altered this world in such a sneaky, slow way that we can barely see it because it changed his followers and it wasn't like putting on a magical suit to become Iron Man or gamma radiation to become the Hulk or Krypton, the Earth's sun changing your Kryptonian or, or, or, or, or. It changed us in the way that people often change. It changed his followers and the cumulative effect of that over a few hundred years changed an empire. It didn't make it into a utopia, but it just set things in motion. See the kind of change Jesus started is measured in multiple lifetimes. We can see it in an individual lifetime, but the cumulative change tends to go even slower than that. It almost always looks like losing in the seculum, in the secular age, which is about a hundred years, the life of an old man. But it seems to win in the long run. And that's what's been happening since this resurrection. The changes almost always look insufficient according to how we imagine change happens, usually having a degree with pacing or time and directness. Here this, then that. The way we want to change history, the way we want to bring in our utopia. But in the long run, it seems to just keep winning in sort of a sneaky, unseen way, sort of like Jesus just popping in and saying, what you talking about? That thing in Jerusalem? You really didn't pay any attention to any of the class assignments, have you? Let me run through it once again for your sake. And you'll still probably get it wrong. Now, sort of like this little girl from the old Gene Wilder, Willy Wonka in the chocolate factory who sees a goose laying a golden egg and tells her wealthy father, I want it now! That's how we are. Christians, however, seem to win by a combination of loving and losing in personal spaces. That's what I've seen. It's everything Jesus said it was, but it seems so personally, horrendously costly, we imagine it can't possibly work. It's irresponsible or unjustifiable. But Jesus said, if you try to save your life, you'll lose it. If you lose it for my sake, you'll find it. And it only makes sense in the light of Jesus' resurrection. Now, I often tell people over the last three years that I've been making YouTube videos and thinking about philosophy and history and theology and having hundreds and hundreds of conversations with people that my belief in the physicality of the resurrection has not only strengthened, but its necessity has become clearer and clearer to me. I get this question a lot. Because most real things, the most real things that we know are real on all the layers. And so is Jesus' resurrection a symbol? Well, absolutely. Is it a sign? Well, absolutely. But it's a symbol and a sign because it was physical. And if it isn't physical, I don't think it would have changed the disciples or the world. Because we all know this, if you train for a career but never get the job, it's fruitless. If you fall in love but never get the guy or the girl, it's fruitless. Jesus' life, Jesus' sacrifice bore fruit. And it bore fruit in the little people that just were always sort of pulling the wax out of their ears and the sand out of their eyes. You see, Jesus doesn't run to Pilate and Herod and shout, how do you like me now? That would have been along the lines of the entire script that everybody who wanted Jesus to organize the rally to storm the Citadel and the temple, and that would somehow win the day and restore the kingdom to Israel. That's that whole playbook and Jesus has rejected it from the very beginning. His angels sing to shepherds. He eats both with Pharisees and sinners. He didn't play their game before, he wasn't about to start now because he clearly understood what didn't bring them peace, even if they kept playing it over and over and over again and it never worked, sort of like us. He knew that these common, seemingly unimportant people would change the world quietly, slowly, sacrificially. And that is exactly what has been happening. You know, we all have a degree of choice and certainly some presidents are better than others and some policies are better than others and I think everybody gets to have theological opinions and political opinions and Lord willing in this country we won't crucify each other over them. But again and again we see the person holding the most powerful job in the world and history just kind of keeps happening and all of our little plans using reason and power to make things happen. Sometimes things get better, sometimes things get worse, usually both. That's the way the world is. We even are management of our own little lives. Now those of you who are older, ask yourself, when you were younger did you think your life would work out this way? My life is nothing like I imagined it would be in probably my teens, twenties, thirties or even forties. In fact, my life today is very different than it was five years ago and it just keeps changing and I try to tinker with things and manage things and we all have responsibility and agency and we should use them and try and use it for the good yada yada yada but in terms of management we don't know the future and we're really bad managers. Use your degree of choice to try to do good things, absolutely, but for the most part we sort of look like a little Bob the Builder convention in the midst of a pandemic. What Jesus does is offer us an invitation into his life, death and resurrection. He invites us to follow him and he's been doing that for two thousand years and the variability of that in terms of time and culture and ways is absolutely breathtaking. But the pattern is always the same. He shows up and talks to two randos and gives him a little Bible lesson after he kind of hits him over the head sort of with a fish. That's a metaphor. Our lives in small ways begin to resemble his. Yeah, we do it badly. Yeah, we don't see the results, that whole pacing and directness thing. But the resurrection is our assurance that this sacrificial love, which everyone knows is in fact the way we should live. That's one of the things that Jesus changed by his resurrection and that his followers eventually convinced just about everyone in the world that, yeah, that's good. That's right. That's true. But I don't know if I want to do it because it's so horrendously costly and I've only got this little life now and so I have to get in all the pleasure and all the meaning and everything I want to do before I die because that's it. Jesus says, no, no. Let me invite you into my life. Let me invite you into my death. Let me invite you into my resurrection because what the resurrection says is all of those sacrifices that we look at and say, yeah, that's good. Yeah, I'd be better if I was more like that. The resurrection says those sacrifices are not in vain. Practice it. Live it. Do you want to change the world? That's how you do it.