https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=sdRmehU9sUY

 Good. How are you doing? Good. Good. It's been a while. It's been two years. I probably, I kind of lost track of hearing a little bit. Yeah. Yeah. How are you doing? I'm doing well. I'm doing well. How's your health? Yeah, it's gotten a lot better. I'm able to exercise and things like that. But it's still pretty rough day to day. I was hospitalized recently for a seizure. So yeah, it's been a lot of improvements, but very slow and kind of a battle every day still. Yeah. How has COVID changed your life? Well, I've been in isolation. I've been in isolation for I think three and a half years. Wow. Yeah. So a long time. Yeah, we're all going stir crazy after eight months. You've done this for three and a half years. Yeah. Yeah, I know. So, but you know, it's weird because it's sad to see everybody dealing with this. But at the same time, you know, a part of maybe the greedy part of me, you know, it's kind of like, oh, you know, now I don't, you know, now everybody's kind of collectively living like me a little bit. So maybe they understand a little bit. Yeah. Yeah. But, you know, I watched your interview with Griswold Grimm. Yeah. Which was just fascinating. I was just fascinated by him. But you know, he said something really real in that talk with you where he was like, I've had a lot of social isolation in my life. And he couldn't really, I liked how he said he couldn't really bear to watch, you know, others going through it. Yeah. So it's very destructive. Yeah. I'm just setting up to take some notes because I always take notes if I don't know why I don't set it up before. Well, what? Yeah. Yeah. No, that conversation with Gris was really, that was really good. That was really good conversation. I'm glad he's on YouTube and working that sorting myself out channel. Well, what was on your mind to talk about today? I mean, it's been a while since we've talked and a lot has happened. So I didn't have really anything in mind. You know, I think to like a while ago, I was going to talk to you about Benzos and it's kind of like, I'm not sure if I just want to sit here and talk about, you know, the horror of Benzos. I'm glad Jordan is kind of back, it seems like. So that's exciting, but it is weird how, you know, how I've experienced a lot of what he's dealt with. And people, there's a lot of miss miss. I see a lot of misunderstanding on the internet about it. You know, they kind of misunderstanding on the internet. Yeah. People taking things the wrong way. We got to stop that. We got to start censoring people, you know. A lot for a lot of us. I mean, I, you know, I'd heard, I'd heard the classification of drugs before and I didn't know hardly anything about them. And of course then when, and what, what, what was that? What was that? Re that was that withdrawal reaction at a, at a, is it at a phage or something like that? Oh yeah. Yeah. I, I don't know the, the medical terms. I forgot what it's been a while since I looked at all this stuff. But I, what I saw is people saying, how could he, with all his, you know, his clinical experience fall into that? I mean, that is just a complete misunderstanding of the medical world. They're given to you and they tell, like I was told, I'm still being hospitalized for this, right? So they told me when I was trying to get off them, they said it will be like two weeks with the flu. Now it's been two and a half years. So that, that's the top, top neurologist at UC San Francisco and he had no idea. Wow. They don't, they don't, they don't see people after this. Yeah. And there's a lot of liability with it. So I thought that was hilarious. I was like, Oh, of course he would take them. I mean, of course he would take them and not know, like no one knows until you get to the hospital. No one knows until you do it and you get destroyed from it. Yeah. Well, there's, there's just a lot of, I mean, the internet has changed medicine because I'm old enough to remember before the internet. And so the doctor gives you something. You trust the doctor because they have a degree. They're in a white coat. There's an entire institution behind them. They give you something. You take it. Now, of course, with the internet, anything that the doctor says and does, you can go back and Google, but that's its own, that's its own snake pit too. I mean, find any, any practice or food or anything. And there will be people on the internet that, you know, that, that say this is the, this is the cure for everything, or this is the worst thing in the world. And so, and then we're, we're, we're there in the middle of this miasma. Well, and, and this isn't obviously just medical things. It's, it's politics, it's science, it's religion, it's almost everything. We're in a, we're in a blender of information. And at least in this situation where you've got a medical condition, well, I mean, your biological life actually depends upon it. Yeah. So what do you do? And, and, you know, I've known a number of people like yourself and obviously with an older congregation, you very quickly realize that there's a lot of trial and error that goes on with this stuff, especially with psych meds. I see that all the time. Well, let's try this on you. Oh, okay. Let's see how it goes. Okay. But yeah. Yeah. No, they really think these, these people have it all together. And I, you know, I have a much different look at doctors. Like I almost look at them as killers, that it's your responsibility. You're an advocate for yourself. They will kill you and then they'll walk away and have lunch. You need to really internalize that. And that's really hard for people because they go, what? You know, they're doctors. Yeah. And, and it's not like they don't, it's not, you know, in most cases, they're not looking to harm you. Most people I know go into medicine. They really want to help people. They, they want to do the right thing. They have hearts and, and lives too, and, and feel guilt and responsibility, but they're playing with tremendously powerful tools. Yeah. And then they have the, I'm convinced that, I mean, almost every doctor I've met, I think, and I counted, you know, I've been to, I think it was 30, 32 doctors in four years. And so, like, I know doctors and I would say I've met maybe one or two out of those 32 that are humble. There's very little humility in that profession. And because people come to them and go, hey, I need your help. You know, I know all the answers. You're the, with the degree, you got the BMW, you know, you're going to tell me what to do. And it kind of breeds this, this arrogance. And sometimes I wonder how much, how much that has to do with what's going on here. Yeah. So, so what are your, you know, given your, your perspective and your experience with the medical establishment, what are your thoughts on, you know, what are the next phases in COVID with vaccinations and any thoughts on that? I'm, I guess I kind of identified with some of Chris Wolfgren's statements on just being kind of horrified by people giving up their, I'm, I'm much more concerned about the liberty aspect than I am about the health aspect of going with COVID. I think it's a huge misunderstanding what's going on right now with fear, where I see everybody in such fear and they're like, oh my God, you know, I could get this disease and it could kill me. And I go, yeah, that's been going on way before COVID. Yeah. Welcome. Welcome to life. Anything can kill you and diseases kill 14 year olds and they killed nine year olds, but no one wants to face that. You know, it's too, it's very hard. And I get it. It's, we're all just lucky to be here just for today. You know, so I find everybody's fear. I'm like, it's very strange. I'm like, why aren't, why aren't we discussing heart attacks? Why aren't we discussing cancer? Why aren't, why is there no push to, to destroy these things? To end this, this evil on the earth. And I think I like the, how people are so willing to go after this one, but I'm convinced that a lot of that has to do with the media. And I hate the media. I would say that that's one of the things it's, you know, I almost, maybe I need to work on that. It's like forgiving the media. Well, I mean, so you've been in isolation for three and a half years. What, what, what has brought this about with respect to the media? Cause I guess you've, I mean, how do you fill your days? You know, we have these screens and things. So, so what has brought that? What has brought that reaction in you? I'm going to, when I, when I got out of treatment, initially, you know, I was able to, I still hadn't come off Benzos and stuff. And so I was able to move around for a few months and I went to a riot in Berkeley. I went to that, it was called the battle of Berkeley. It's where, you know, there was a huge riot and all that. So I went out there specifically like to see, I was like, I keep hearing that these Trump supporters are all white supremacists and that like they are, that's who they are. And so I was like, and so I worked right there and I was like, Oh, I'm going to go walk over to this part and see who's act, who these people are and see if the media is lying. Cause I always, ever since I was little, I was always just like, the media makes money off of death. That's how they, yeah, it's perverse. And so I went there and it was just completely the opposite of that. And then that was a really profound moment in my life because I saw young people, like I saw a young, he looked, you know, like an Indian American kid who was probably 80 pounds. He had like a, a MAGA hat on and just getting stomped on. I saw like a middle-aged man who's, who was trying, who was waving an American flag, get beat till he was bloody. And I didn't see any media around till it ended. Then ABC came in and they reported that the white supremacists were there and all this stuff. And I'm sitting there, I'm like, and then the cops also just stood there in front of, literally, I mean, maybe 50 feet away, why people are getting stomped on. And I was just like, this is completely the opposite of what they've been saying. And then I've been, you know, I've been using this time to read a lot and specifically about the Soviet Union and the history of our media with this, the Soviet Union is, is absolutely despicable. I mean, Walter Durante and it's, it's inexcusable what they, what they have perpetrated in the past. And so I now can't even listen to conservative arguments. I always tell my wife, you know, it's like I turn, turn on YouTube or whatever, and I'll be following a bunch of conservatives. And it's like, can you believe that the media lied? You know, I really, can you believe they covered up, you know, these concentration camps in China? It's like, yes, they've been literally doing that the whole entire time. You know, why do you give them any respect at all? You know, their history is a bloody one. It's a, it's a very bloody, sick, or, you know, I was researching Ted Turner. If you ever like, I mean, you just sit researching Ted Turner, the man who created the daily news cycle. Yeah. I mean, he is one of the most sick people. You know, he's talking about depopulation, how you shouldn't, how, how we should have a one child policy. And then he has five children. I mean, he's, he's the definition of a hypocrite who wants to control the world. You know what I mean? And sell, and sell debt. I think he was pretty open about that. He's like, we just sell fear. We sell fear every day. And I'm like, okay. Is that what he said? Yeah. I think in an interview in the 80s, and then he tried, he, he was in, he was kind of like an environmental fascist. That's how I would describe his, his views. He was, he went to North Korea in the 2000s and he was like, I didn't see anything bad there. It seemed like stuff was working out, you know? Okay. They always have a soft spot in their heart for totalitarianism, you know? And that's inexcusable to me. It's just simple as that. So. Well, we've, we've talked about two institutions that are, I mean, media is deeply important for a kind of public sense making. And, you know, I was also a little struck by, you know, COVID, let's say versus heart disease and, you know, the, the hard one sobriety with which you approach the medical establishment. And, you know, my experience of both doctors that I know personally and journalists that I know personally. Yeah. You know, we don't want to get too Rousseau in here and just imagine, well, it's the, it's the institution that sort of corrupts them. But, you know, it's, it's, so here we have two, here we have two institutions that we need. And of course, as a pastor, I get to hear a lot of the ways that, that churches and religious institutions have, have harmed people. Yet at the same time, we need, we need these institutions. I mean, it's, it's not, it's not the case for you that, okay, you've, you know, you've had this horrible experience with the medical regime that you no longer are, you know, place yourself in their hands, you continue to do so. And you have to, you know, it's, it's where, and in any, you know, the media is an attempt to, is an attempt to gain information. And you cannot gain information from human beings without also having perspective right along with it, because that's the only way we can have information is via perspective. And these things, if they're going to be, I mean, especially before YouTube or, or social media, which have its own issues, you know, it's just that, you know, it's, it feels maybe a little bit of, you know, vindicating for a Calvinist, but it seems like each, we know we need these things. We know we need assistance in terms of our health. There is technology and there are things that can help. There is wisdom to be gained. We know we need information from the outside world. I knew, you know, nothing of this, you know, battle of Berkeley. And, and obviously, because, you know, I have, you know, something of a relationship with you, when you tell me about it, you're, you know, your, the relationship that I have with you sort of says, okay, well, I trust what you have to say, because, you know, I'm not going to be able to do that. I'm not going to be able to do that. I'm not going to be able to do I trust what you have to say, because just in terms of our relationship, you'd have no reason to lie to me. You know, you're not making money off of this and all of that. So, yeah. So, so, so where do we turn? What do we do? And again, I mean, what I appreciate about you in this is, I mean, it'd be one thing to say, to have relatively healthy people say, well, I never go to the doctor. Oh, okay. Well, you're relatively healthy. And what and my experience, because there's lots of people who don't go to the doctor. And my experience with them is that they don't go to the doctor for 20, 30, 40 years. And then they have a heart attack or a stroke, or they discover they have diabetes or, you know, something that basically, as we age, the cumulative things build up. And then, you know, one of their systems is now at risk and in crisis. And now suddenly, they're over at the doctor, or they're in the hospital, or they're in a convalescent home or on and on and on and on. So, so you're in the position where on one hand, you have, you have good reason to be skeptical about the innocence and omniscience of these institutions. At the same time, you can't live without them. Yeah. So how do you navigate that? Yeah. We'll say more. I don't know. I that's the only thing I can rely on. Okay. I mean, that's the only thing that's been with me in these moments, literally, like, when I have these seizures, like, I've been trying to kind of gain some meaning from them, because I feel like it's been going on for so long that I'm being tested, and I have to learn from them. And what's strange about them is when I go into them, I feel this presence like immediately that I didn't feel before that like, God is next to me. In a very light, I've been reading Dallas Willard, and in that kind of way, in the atmosphere, it's like, the presence is palpable, it's right next to me, it's with me. And it's no, it's not a, hey, you're, this is going to be easy, or you're going to get through this, or you're not going to die. It's just like, oh, he's here. Oh, okay. And it's at your worst moment. And so it's very strange, because you're it's kind of confirming his existence. Because there's no reason that I should feel any type of security or comfort within those times. But then what's really strange is it ends. And I become weak for about like one to three days. And it's, you know, I feel, you know, not a lot of coordination when I walk, I can't talk great, things like that. And I feel so weak, I feel and I don't feel him at all. Like, I feel like I feel like I would do anything to feel better. It's like almost the worst side of myself, like, oh, man, I would claw someone to death just to feel better for an hour. And so I'm starting to use those experiences. I'm now more concerned with that weakness. And, you know, in Matthew, where, you know, Jesus is confronted after fasting, you know, that that made me his weakness, he's incredibly weak, he's physically weak, and then he comes. And I've been trying to get stronger. So I've been I've been using this time to read about the Soviet Union and the people within the Soviet Union, who were tortured, and were able to withstand that because I can't wrap my head around it. Because I know what I've been through, and it's nothing compared to what they've been through. And so I'm like, I got to learn from these people. So when it comes my time, I can I can stand up a little bit more. You know, I can redo the experience in a sense. Now, from like it's like I said, it's probably been a couple of years since we spoke last. Yeah, you what has what has your religious or spiritual journey been like over the last couple of years? Because my I recall I didn't go back and watch our conversation, but I recall what you just said to me now isn't something that you would have said to me a couple of years ago. No, well, it's I'm in such a weird position, because I've been trying to go to church for three years. I can't get in a car, I can't drive more than five or 10 minutes. And so it's like, you know, I have like some Black Lives Matter church next to me or whatever, and I'm just not interested, you know, I don't want to talk about politics. And so I think I'm, you know, I, and then I got so deep into theology. I mean, that got really just confusing, because I'm like, who's right here? You know, the hell is right here. And then I got one side of me, you know, my grandmother was a Baptist. And so a part of me is like, Oh, she, you know, maybe that's, you know, this kind of southern, you know, kind of thing. And then another, and then I have, you know, my other great, my grandfather was was Greek. And so I'm like, maybe the Eastern Orthodox, maybe they really know what's going on. I guess I'm trying to connect, connect to this, because I never really got any of that from my past. They died when I was young. And, and, and my father's kind of the same way. He's like, he's been to all these churches, he's, he goes, I'm not very religious. You get up in the morning and read the Bible and pray. What he means is like, I can't stand the churches, man, I just, as soon as the authority comes in, and they start begging him for money, or whatever it is, he starts getting like, he starts feeling like they're hostile. And I really want to be in fellowship with people to, to, to, to build up my faith, because I know that it's weak, you know, when you're in isolation, and you're lonely. Yeah. So I'm in a really weird space with, like church and religion. I don't know, because I have never been baptized, you know, so that's that part, that part of me is very like, it's like a whole little bit. You know, it's like, wow, I can't, I can't even get that. But it's, but I'm just like, this is the test, maybe this is the test. You know? Wow. So you've been a huge opening for me, because it's like, oh, you know, I, oh, man, I was hospitalized, and I saw one of your, I mean, the next morning, I got up, and I saw your live stream on Sunday, I was so angry, I was so angry at this doctor. I mean, I was so angry. He treated me like trash while I had this seizure, to the point where a lot of people think, you know, a lot of people think that I should get, I've been told a lot about my family, you got to sue these people, you got to go to court with these people. And I turned you on, and you were talking about forgiveness and murderous thoughts. I was like, oh, man, and I was like, and you're, I think you were saying, if I could just get rid of these people, my life would be so much better. And I was like, ah, so every day I'm working on forgiving the doctor. And it's so tough. And, but yeah, there's, you know, I met with your friend, though. Oh, Mark. Yeah, Mark, a long time ago. And he's a good guy. Yeah, you know, I only saw him, I think once, and it was like, he, I mean, I'm still going on that. Yeah, he's a good guy. He's a good guy. The Alameda, Alameda Christian Reformed Church, another little, another little struggling Christian Reformed Church, Mark is doing. Mark's sort of a one man band during COVID, I caught his church stream, and he's, he's, he's singing the songs himself. Someone's playing the piano, at least for him. He's singing the songs. He's doing the liturgies, doing the services, doing it all himself. God bless you, Mark. God bless you. Wow. Wow. But, oh, well, thank you. Thank you for, thank you for letting me know I was helpful. Because as a pastor, that's, that's a big deal. Because, you know, the institutional, you know, the insta, there's a lot here in terms of doctors, doctors get calloused and hard to protect themselves. Yeah, because, you know, it's one you go into, you go into that thinking you're going to help people and you wind up killing people, hurting people. And then, you know, how do you, how do you, how do you, how do you, how do you continue on? And you're sort of trapped because, hey, you've got all this student debt, you've got this job you have to do. People do need doctors, you want to be a good one, so on and so forth, but it can turn you into a bad doctor. Yeah, I think reporters, you know, everybody has a perspective. So, yeah, you know, they go into the world and they want to tell the truth and they want to make things known, but their biases are going to their biases and their perspectives are going to, you know, and then, then you've got commercial interests in both realms. And so, like, you've got all of the same stuff going on in religion, as your father noted. And, and so pastors, pastors get into this because they believe or they care and they get, they get calloused, they get cynical, they get, they take, they take easy ways out of difficult things theologically. And, but at the same time, you know, no, I just, I'm really struck by your answer in terms of, and I completely believe it just in terms of, you know, the difficult times in my life and what, what kinds of things got me through, you know, there are all other things to friendships, you know, solid relationships. I mean, all those other things too, but yeah, yeah. Those are not really on the menu right now. I don't, I don't. Yeah. I mean, what, what would, what would be your advice to someone who can't go to a church, but, but believes in studies and cares about this deeply? Well, I think, you know, people, people have to kind of make do with what they have. And I think you're, I think you're, you know, reading of life in the Soviet Union for Christians. I know, you know, Peugeot and Drears conversation they did the other day. I haven't read Drears book yet. I'm reading it right now. Are you? Yeah. But, but it's those kinds of stories I find tremendously helpful because the one, the one, one of the things that I learned in some dark times in my life was God is enough and he can bring you through. Yeah. And I know that, but I also, I mean, you talk about the, the times when he's gone and the weariness and the, the desperation of being willing to do almost anything just to make whatever it is, the, the, the, the fatigue or the loneliness or the isolation stop. I get that too. And I think you're doing the right thing. I mean, you have, you have certain things at your disposal. You know, you're reading, you're, you're finding other people that, you know, other media that can help because you can only read so many hours of the day. And sometimes you need music or you need, you know, another voice or something. That's, you survive, you know, you survive. And, and as I've said many times, I don't know. I don't know any Christians that I really esteem who have, who haven't gone through one sort of hell or another. Right. It's, it's, it's part of the process. That's what the Bible says when talks, you know, it's a kind of a pretty image of refining like gold, but if you've ever, but if you've ever, you know, if you've ever felt the heat of what a crucible or what that looks like, it's so I, you know, and the church has to, and I think the church is doing this. The church has to find ways to, to help people who are isolated. And this is a, this is a, this is a far older thing than any modern impediments pastors have, have always, and churches have always, you know, visited the sick, visited those in prison. You know, the church has to reach out to those who are isolated and find ways. And even if they're in perfect ways, like YouTube or Zoom, yeah, it's simply essential, but there are many, many people who are struggling and isolated and alone. And yeah, so yeah, that's always the case. Yeah. Yeah. Well, yeah. Reading Rod's book, I'm not sure how I feel about it so far. I think a part of it might be a little, I understand what he's trying to do and the thing, the people he's trying to warn, and I think it's very probably warranted, you know, what's going on. But I also, we, I think we have to have some respect for the suffering of people in these communist countries and their memories, and how severe what we're talking about here is. We are not talking about SJWs banning people off Twitter. This is, this is very profound stuff. I mean, the levels of hell that, that, you know, something like the Soviet Union, the more that I read, I can't fathom the, the, the, the, the I, you know, I read that I read this book. I got it right here. I don't know if you've ever heard the hope against hope. No. Have you ever? No. I just get this book if you can. Hope against hope. Hold it up again. Yeah. No, it does. Yeah. And they'll stop. Okay. Tell me about it. So she, she is the wife of a poet named Osep Mondelstam, who is considered like one of the Russia's greatest poets. And he was put in a Gulag and died there. And this is the story of her living in exile with her husband. And she memorized his poetry because it was illegal. He wrote a poem about Stalin and that's what sealed his fate. And she basically took it upon herself to run from the secret police and to memorize and to hide manuscripts of all of his work. And I think only till it was, this was in the, they had a relationship in the twenties. He got a sense in the mid thirties. And I think by the mid fifties, right after Stalin's death, then she was allowed a permit to live in Moscow. She never did one thing. She didn't have a charge or anything. She was running for, I mean, every couple of days, you know what I mean? Very serious stuff. And what's amazing about this book, it's one of the most real books. It's been pretty life changing for me. I told my wife, if I have a daughter, I want her to have that name or that middle name. That's how important she's been. And she explains the hell that they're living in. Not only just Gulags and secret service policemen every second of every day, but what's really strange about it is that there is no one to trust. Everyone is against you. Everyone is willing to destroy you for your apartment or some bread or some sugar, milk for their reputation. And you kind of, you go, wow, these socialists, man, they were more competitive than any, you know, Henry Ford character. You know, you can imagine they were, I mean, they would do anything. And Osep, her husband is kind of this light. He's just, he's just like, I don't care. I'm gonna, I can only live in the truth and get ready. We're gonna die. You know what I mean? But one thing she says that was, I've never heard before is she talked about divorce, cancer, and all this stuff. And she's explaining how her friend died from cancer. And she goes, oh yeah, he was lucky because he died in 1928 or whatever and died in bed with his, with his family around. And he didn't see the horrors that were about to come. You know, he saw some of it, but he didn't see everyone be taken away. And she said, me and Osep would sit around and we would kind of opine. We would say like, we wish for cancer. We wish for divorce. We wish for affairs because those are natural things that occur in the world. And what's the reality of our world is executions and torture. And I had never, you know, most things that you read, they're kind of like, oh, getting sick is the worst thing that can happen to you. And she was like, no, I know, I know how, how far hell actually goes down. And it goes so far down that you'll be just hoping you have cancer instead of this. And so I've been really, I've been really trying to hold on to people like her and him. And I've kind of gained a new conviction about, I don't know where it came from, but lately I've been very emotional about genocide. So I started donating to a charity that helps North Koreans get out. I've been reading more about what's going on in China. And it just, yeah, I just feel very drawn to that, you know, right now. Wow. And trying to, I knew that one thing that during cancer that really I hated was I would talk to people and they would say, you know, this is a little tough for me to talk about, or, you know, I don't know, I can't, and I would sit there and I go, you think it's not tough for me? What gives you the right to not talk about death or illness when you're not even sick? You can't even talk about something, you know? And so I've been really trying to open myself up. But another thing that I did was, you know, there's, there was a famine in 1921 called the Volga famine that was really famous. And I decided one night, you know, I kept reading about it in other books and it's horrible. Millions of people died. And I was like, when people just starved to death. And so I said, I wonder if there's photos of this. And there's photos, a lot of photos. And I made sure I didn't turn away. And it had a huge impact on me. I, you know, I was, I was, I was, I was, I was, I was, I was, I was, I was, I was, I was, I was, I, you know, they were eating their children. And they have photos of literally the marketplaces with cut up children and they're selling cut up children. And they have people in the throes of death. And they're clear photographs. You can focus on their eyes and they look like aliens. And it's not okay that we don't remember these things. I am very sad about my education and something Jordan is very good at talking about is we need to internalize these periods of mass suffering. And I think that's one of the biggest problems today is that we all think the world is falling and it's not even close. It's just not even close. It's, yeah. Yeah. We're so blessed. Yeah. Yeah. That's true. That's true. That's true. Well, and listening to you talk also makes me think about the, I mean, the strangeness of suffering, you know, a lot of suffering that goes on now is, so the crown was on Netflix and my wife and I watched the crown and we've been watching some other stuff on the Royals. It's a, it's a fascinating study in humanity to watch. And again, all of these are representations and depictions and, but to watch someone like, so Diana, my wife was noting that she married Prince Charles in 81. And my wife said, you know, she remembers that and all the, all the girls. So in 81, my wife was 15, no, no, 81. Yeah. So my wife was 15. So I was 18. Yeah. My wife was 15. She said all the girls in school wanted to be her. And so here you have this young woman who is by virtue of marriage made astoundingly wealthy, lives in palaces, but yet is in some ways this prisoner and, you know, gets bulimic in terms of, you know, trying to, you know, binge and purge. And it's like, huh, this should be, this should be the most privileged, fortunate person on one of the most prestigious, fortunate persons on the face of the earth. And she can't stand herself or her situation almost to the point of suicide. And, you know, a lot of the suffering today will happen. You know, children in a also watched Hillbilly Elegy and the reviews of the movie, you know, weren't that great. And I can, you know, part of me can understand that. I actually thought it was pretty good in terms of, yeah, your mother's a monster. She beats you and she's a drug addict and she's your mom. And that's true for lots of people, whether it's drugs, alcohol, borderline personality, she's ill. And so, you know, and so you've got all that sort of common, common suffering. It's deep and it's painful and it warps. And then you, and then you've, you know, I read Black, not Black Earth, but the other, the Bloodlands by Timothy Snyder, basically the land between the land between Stalin and Hitler and, you know, Belarus, Ukraine, Poland. I mean, the years of the thirties and forties, it was just, you know, the, this, this famine that goes through the Ukraine, basically a human induced famine, because Stalin is taking all of the grain out and people are reporting on other people. If they're trying to at least keep a little bit of the grain for them to eat. And again, you've got cannibalism going on. You've got famine, you've got starvation. And then of course, that's all Stalin in the thirties. And then Hitler comes marching through. Hitler goes back and it's like, yeah, how can human beings survive this? Yeah. And one answer is they drink. That's how they survive this. They drink. No, no, it's, it's, it's, it's weird literature to read because at one level it can kind of feel voyeuristic. At another level, it can feel participatory. Yeah. Sometimes you don't feel worthy of reading it. Yeah. Yeah. But at the same time, you have the sense, no, I should be reading this. I need to know this. Yeah. I, in a sense by, by not listening to them, I, I don't honor their suffering. It's, it's strange multi-layer dynamics with this stuff. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I, yeah, I think honoring their suffering is that's all that's, that's our job in this world. You know, it, I don't see what else being distracted is not working. You know, I mean, yeah. Right. Yeah. Right now as we speak, and this started before we started, there's a couple, there's a woman sitting on the, on the, the stone work that we've got this terracing right outside of church. And she's there with her husband and they have been fighting on and off most of the morning. And, you know, you, you went, you've slept with those bitches, you know, that's what she's hurtling at him. And he's throwing things back at her. And they're doing this right here in front of the street. And you know, and it's loud enough, you know, they're about 20 feet away from my door, but it's loud enough that even through the door and the walls, you know, I can make out a lot of what they're saying. The mic probably doesn't pick it up because it gets up the mic to this, but here is, here is the human condition. And these people are there. In this case, they're, they're African American. You know, they, they have a culture, they have a story, they have a past, but at the same time, you know, the government isn't locking them up, you know, and just the, and, and it's, and it's there, you know, and it's a married couple, they are married. I mean, I picked that up pretty quickly, you know, I mean, I'm not, I'm not, I'm not, I'm not, I'm not picking that up pretty quickly, you know, I'm your wife and okay, they're married. And, but it's, you know, and you with your, you know, with your, with your cancer and with the, yeah, it's, yeah, yeah. And again, I, part of, part of this is, and it's so strange because I completely understand people will, people will say to me, how can, how can there be a good God? And, and how could a good God tolerate this level of suffering in the world? And I, that's a, that's a, I, I feel the weight of that question, but I almost always see it in the reverse. If, if God isn't good, if his promises aren't true, if his power isn't available, and if all of these people who have suffered have no hope of redemption, consolation, well, then I, then I don't want to be a, you know, then I don't want to be a preacher. I don't want to be a Christian. I don't want to, I don't want to give false hope, but yeah, if all that hope is false, that's a thought that's, that's way harder to deal with because then, then we're just left to despair and nihilism and suicide and genocide and, you know, destroying life because life isn't worth, isn't worth the cost. So, and it's often, you know, so I'm planning a conversation with someone and she asked that I read a chapter out of Brothers Karamazov and to talk about it. And it's one of these classic chapters of Dostoevsky, like few other people could sort of lay these things out. And as Peterson said, lay these things out. And as Peterson says, to his credit, Dostoevsky puts these enormous challenges, the strongest arguments, not in, not in Aloysha's mouth, but in the mouth of Ivan, you know? Oh yeah. And yeah, the Russians, they know, they know suffering. Yeah, they do. They know suffering. Yeah, I've been really taken with almost all of, all of these writers, you know, Tolstoy has had a big impact on me. And, you know, I'm starting to dig deeper into his political thinking and his, you know, Christian anarchism. And I think that I was trying to find an answer with politics. And I think a lot of people were, especially in around 2016, 2017, it was like, okay, we get that this is insane over here. This is pretty obviously insane. So maybe, what do these guys have to say? And I've kind of come away with, like, they're almost the same. I don't know, in a strange way, they, but about, you know, evil and good and evil, I don't want to be God's slave. I want, I want the freedom. And that's, that's to me, that's, that's the most important part. It's like, there has to be one because he gave us the freedom to fail. And then lift us back up. You know, I can't imagine, I don't want to be a slave in heaven. You know, that sounds just bizarre and, and, and, and not fulfilling or, or, or meaningful. I don't know. But have you read C.S. Lewis's screw tape letters? Yes. Yeah. And Lewis goes into that there. And I, you know, screw tape, of course, writing our father below, you know, wants them for food. But the horrible truth is that, you know, him above wants them for sons. And, and I, you know, I, I have to believe in God's justice and God's mercy and the consolation and, and redemption of suffering. Yeah. I can't, I can't, I can't not believe that because I couldn't, and I have an easy life. I'm healthy. My kids are healthy. I have shelter. I have food. I have disposable income to do things. I enjoy, I've, you know, I, I'm, I live in the, in the span of, of human possibilities. I live an unimaginably privileged life compared to not only people in past centuries, but billions of people in the world today. Yeah. It's just true. Yeah. But I, I couldn't, I couldn't tolerate the human story if it were not for the Christian promises about the goodness of God and his justice and what he will do in the age to come. I just can't, I just can't go there. Yeah. And I find it strange, you know, all the people we're talking about, they come to that conclusion, you know, like Nadezhda, she become, you know, she became an Orthodox Christian, you know, all these writers became deep, deep Christians, Solzhenitsyn, all these people. And you would imagine it's like, why not just say this is, this isn't working. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Even with, you know, again, we were talking about institutional corruption, you know, even with all the corruption that we've seen in church, you know, that's the thing that's, that's part of, on one hand, I, you know, I, people need to find churches if they can. On the other hand, I also know that, well, be disappointed. They'll be disappointed in their pastor. They'll be disappointed in the other people there. That will come. There's no, there's no avoiding it. And I pray that, I pray that you find, you know, a good church and a good pastor and a good community and that it's a blessing. And that I see too, I see many people, you know, especially when I do funerals and a good funeral of a saint who has lived their life, has lived their life well. I, you know, I'm privileged and really happy to perform at those funerals. But then when I look at others, and I think, oh, if you don't have the church around you, how do you get through? How do you get through? So, yeah. Yeah. I have an 11 o'clock. I'm sorry. Sorry, I can't see the time. No, it's okay. But it's, we're not, we're not quite there, but we're almost there. I just didn't want to, you know, you want to continue for five more minutes or do you want, do you need some time before? Well, we should wrap it up, but I, but I really, I'm so glad that you reached out again. And I'm so glad we could do this. And I, these conversations are good and they're also hard because they're, they're meaningful. And it's, it's really, you know, I know we, I know we had that little quick video moment when, you know, when, when you're, when your wife popped into the frame and we talked a little bit that one time. That was really special. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. And, and the frustration of, of the destruction of my Dunbar number is that, you know, in a moment like this, I, I want us to have more time. Well, one of these, one of these days I'm going to be able to get in a car and I have a lot of, I have a lot of churches to stop at. I got to, I got to stop at Mark's. I got to stop at yours and say hi. And, and it's weird. It's weird not, you know, ever seeing your church, but seeing it and seeing you all the time and constantly, it's like, wow, I wonder what it looks like really, when you're inside, it's kind of voyeuristic, like you were saying, there's kind of a voyeurism aspect of all of this. So, well, this to me is again, another reason why I believe the Christian gospel. And I believe that, you know, as, as the, the amazing verse and amazing grace, you know, we've been there 10,000 years, we've no less days to sing his praise. We also have no less days to, to the Dunbar number will be a thing of the past and the age to come. And that's a boy, what a thought that, you know, part of, part of God's goodness to us will be the exploration of each other and his gifts in you, you know, without the kinds of distraction, limitation, disruption, corruption that we deal with here and now, even that thought alone, you know, gives me strength and joy and, and pleasure, so. Yeah. I'm glad you're reading Dallas Willard. Oh, man, he's been, he's pretty solid. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. You know, yeah, amazing. I've been trying to, trying to get less into theology, it more into how living a better life and being a better person. I'm starting to get out of the net, you know? Yep, yep. Get the practices. And that's something I remind people. Part of the problem is that we have, and we're talking on Zoom, we're using words, we're looking at screens, and we tend to fixate on that, but this should be in the service of real living, not doing this. Yes, yeah. Something that you've been, you know, obviously you've been deprived of, but it sounds like you've used, you haven't wasted your sufferings, and that's good. I hope not. I haven't gone insane yet, so that's a plus. I think you're growing saner, even as, you know, we meet in this way. So good, good. I'm glad to hear that. I can see that. I can see that, actually. It's like, you know, when you see a kid, and you only see a kid when you're, when it's your kids, you don't see them change because you see them every day, but when you see other people's kids after a few months or years, and you say, oh wow, they've grown, I can see that in you. Oh, that's great to hear, because I have no perspective like that, you know? I can't see that. Yeah, yeah. I appreciate it. Well, Nick, this has been a joy, and I will pray for that day that you can get into a car and join us at Living Stones, and I hope maybe one or two other people from Living Stones will have watched this, and so that when you come, it won't just be, Paul, and oh, he's another person from YouTube with Paul, but oh, that's Nick, and I hope they can have a perspective of what this means, and I know Mark will watch this, so. Okay, awesome. All right, I really appreciate it, Paul. I'll talk to you soon. Is this something you'd like me to share, or what do you think? Sure, whatever you want to do. Okay, I think others would benefit from this conversation. Okay, great. All right, thank you, Nick. All right, take care. Thank you.