https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=hGnzDrgEOs0

 Hi, this is Paul and this is Rough Draft for Sunday where I run through the current iteration of my Sunday sermon. Yesterday I made a video, a conversation with a friend of mine, church planter, the pastor over in Christchurch Davis, Eric Dirksen, because I wanted to talk to him about the book Dominion. Now, I had sort of had an inkling about Tom Holland from watching the different podcasts and radio programs that I follow, but Eric hadn't really heard of him, but somewhere across his field of view came this book Dominion and the subtitle, How the Christian Revolution Remade the World. What impressed me about the book, and we talked about this, was how what Tom Holland seems to show is that the life of Jesus of Nazareth radically transformed human history. And it didn't just transform history via the beliefs of the people that held to Christianity as a confessional over religion, but seemed to transform the assumptions even of those who don't believe it, and that over the course of human history, this has in fact reshaped the world. Now, in a conversation that he did on a podcast, he said something that I've read a couple of times in sermons already, I'm probably going to keep reading it because I think it bears repeating. He said this, and Tom Holland is the author, imagine you've got to write a story in which for the first time someone who suffers the excruciating death of a slave is going to be cast as being in some way part of the creator God who fashioned everything, and he's got to be convincing not just to people now, but for 2,000 years and across the whole span of the world. It's a really astonishing thing to have pulled off, and I'll put in even or only, as a literary feat, and four people did it, and that four people did it is amazing, and I would add to it that these four people weren't the Shakespeare's or the literary giants of their age, and what that means to me is that it wasn't necessarily the literary skill of the authors, it was the subject and the material that these authors were drawing from was that transformational. Now how do we imagine the world is remade? We pretty much all think, well, rise to the top of the power, this is why we're all paying attention to a presidential election, rise to the top of power, prestige, influence, hierarchies, and use whatever you've got at hand to bend the world to your will, and we see this all the time, Christians, non-Christians, everybody imagine the world is remade. Now there's a podcast in this little universe that I'm following of two brothers, and one brother works for a financial group in San Francisco, and the other one was a college professor up in Washington, until in the words of his other brother, he was outed by a Maoist plot, but big brother Eric in this podcast keeps taking to task little brother Brett because he thinks Brett hasn't been a good steward of his gifts. He thinks that his little brother Brett was really sort of cheated out of a Nobel Prize, he has not pursued the high prestigious positions that his skills would dictate, he should have pursued, and in fact little brother Brett went to teach at an obscure small college in Washington state where in fact he was pushed out and is now out there in sort of an exile, no college will pick him up because of that incident, making podcasts, and big brother's a little nift at the whole thing, and when I listened to this podcast I said, guess what, both of them are atheists, little brother has a sense in which he follows the influence track of Jesus. How did the most influential person in all of human history do it? Now if you imagine we're living in a computer simulation, you know where would God insert his son, and when I say his son I mean you know someone who would come with his power and his authority, that's basically what the term, I mean when the Bible talks about Jesus as being God's son it doesn't really mean that for example in the same way that Jared is my son, no it has much more of a legal royal connotation that the prince, and so the prince of God, the incarnation of God would come into this world, where would you insert such a character into the matrix? Would you, well in the first century, put him into the power structure at Rome? Would you maybe put him in Alexandria or Antioch or Athens, one of the major cultural or world centers in the Roman Empire? That's not what he did. What sort of goals would you have for him? Let's make sure he lives a long life and let's make sure he writes a lot of books and let's make sure all of these things happen. You wouldn't imagine that he'd only be here for 33 years and 30 of those years we know nothing about and he did nothing that we have any indication contributed to his influence. So you nail him down to three years out of 30 and how are you going to spend those years? Walking around with a group of nobodies, talking and then dying and then there being stories of his resurrection but he himself never showing up to Pilate or Herod or Caesar and saying, how do you like me now? It's the craziest story you could imagine but it worked. Now, there are various sources that go into the four canonical books and the Gospel of Mark scholars often imagine is sort of the root source of the three books of what we call the Synoptic Gospels of Matthew, Mark and Luke because we can find often word for word agreement in Matthew and Luke from Mark and then there seems to be another source that Matthew and Luke share that Mark doesn't have access to and that's often been called Q and there might be other sources. Luke at the beginning of his Gospel says, I collected sources for this and then of course we have John and John is a very different book and the timings are different, it's quite separate, there are some story overlaps but not a lot and so scholars, skeptics and believers have been trying to figure out how to piece these things together but the church has always kept four of them and whereas over throughout the whole history of the Christian church some people have tried to harmonize them and put them together but the church has always said no, keep them apart, leave them as testimonies of four different witnesses and let their sometimes incongruous voices stand to give resonance and perhaps in some way sort of stereo optical vision of the life of Jesus. Now last week we were in the Gospel of John and Jesus was baptized and after his baptism Andrew, Simon's brother was one of the two who heard what John said, we talked about Jesus as the Lamb of God and the first thing Andrew was, did was find his brother Simon and say we have found the Messiah, that is the Christ and he brought him to Jesus and Jesus looked at him and renamed him. Now this all happened down in Judea which if you look at the little map is sort of on the south end of that map and this week we're in Matthew and we're up in Galilee and both Matthew and Mark say well after John was put in prison John was arrested by Herod Antipas that Mark says Jesus went into Galilee. Now Matthew says Jesus withdrew into Galilee and this has a connotation of refuge. Now what's interesting is that Herod Antipas was in charge both of Judea and the Galilee so he wasn't really leaving the jurisdiction so in what sense did Jesus withdraw and who did Jesus withdraw from? Matthew is beginning to sort of set this up within a cultural narrative to give it depth and color and resonance that Mark doesn't seem to have or at least to color this in a little bit differently than Mark did and you'll notice this if you put these verses side by side that Matthew is this far longer and what Matthew does as if you followed Matthew all along keeps dropping these quotes in from the Hebrew scriptures what Christians often call the Old Testament and these quotes are well why is Matthew doing these quotes? What's he doing? Well the first thing he's doing is showing Jesus to be the fulfillment of God's work through Israel and many scholars believe that Matthew was addressing a Jewish audience but he's also universalizing the mission of God from a nationalist, ethnicist vision of Israel which you can find actually at the beginning of Acts when after the crucifixion, resurrection and before the ascension Luke reports the disciples saying to Jesus now will you restore the kingdom to Israel? The disciples at that point seem to very much have an idea that well Jesus' idea well Jesus was going to be like David and maybe now after he's come back from the dead because what are you going to do with a leader you can't kill? Now that he's come back from the dead well you know maybe now he'll have his way and clean out the Romans and elevate Jerusalem to its preeminence. Jerusalem will be the new Rome. No that's not what Jesus does. Jesus universalizes the mission of God but not in sort of the imperial universalizing that Rome and Persia and the Greeks did. The standard imperial treatment that nations do to another. This is the redemption of the whole world which accounts for the strange lack of antagonism that everyone expected Jesus should have towards these pagan Romans and Greeks. And there's something about this Galilee of the nations. Why does Matthew pluck this verse out? Leaving Nazareth he went and lived in Capernaum. Not Sephora which has been uncovered as really the major city of the region very close to Nazareth which you know Jesus could have worked there at Sephora. Capernaum which is by the lake in the area of Zebulum and Naphtali by the sea. The NIV should really keep it sea and talk about that a little bit. To fulfill what had been brought through the prophet Isaiah. Land of Zebulum and the land of Naphtali the way of the sea beyond the Jordan Galilee of the Gentiles the people living in darkness have seen a great light on those living in the land of the shadow of death a light has dawned. Now we've been dipping into John and so we're sort of used to these light metaphors but here Matthew is bringing them out from the book of Isaiah. And so what we're getting here is a deeper picture on Galilee. Galilee of the nations even during the ancient kingdom of Israel there was always influence from Tyre and Sidon you might remember Ahab, Samaria and Queen Jezebel where they had that temple of Baal. The nations always seemed present up there in the northern reaches of the kingdom. And then after the Assyrian conquest the rise of Samaritanism and this group of people who weren't fully Israelite and worshipped at Mount Gerizan and you see in John 4 when Jesus meets the Samaritan woman actually I've been treating that in my adult Sunday school class how Jesus addresses this centuries long rift between the Jews and the Samaritans. And then Galilee is the source of Hellenistic contamination and rebellion. In 6 AD Judas the Galilean launched a revolt against the Roman Empire from the Galilee and the Galilee was sort of a melting pot. Yes there were Jews up there but there were the other nations and if you look at again the archaeology in that region you'll notice that well it's very Jewish but it's also there's a lot of Gentiles living there and they're trying to find a way to live together sometimes successfully sometimes not. From this time Jesus began to preach repent for the kingdom of heaven has come near. Now again if we compare this to Mark it's a little different the time has come and I preached out of Mark a year ago actually the time has come the kingdom of God has come near and you notice the circumlocution from using God as heaven okay and that's common throughout Matthew. Mark says the kingdom of God Matthew says the kingdom of heaven but in Matthew it's very it's very brief it's very repent for the kingdom of heaven has come. Mark takes who's usually Mark who's usually quite a bit shorter a little bit more economical repent and believe the good news. Now good news if Mark is in fact the preaching of Peter. Peter who would go on actually to to to minister in Rome would use Roman appropriations of terms. Good news is a Roman appropriation not really a Hebrew. So you have this language of the kingdom that remains in Matthew well it's there in Mark too but Matthew doesn't have this this good news language this Roman language. And then we come to the calling of the disciples in Matthew and Mark and here you'll notice that actually Mark is Mark is a little bit. See this is what I this is what I see now I'm going to edit this slide hang on. Matthew as you can see his is a little bit longer than than than what we find in Mark but you know quite a bit quite similar and then last year we we looked at Mark and the the talk about the sea and chaos and and how Jesus wrangles chaos and calls the catchers of people we say fishers of men but but the Greek really isn't specific to fishing like the English and it's more just captures. These are you are you are capturers of fish. Now you're going to be capturers of people. That sounds a little different to us but calls the catchers of people who ply their trade bringing life from chaos and if you want to look at those sermons you can find them on YouTube from from last year about this time again in an epiphany and and and Jesus pictures and and and there's a deeper this is a rough draft is why you practice. There's a deeper picture of the disciples that we find between these two and and so we wonder well here and John we met them as at least Peter and Andrew as disciples of John perhaps and and now we find them fishing up in the North area. Let's see I I planned on reading this from this instead of okay so this is why I do a rough draft. I should make myself a little note. Just made a new slide. As Jesus was walking besides the Sea of Galilee he saw two brothers Simon called Peter and his brother Andrew and they were casting a net into the sea. I might switch out the NIV here. For they were fishermen. Come follow me Jesus said and I will send you out to fish for people. I will send you out to capture people. At once they left their nets and followed him. Going on from there he saw two other brothers James the son of Zebedee and his brother John. They were in a boat with their father Zebedee preparing their nets Jesus called them and immediately they left the boat and their father and followed him. Jesus went throughout Galilee teaching in their synagogues proclaiming the good news of the kingdom. There's some good news talk and healing every disease and sickness among the people. Now we get a deeper picture into the disciples. Peter Andrew James and John were perhaps politically and religiously interested because politics and religion were by no means separated and and they were very interested in what was going on to the degree that you know maybe some or all of them were in fact disciples of John and had been down in Judea the same time as Jesus and John and John says look the lamb of God who takes away the sin of the world and we don't know how much time had passed or anything like this but Jesus then finds them by the lake and calls them. While they were laymen they were semi religiously and politically radicalized. They were looking for the deliverance of Israel. They were looking for the world set right. They were looking for something to happen and they had been watching John and they had been looking at Jesus and they were curious and now these are just the kind of men you might need for a reformational or religious or political movement but what we find Jesus does when he finally names his special 12 in a sense to recreate the the sons of Israel this 12 will be politically and religiously diverse in terms of the first century Jewish culture war which is pretty amazing because if Jesus were to fit into the religious political landscape you would imagine he would align with a certain faction but Jesus in fact doesn't do this as you can see if you go back to the Gospel of John in John chapter 3 when Nicodemus comes to him and tries to woo him to the party of the Pharisees and Jesus won't be wooed. There's a subtle shift in Jesus from John the Baptist. Repent. Well they both have that. It's not the status quo. Jesus withdraws. This is not direct political activism as one might imagine. John is now in prison and Jesus doesn't just leave to save his hide. This is a strategic move on Jesus part up to Galilee and do some things there first. These catchers of people will be disciples and then later disciplers. Jesus takes his time to pour his life into just a few people and we're going to see the cruciform power of Jesus and the global transformation. He's going to challenge the nationalism the ethnicism and the assumptions about how the world works to the degree that John the Baptist from prison will have questions. Jesus are you him or should we wait for another. Now what you see is that the results are not immediate. Jesus rejects the triumphalism of the Galilee and followers. Jesus will draw to himself huge crowds in the Galilee and he will reject them. He says you're looking for the religious show. You're looking for the miracle show. You like the preaching but you're not really interested in what's at the heart of it. And Jesus one shining moment on the popular stage in the big time in Jerusalem which is Palm Sunday is followed by the seeming and utter collapse and catastrophe of Gethsemane and Golgotha. Which all sets up the cross and Tom Holland in the preface of the book says this about the cross divinity then was for the greatest of the great for victors and heroes and kings. Its measure was the power to torture one's enemies not to suffer it oneself. Isn't that how Empire works to nail them to the rocks of a mountain or to turn them into spiders or to blind and crucify them after conquering the world. That's what everyone's expecting and wanting from Jesus. That man who had himself been crucified that a man who had himself been crucified might be hailed as a god could not help but be seen by people everywhere across the Roman world as scandalous obscene grotesque. The ultimate offensiveness though was to one particular people Jesus own the Jews unlike their rulers do not believe that a man might be a god. They believe that there was only one almighty eternal deity creator of the heavens and the earth. He was worshiped by them as the most high god the lord of hosts the master of all the earth. Empires were his to order mountains to melt like wax. That such a god of all gods might have a son and that this son suffering the fate of a slave might have been tortured to death on a cross were claims as stupefying as there were to most Jews as they were to most Jews repellent. No more shocking to no more shocking a reversal of their most devoutly held assumptions could be could possibly have been imagined. Not merely blasphemy it was madness and that in fact becomes the center of the story of his life for the church. Paul says it's foolishness to the Greeks that the power of God would be displayed in not miracles and the spirit filled Corinthian church but Christ the The power of God would be displayed in not miracles and the and the spirit filled Corinthian church but Christ crucified would become the center of their system. How would this savior change the world? Well would he be matrixed into Rome? No. Would Jerusalem become the new Rome? No. He would love face to face one person at a time and the gospels are full of those stories. He would make disciples of the most unlikely sort. And in fact some like a demoniac that had legion in him who wanted to follow Jesus. Jesus said no go to your people. The woman in John 4 who had to go to the well at noon probably because she had burned her relational ties to all the other women in the village. She then reveals Jesus to the village. You find this again and again in the gospels. He makes disciples out of the most unlikely sort and the most unlikely way. He would live your well being at my expense which is to love. It's the definition of love. We see it in every good mother and every good father. This life would be poured out for those unworthy of the offering. Father forgive them for they don't know what they do. His disciples would do likewise and the world is not the same even when they do it badly. How does Jesus change the world? This is how. Now most of us are scrambling up hierarchies and trying to get microphones and trying to make a big noise and have a big public show. Now go ahead. How does Jesus change the world? Watch what he does and follow that lamb wherever he goes.