https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=cQ_FsXvswDM

 Hi, this is Paul and this is Rough Draft for Sunday where I run through the current version of my Sunday sermon. We live in strange times. I have this little meme with Homer Simpson. First he's sleeping in a sleeping bag, entitled Ancient Ethics Being Pulled Up the Hill by Christianity Modern Ethics. He wakes up in his sleeping bag, stands up and says, look how far I climbed and I'm not even tired. That little meme I got off Twitter. We're happily quite out of touch with the world that Paul of Tarsus was living in when he was writing the Corinthians. Christ's spirit has been remaking our moral imaginations for 2,000 years, but because we're short-lived and short-memoried creatures, we forget. What does it mean to be the head? What does it mean to be a leader? What does it mean to have people aspire to be like you? Now I've been going through Homer's Iliad lately and very much enjoying it, but the contrast couldn't be more stark between the leaders of the Greeks fighting the Trojan War and Jesus Christ. For those of you who have forgotten some of this story, there'll be some spoilers, but given that this is one of the oldest stories in the West, I'm not going to feel too bad about it. Paris of Troy runs off with Helen, the wife of Menelaus of Sparta. Menelaus's brother Agamemnon of Mycenaeia gathers the Greeks together to travel to Troy to get her back. Homer begins the story sort of in the middle. After nine years of war, the gods of Mount Olympus make the humans their proxies for their little family quarrels. If you want to get a sense of the Greek gods, just read the Iliad because there they are in all of their not so glorious relational abilities. The army has been taking cities and spoils all along the way, and many of these spoils are slaves, often young women being most prized as slaves for service and for bed. Agamemnon has taken the daughter of a priest of Apollo as his girl. He says he likes her better than his wife. Now spoiler alert, his wife is over on the other side of the Aegean Sea, and she's a little bit angry since he sacrificed their daughter for fair winds to get over to Troy. And shoot, she's going to kill him, quite literally, when they get back. But that's a few years from now. The girl's father is a priest of Apollo. Apollo is the son of Zeus. And he comes to Agamemnon to ransom her back. So he brings all sorts of ribbons and trinkets and things. And culturally, this is a way for him to buy his daughter back from Agamemnon. But Agamemnon rebuffs him. And so the priest prays to Apollo against Agamemnon, and Apollo strikes the camp with plague because that's one of the things that Apollo does. Apollo is the god of plagues, and suddenly the Greeks are dying of plague. And so Achilles, the greatest of the Greek warrior, speaks for many of the rest of the leaders and a delegation and says to Agamemnon, give the girl back, please, so we can end the plague. But what this story is about is honor. And these honors that they have are, in fact, the trinkets and the slaves and the trophies of their conquest. And Agamemnon, now confronted with this, has to back down from pressure from Achilles, has to back down due to pressure from Achilles, leading the other warriors in the camp, but is surly because he's the big dog. And why should he have to give up his slave, girl concubine? He complains, it's not right. I have rank. I get the pick of the spoils. And if someone else has to pay the price, it should be someone further on down the line, not me. So he sends the girl back with Odysseus on a ship. And then he takes the trophy, booty, prize of Achilles that he has in his tent from a previous battle and basically says to Achilles, how do you like them apples? And in many ways, this is part of the tension and the conflict that's beneath the entire story. The Iliad begins with these lines. The wrath saying goddess of Peleus' son Achilles, that destructive wrath which brought countless woes upon the Achaeans, that's those coming from the Greek side, and sent forth to Hades many valiant souls of heroes and made they themselves spoil for dogs and every bird. Greek's best warrior won't go out to fight with them because he's made because he's mad, oops, got to fix that typo, because he's mad at Agamemnon who was salty because he had to give up his slave girl and so took the slave girl of Achilles. And so the wrath of Achilles against Agamemnon and just the wrathfulness of Achilles in general will be the center of the story. But it means that this entire story is going to be a tragedy because in this war, yeah, the Greeks will sack Troy, but no one really wins. This is normal for the world Paul is addressing. This is how leaders act. This is normal and this in many ways is what the Corinthians have their sharp elbows over. In some ways the Iliad is one of their founding guiding myths and documents and what we tend to do is we look at stories like this and say, well this is what leadership is about. So Paul writes the Corinthians. This then is how you ought to regard us, meaning the apostles that they're bickering over, Paul, Apollos, Apollo, Peter, Cephas, servants of Christ as those entrusted with the mysteries God has revealed. Now it is required that those who have been given a trust must prove faithful. I care very little if I am judged by you or by any human court. Indeed, I do not even judge myself. My conscience is clear, but that does not make me innocent. It is the Lord who judges me. Therefore judge nothing before the appointed time. Wait until the Lord comes. He will bring to light what is hidden in darkness and will expose the motives of the heart. At that time, each will receive their praise from God. Now the Corinthians are evaluating them all and he says you can keep your evaluation. I will live by the evaluation that the Lord gives me. And he's not saying that necessarily he will be exalted for it, but he says the Lord is the proper judge, not you. Now brothers and sisters, I have applied these things to myself and Apollos for your benefit so that you may learn from us the meaning of the saying, do not go beyond what is written. Then you will not be puffed up in being a follower of one of us or the other. For who makes you different from anyone else? What do you have that you did not receive? And if you did receive it, why do you boast as though you did not? In other words, you're all recipients of this. It's not really a contest between you. Now again, you'll notice that Apollos obviously brought in up in a Greek situation named after the great God Apollo, the one who strikes plagues. Well now Apollos is a Christian, the man of course, not the God. Apollos was of course named by parents who lived in the same world shaped by the Greek myths. We meet Apollos in the book of Acts, a convert who became a popular preacher. Apollos and Apollos don't behave like Achilles and Agamemnon. That's Paul's point. They don't behave like Achilles and Agamemnon. That's not how Christian leaders ought to behave. Among Christian leaders, it ought in fact to be very different. Now Paul gets sarcastic with them because he's basically saying, you're all acting like Achilles and Agamemnon and all the leaders and the myths around you and you have absolutely no idea what it means to be in a church whose head is the crucified Christ. Already you have all you want. Already you have become rich because this is the goal. This is the nature religion that's supposed to fill them up and make them wealthy and make them successful and make them victorious. That's what they're looking for. You have begun to reign and all that without us. How I wish that you really had begun to reign so that we might also reign with you. For it seems to me that God has put us apostles on display at the end of the procession, like those condemned to die in the arena. Now he's referring to a Roman triumph and what happens in a Roman triumph is that after the general has conquered the city, he takes the slaves, the people of the city who he the ones he enslaves and he brings them through the streets. Now usually because people get a little bored at a parade, you're going to put all the, well the really choice slave girls and the really fit young men and the really wonderful gold pieces all the way at the beginning of the train and the stuff at the end is sort of the fodder. These are the ones that are going to become the fodder for animals in the arena. Yeah they're a slave but they're not worth much so we might as well throw them at the game because nobody wants them in their house looming or taking care of their children or sleeping with them in their bed. These guys, they're not even worth that and Paul says, with regard to the world, that's who I am. We have been made a spectacle to the whole universe, to angels as well as human beings. We are fools for Christ but you are so wise in Christ. We are weak but you are strong. You are honored, we are dishonored. To this very hour we go hungry and thirsty, we are in rags, we are brutally treated, we are homeless. We work with our own hands. When we are cursed, we bless. When we are persecuted, we endure it. When we are slandered, we answer kindly. We have become the scum of the earth, the garbage of the world right up to this moment. Now it's very interesting because here in Corinth, which is probably one of the wealthier church Christian communities, Paul will take no money from them. He will instead work his leather working tent working over in the marketplace because he doesn't want to be indebted to them because he knows once he takes their money they're going to have influence. And so he says, no, I'll work with my hands. I'll live in poverty. I'll do all of this because what I want is to be judged by God and what I want is a harvest from God which will be you and your godliness. I am writing this not to shame you but to warn you as my dear children. Even if you had 10,000 guardians in Christ but you do not have many fathers for in Christ Jesus I became your father through the gospel. He's saying I started this church. I brought you to the faith. You might be looking for all of these all of these servants who are there to raise you in a wealthy home but I am your true father and so I'm speaking to you not as some slave taking care of a child but as a father. For this reason I have sent to you Timothy my son whom I love who is faithful in the Lord. He will remind you of my way of life in Christ Jesus which agrees with what I teach everywhere and every church. In other words look at Timothy. This is the program. They are taking their cues from the culture that they are embedded in. They are looking at Achilles and Agamemnon and Paul says you should look at Paul and Timothy. This competition for glory is enduring but hard to unleash or hard to unlearn. It will take time for them to understand this new perspective on life. Now the old and the new remain side by side. It's natural to want for myself. It's natural to feel. It's natural to feel. I forgot to figure out what I said on that slide. It's natural to make it all about me instead of Christ. This is nature religion where the religious payoff should be all the same kinds of things that Agamemnon and Achilles were scrapping over and that is in fact what they're playing out. But of course their master is the crucified Christ. Remember what he said about Christ crucified in the logos of the cross. He did not consider using his status as the son of God to exploit. But while we were yet sinners he died for us. We are called to be like him for each other. Now people look to stories and examples to set their expectations. People look to leaders to know how things are supposed to be. It is assumed that the little people will die for the great leader. But with Jesus the son of God dies on behalf of the people who were confused and helpless. Jesus says this best. Then the mother of Zebedee's sons, James and John, came to Jesus with her sons and kneeling down asked for a favor of him. What is it you want? He asked. Now James will die first and John will die last. Jesus said you don't know what you are asking because of course she had ideas of Achilles and Agamemnon and all of the ways that the world judges these things. Can you drink the cup I am about to drink? We can they answered. Okay. Jesus said to them you will indeed drink from my cup but to sit at my right or left is not for me to grant. Those places belong to those for whom they have been prepared by my father. When the ten heard about this they were indignant with the two brothers. See it's not just the Corinthians that are acting like this. The disciples are acting like this. Who says they get to be number one and number two? They have all got sharp elbows. Jesus called them together and said you know that the rulers of the Gentiles lord it over them and their high officials exercise authority over them. Not so with you. Instead whoever wants to become great among you must be your servant and whoever wants to be the first must be your slave. Just as the son of man did not come to be served but to serve and to give his life as a ransom for many.