https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=CRorGa6UVpA

 Hi, this is Paul and this is Rough Draft for Sunday, and I'm doing it on Thursday instead of Friday because I've got some travel coming up. Elizabeth Elliott is a well-known Christian author. She's well known for a couple of reasons, one of which in the 1950s her husband and some other missionaries were setting out to try to make contact with some Aboriginal tribes in a South American jungle and they were killed by those tribes and that story was told in her book Through the Gates of Splendor and also more recently in a movie called The End of the Spear and Elizabeth Elliott herself went on to continue to work in missionary service, but she also became an author and wrote a number of books. Probably her most controversial book was entitled No Graven Image and in that book she told the story of a young missionary working with a man who could translate both a native dialect to the Spanish and so he was vital for this woman's missionary service and one day he doesn't show up for work and she goes to his home and discovers he's got an infection and so she, there not being any modern medicine around and as is often the case in missionaries in these circumstance takes some penicillin and injects him with the penicillin only to discover that he is deathly allergic to penicillin and it kills him and she not only alienates obviously relationships with the family, but years of work that she put in to try to establish contact with these people and translate the Bible into their languages and develop their own language all goes down the tubes and there's no silver lining in that story. Elizabeth Elliot got this book published and the book was not well received. Christians were angry and they said things like God would not let such a bad thing happen. Elizabeth Elliot didn't buy that because the the story was largely autobiographical. God does let such bad things happen to Christians and they happen all the time. More recently a blogger that's quite popular on the internet, his pseudonym is Scott Alexander, but he's a he's a psychiatrist and a few years ago he wrote a piece, How Bad Are Things and he writes about the fact that he lives in a mostly white college town in the eastern United States where you know things are about as good as they can be on planet Earth and he talks about the kinds of patients he sees and the kinds of suffering they have. He talks about a woman who has moved out to be with her to be closer to her daughter and her and her grandchild only to discover that the her son-in-law is is abusive and it's people's lives are a mess and so he just runs through statistics and looks at how many people are in prison or on probation or depressed or schizophrenic or on food stamps or alcoholic or sexually abused as children or or or and then he runs through a list of out of every 20 people these are just some of the things he can document and all the NPs are no problems, but that doesn't mean they have no problems. It means they have all the kinds of common problems that are not associated with the other kinds of problems he has on the list. It doesn't include health problems and so on and so forth and obviously as you get older well, we all in a sense get beset with problems and then we die and this is in the most affluent the most powerful the most secure probably the best place to live in all of human history and if you look at life all around the globe throughout history life is hard. It is not easy. It's somehow Christians and other religious people try to work their religion to imagine well this is my edge to get God or the universe to get me what I want to secure the life I've always wanted. Others turn around and look at this and say see there is no God because if there really were a good God well, then he wouldn't let all these bad things happen. What's amazing is that all of the suffering is scalable. You can meet people who on the surface of it have absolutely wonderful lives. They have no financial insecurity. They have they have no major health problems, but if you ask them the difference between their lives and their expectations leads to suffering and they're bitter and angry and not even people you want to be around. Then you find ironically other people who have what look like terrible lives and they're not complaining or suffering all the time. Now we're going to be looking at the book of Daniel and the book of Daniel opens up with a very bad time in Israel. In the third year of King of the reign of Jehoiakim, King of Judah, Nebuchadnezzar, King of Babylon came to Jerusalem and besieged it. This is after we went through the history in some of the other videos basically Jerusalem has lost its king and Babylon is looking to get revenge for basically you know throwing off the shackles of Babylon and they've come to take the city. And the Lord delivered Jehoiakim, King of Judah into his hands along with some of the articles from the temple of God. These were carried off. These he carried off to the temple of his God in Babylonia and put in the treasure house of his God. Now what's amazing here is that the statement the Lord delivered Jehoiakim, King of Judah into his hand. It is not the case of at least according to the book of Daniel of God being overpowered by the God of Babylon. That's how most people would have imagined it. But the prophet says God delivered his people into suffering. Now Jehoiakim and his sons, Jehoiachin and his sons eventually go up there and they're held later on by the Babylonians and you might think well they're eating at the king's table. What does that mean? Well, it means they're hostages because if you make someone dependent upon you for food it means that you can starve them and if Judah rebels If Judah rebels, Judah then or whoever's left in the city rebels they then can basically threaten the life of the royal family and the sons. That's a means of control. Then the king ordered Ashpenaz, the chief of his court officials, to bring to the king's service some of the Israelites from the royal family and the nobility. Young men without any physical defect, handsome men with no physical defect, handsome showing aptitude of every kind of learning, well informed, quick to understand, and qualified to serve in the king's palace. These are the brightest and the best of the kingdom. And he says bring them to my palace. Is this a good thing? He was to teach them the language and literature of the Babylonians. The king assigned them a daily amount of food and wine from the king's table. They were to be trained to be a good cook. They were to be trained for three years and after that they were to enter the king's service. Now, again, you might imagine well this sounds like a scholarship. This sounds wonderful. This sounds like they're going to be taken in and educated by the world's or at least the region's leading nation. This is not something done out of benevolence. This is a tactic of assimilation. This is how in fact the king of Babylon takes control over these people. And what is not mentioned here, but what is quite likely is that these young men are castrated. They basically become slaves. You take the brightest and the best and you educate them. You cut off any future from them. They will never have their own families that could split their allegiance between them and the kings. You make them fully slaves and you turn them into your agents to be used at the service of Babylon against the wishes of your national tribe. Among those who were chosen were some from Judah. The chief official gave them new names. And to Isaiah, Abednego. The new names were Babylonian names and especially Belteshazzar. They are now given new names in association with the gods of Babylon. There's no question who their new masters are. These young men were quite likely castrated. They were taken from their families and they're to be indoctrinated into the education of Babylon and they are to serve Babylon. They are to be cut off from a future that they might have as Judeans. They're to be cut off from their past as Judeans. They're given new names, new identities. That which way they had their intelligence, their good looks. All of those assets in their youth are now adopted by the Babylonians in service of the Babylonian kings and the Babylonian gods. That's the program. Now this naming business is of course not new. And if you read and I would recommend reading the reading the book. I didn't see the movie, but generally speaking the movies aren't aren't as good. Read the original slave biography. 12 Years a Slave by Solomon Northrup. And in Solomon's case, he was kidnapped. He was born free in New York State and he was kidnapped on a trip down to Washington, DC. He was beaten within an inch of his life and basically told if you tell anybody who you really are, we will kill you. And then they give him a name. And someone once yells plat because it's on a list that and nobody answers and and and finally by power of deduction your plat. And and he says well, you know, I I you know, I'm not plat. From now on learn your name. If you forget it, basically you're dead. That which you name you own. But Daniel resolved not to defile himself with royal food and wine and he asked the chief official for permission not to defile himself in this way. Now what you see here is Daniel is trying to maintain the identity of Judah. He's trying to maintain his connection with his religion, his past, and his god. Now for years scholars have puzzled about this term defile because there isn't any indication that the Babylonian food is necessarily unclean. It very well may be. It might have been offered to gods. They might have pork in it. They might have shellfish in it and certain foods that would violate the covenant. But Daniel chooses to make this case. Now you notice he doesn't do it defiant defiantly. He asks permission of his overseer. Now Daniel had caused the official, now God has called caused the official to show favor and compassion to Daniel and right away we see the strangeness of this god. On one hand this god would deliver Daniel into slavery, into losing his future, into what in the ancient world would be called hell for all practical purposes. They didn't have a concept of hell. And but yet at the same time God shows a little mercy and the official decides to give Daniel a little bit of latitude, but this is risky for the official. But the official told Daniel I'm afraid of my lord the king who has assigned food and drink. Why should you see um, why should he see you worse looking than all the other men of your age? The king would have my head because of you and that's not a euphemism. That's not an exaggeration. It would never be a euphemism. It's the wrong word. The king would literally take his head if the king doesn't do if his servant doesn't do as the king wants. And as we go through the book of Daniel, you'll see regularly king Nebuchadnezzar is demanding the heads of people. You didn't cross a king like Nebuchadnezzar. If for any reason he woke up on the wrong side of the bed and you crossed him you were dead. That was the way it worked. And now Daniel is asking this official to go out on a limb to let him try water and vegetables. Now the conventional wisdom at this point is that the wine and the meats that are being served at the king's table are the best food and these best foods sacrificed to the gods will probably yield the best health and the best most vital young man because you know, you're the gods are connected to the rest of life. Daniel then said to the guard who was the chief official who had appointed him over Daniel, Hananiah, Mishael and Azariah. It's important to pay attention in the book of Daniel when their Hebrew names are being used and when the Babylonian names are being used. Please test your servants for 10 days. Give us nothing but vegetables to eat and water to drink. Then compare our appearance with that of the young men who eat royal food and treat your servants in accordance with what you see. Daniel now goes out on a limb and says this is the test. I'm asking you to go out on a limb. I will go out on a limb. So we agreed to this and tested them for 10 days. And as we go through the book of Daniel, you're going to see a series of tests. At the end of the 10 days, they looked healthier and better nourished than any of the young men who ate the royal food. So the guard took away their choice food and the wine that they were to drink and gave them vegetables instead. So the guard is doing a little science experiment here and here lo and behold, the religious observance of Daniel gets basically put out among the rest of the young men who are not Judean, who are from the other nations that Babylon has has conquered. And now we're going to begin to see a pattern develop in the book of Daniel where instead of God conquering in the way that Marduk and Nabu, Marduk's son and the other gods of Babylon, everyone imagine they're all conquering by power over, God is going to begin to conquer by power under. To these four young men, God gave knowledge and understanding of all kinds of literature and learning, and Daniel could understand visions and dreams of all kinds. And again, we see this this current, which is going to be power under versus power over again and again. It's in the small, subtle ways that the empire and the coercion of Daniel and his friends are going to be undermined subtly by God, not through violence, not through bloodshed, but through God acting patiently, quietly from below. At the end of the time set by the king to bring them into his service, the chief official presented them to Nebuchadnezzar. The king talked with them and found none equal to Daniel, Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah, so they entered the king's service. In every matter of wisdom and understanding about which the king questioned them, he found them ten times better than all the magicians and enchanters in his whole kingdom. And Daniel remained there until the end of the first year of King Cyrus. Now what's interesting on the one hand, this sounds great, Daniel and his four friends are head and shoulders above all of them, but head and shoulders in what? As slaves, as being co-opted. And another one of the themes we're going to see through the book of Daniel is what kinds of servants of this pagan tyrant will Daniel be? Because if Nebuchadnezzar is an evil pagan tyrant, shouldn't Daniel always be constantly trying to subvert the king? Or will Daniel be the best servant? And we're going to see this tension as the book unfolds. And we're going to feel these to this tension, and this is going to supposed to help us, inform us as to how to play out these tensions in our lives. Now, this is not a story about expressive individualism. This is not a story about first world problems. This is not a story about pampered people always getting what they want. Daniel and his friends are hostages of source. They are slaves, possibly eunuchs, castrated. All hope for a family is literally cut off. In the ancient world, you lived, you transcended death through your children. Your children gave you life after death, and they have no hope for children. They, in a sense, are consigned to hell, metaphorically speaking. They lost all future of self-determination, and there is not just, but there is not just one kind of slavery. And so again, this idea of what kinds of servants will they be? What kinds of servants should they be in the midst of this pagan godless empire? They're given the names of foreign gods. They're subjected to all kinds of compromises. How should they live? The first six chapters of Daniel will be all about ordeal stories. Ordeals are life and death trials where proof of divine favor is exhibited in miraculous deliverance from ordinary and expected harm. And so in this case, everyone assumed that the rich food from the king's table would yield better outcomes in terms of their health, but here you had an unusual circumstance where water and vegetables produced better. Now some of you today might say, aha, see, veganism works. First of all, that's not the point of the story. The point of the story is that in a sense, God's way, not defiling, God works a tiny little minor miracle honoring the resistance that Daniel and his four friends are offering to empire. But notice the way the resistance is carried out. Daniel isn't looking for a chance to stick a knife into the king. Daniel isn't trying to sandbag or undermine the empire. He is going to be both the best servant and in another way, slowly subverting the will of this anti-God empire. And that's how this is going to play out in the book of Daniel. But there's more to it. Because if you might have noticed at the beginning of the book in verse two, the Lord delivers Jehoiakim, king of Israel, into his hand along with the articles from the temple of God, these he carried off to the temple of his god in Babylonia and put in the treasure house of the god. Now, what did that mean? It means the humiliation of Israel's god. He didn't just take it for the gold. It's taken as humiliation. And a few years later when Nebuchadnezzar comes back to level the temple, everyone understands the message. Israel's god is nothing. Marduk is the king of kings and the lord of lords and all of Israel's people should submit. That's where we're going to get this subtle play of Daniel being both the best servant Nebuchadnezzar has, but yet at the same time Daniel slowly subverting this rebellion and God not losing his sovereignty. But God himself will conquer not through power over, not through Israel destroying the armies of Babylon, but through humiliation. So what is this book about? Well, we tend to pay attention to the miraculous vindications and celebrate those. But Daniel will be cut off, no hope for family or freedom for the rest of his life. As an expressive individualist, Daniel has no hope. His people and their god are humiliated. They are the losers to the powers of this world. How then should they live? Now the script that's usually taught us is Daniel should find his pride and find some way to become a revolutionary and undermine the tyrant and sabotage his court and no longer comply with the injustice done to him by the empire and realize in himself his secret sacred self that really his life is all about him and he should have his best life now. But this is not modern America. Acting in such a way would quite frankly be short lived as as we get to know Nebuchadnezzar, we'll see that. But then the question remains what kind of revolution is going on here? How do the people of God in subjugation to the empire bear witness to God's kingdom because God gave them into it and also simultaneously be the best citizens of the empire while also wanting the empire itself to be subverted in that which is evil and to come in to the kingdom of God. Daniel begins to show us the way of Jesus who showed us the way of God. Now people draw hard lines between the old and the new testament but they really shouldn't. Almost everything Jesus says comes out of the old testament and everything Jesus does is consistent with the old testament. It's even consistent with the book of Daniel because this manner that we see beginning in Daniel Jesus will live out because of Jesus will of course be under the thumb of the Roman occupation but what kind of revolutionary will Jesus be? Will Jesus draw an army and march against Rome? Or will Jesus follow the path of humiliation? God willingly endures humiliation with and for the sake of his people because what he's trying to liberate his people from is a different kind of bondage. It is through that humiliation that the tyrants have a chance for freedom from their own bondage. The Israelites had their chance at being the big empire under David and Solomon. They subjugated their neighbors. Now they are being subjugated and the question is how does God really subvert the way of empire and the way of the world? You see tyrants are slaves to themselves. I'm going to put a slide in. Now what you begin to see and what will be evident throughout the book of Daniel is that tyrants are slaves to themselves. Again and again we're going to see how Daniel although he is a slave, although he is cut off, although he is in bondage is calm, cool, and collected even though his life is always at risk. But Nebuchadnezzar who is at the top of the heap who should have every advantage in the world he's slave to his own inflated sense of self-importance. He's a slave to his own appetites and desires and his own ego. He's a slave to fearing his lofty place. But God who has all power legitimately, he didn't take it from anyone, he made the world, is willing to be humiliated in order to help his creation be free from the internal chains they cannot see. He never loses sovereignty yet he suffers for them and with them. Now those of you who know the Jesus story can begin to see that this is finally fully revealed in Jesus. If you look at Elizabeth Elliot, she's a very amazing woman because in all the calamities of her life she saw this which is why she wrote this book that offended so many Christians and Christians were all upset because we're right there with Nebuchadnezzar and empire and the rest of the world and we want our best life now and Elizabeth Elliot says that's not the way God works. We know for example that time and again in the history of the Christian church the blood of the martyrs has been at seed so we are tempted to assume a simple equation here five men died this will mean X number of warrani Christians perhaps so perhaps not cause and effect are in God's hands. It is not the part of faith simply to let them rest is is it not the part of faith simply to let them rest there? God is God. I dethrone him in my heart if I demand that he act in ways that satisfy my idea of justice. It is the same spirit that taunted if thou be the son of God come down from the cross there is unbelief there is even rebellion in the attitude that says God has no right to do this to five men unless blank. The name of the auka is a Kichwa word meaning naked or savage. It is no longer used while rani is that is what the people call themselves. Their story at the time of the death of the men later when I lived with the Indians themselves and during all the years since as I've recounted and reflected on it in the light of my own subsequent experience has pointed to one thing God is God. If he is God he is worthy of my worship and my service I will find rest nowhere, but in his will and that will is infinitely immeasurably unspeakably beyond my largest notions of what he is up to. You