https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=V1EFRCHbuag

 Hi, this is Paul. I want to continue working on my project about the split world, and this is following Paul Maxwell's video on the hermeneutic of Jordan Peterson, and he starts getting into this whole philosophical theological trail that leads up to the thought of Jordan Peterson and I think he does a great job of it. The only difficulty is that in my experience as a pastor who are these people he's talking about? Who is Immanuel Kant? Who is Hegel? Why is he important? How does Hegel lead to Feuerbach, to to Marx, to to the modern world? What does this do with us? So I want to fill in some of this gap in terms of dealing with Paul's lead-up to the question of that when Paul Maxwell says biblical hermeneutic, that's a very laden term in terms of modernity and studying the Bible as science. I'm not going to unpack that all right now, but I want us to have a bigger frame of reference in terms of the entire conversation and where Peterson fits into it and why he's having some of the ripples that he's having. I had a good conversation yesterday with Ron Dart. You can watch that. I just posted that yesterday, but it all feeds into this. So we talked about this so that I looked at Vervecky's video, which I played in the video before, you have, as Charles Taylor calls, the continuous cosmos, as I call it, the integrated enchanted. This is the pre-axial age. We are small creatures and we live in the garden of the gods. You kind of see that represented in the Garden of Eden. Then the axial age comes and heaven and earth are split. You have a split world. You have the division between heaven and earth. Earth is a place of pain, of decay, of corruption, especially in Eastern traditions. Earth is illusory. Heaven is ideal, eternal, unchanging, true, perfect. Now there's tons that you can think about in this move in terms of, well, we discover that every example of love in this world will end with betrayal or death, but the idea of love is in the heavenlies and it doesn't decay. So you get into Plato and some of his ideas of forms and Vervecky in his videos will talk about the axial age and then he'll go into Plato and then he'll go into Aristotle and then he'll go into the synthesis of Plato and Aristotle. That is Platinus and then he'll get into Augustine, who was a neo-Platonist. The neo-Platonists followed Platinus and how Augustine uses... There went bucko. Keep trying to put the lobster up there and he falls down the fall of the lobster. So So of course Augustine, one of the great Western saints, you know, so all of this gets as part of the Christian story. Vervecky's video. Now one way that you can conceptualize of the story of civilization is trying to bridge the gulf between heaven and earth and one way to conceptualize the story of the Bible is that the story of the Bible is the story of the reunification of heaven and earth. Now often Christians and other religions try to escape earth into heaven, but if you read all the way to the end of the Bible and you look at Revelation 21, there's a new heavens and a new earth and it's all come together and that's what the story of the Bible is about. The story of the Tower of Babel is a story of technology, human beings using technology, social technology, construction technology in order to build a tower to the heavens and this is our way to build a tower up to reach up to God to look him in the eye and maybe even to displace God. One way of understanding the story of the Garden of Eden is that the man and the woman try to displace God. It's a coup d'etat where we no longer want God's administrations or desires of his world. We say to God, we want your stuff and we don't want you. It's another way to look at the parable of the prodigal son. Jacob's Ladder, no buffered, no Charles Taylor buffered self in Jacob's Ladder. Jacob in a dream sees a staircase going up to heaven, a stairway to heaven, Led Zeppelin. She's building a stairway to heaven. Jacob's Ladder has this stairway to heaven and angels are coming back and forth but now according to the Bible, earth is permeable to God but we can't get up there and that's the whole point of Jacob's Ladder that the angels come down. They're the messengers of God. Elijah goes up to heaven in a chariot of fire. God takes Enoch, maybe Moses, the assumption of Moses. So the Bible is full of these stories and again it's the tension between heaven and earth. Now eventually we're gonna have to get to Boltmann and the modernizers but before we get to before we get to Boltmann, we really have to deal with Kant and Hegel just as as Paul Maxwell said in his video. Now another way to think about philosophy is philosophy itself tries to bridge the gulf between the phenomenal, now we're into Kant, and the ideal and reason comes from above. Empiricism comes from below and if you remember the story that I keep telling after the Protestant Reformation, the turn away from the texts and the Protestant Reformation, Luther and the Protestants turn away from the authority of the institutional church, of the hierarchy of apostolic succession and they invest their authority in the text. After the Protestant Reformation and the wars of Europe, they're looking for a new stable platform upon which to build and they turn from texts to the natural world where we can learn what we need to from this stapler and we will use reason which is from above, we'll use the stuff of the world which is from below and we will bridge the gulf between earth and heaven and the hope is that if we can get our minds around it, well, what do we what do we what do we mean when we say that? If we can grasp it, what do we mean when we say that? What will we then have? And I think a lot of this, I just finished recording my sermon, a lot of this is about if we can only create models and systems that fully finally capture the world, then we then we what? Then we will have the world, then we will dominate the world, then we can finally colonize the world and colonize ourselves and again read CS Lewis is the abolition of man the third chapter because Lewis takes it all the way to that point and then says and what we will actually do is abolish humanity, but abolish for what? This is where you get into this conundrum with where Brett Weinstein keeps landing that we're going to transcend our robot programming, you just have to stop and say well, who's we? Well, is it the secret sacred self this this this true self that I imagine I have which which which isn't constructed by your genetics and your culture and all of this that we've been spending the last few hundred years trying to map out in order to capture the world. Where does this self come from or is this self merely a product of the material realities from the Big Bang forward? Which is of course the materialist conception. So what exactly are we trying to do? Well, that's that's a really good question, but try we continue and so Immanuel Kant comes on the scene and Immanuel Kant tries to as Paul Maxwell said tries to engage the question between the numinal and the phenomenal and the numinal is in the philosophy of Immanuel Kant. This is just scraped from Google who scraped it from from Botanica. This is the thing in itself. This is this is as opposed to what Kant called the phenomenal and so if you read Descartes and and philosophers within this period they recognize that there we don't see straight. We don't see right. We're we're prone to getting fooled with tricks and and Jordan Peterson does that with the passing the basketball ball the passing the basketballs and the guy in the monkey suit and and Vervecky does that with his nine-point problem. We we see the world through filters and and then the idea is that if like in Vervecky's thing if you can take your glasses off and look at the glass maybe if I can well, what am I doing there? Maybe if I can conceptually map what's in the glasses and how they interact with my eyes then maybe maybe I can conceptually grasp the whole thing and then maybe I can dominate it and and if you look at if you look at Augustine the libido dominante this is the this is the this is the the hungering desire that that both animates us and consumes us and Augustine writes about this a lot in the city of God. But but this is the goal if we can if we can figure out the phenomenal and and our illusion from it if we can escape that illusion then we can see and know the numinal and if we see and know it we believe in our hearts then we can dominate it then we can colonize it then we can control it. Now this is a this is a pretty ambitious thing for creatures that that struggle with their weight or struggle with eating right or don't even know what to eat or struggle with reigning in our sexual impulses or struggle with with money or struggle with relationships that that if we can finally see everything but again you're back to the Brett Weinstein circle where okay if you see everything what then who exactly is dominating or controlling or what exactly is dominating or controlling and actually in just about any endeavor of life including politics well we can't trust ourselves so we set up these structures but who is going to run the structures well people and the people will corrupt the structures and use them for their own ends and whether that's patreon and MasterCard or the Constitution and Trump or the desire to impeach him it doesn't matter we just keep telling these stories around and around again and again the same thing over and over so so the path to this stuff flows through Immanuel Kant and so we should get a sense of who Kant is and What's going on with him and as is often the case I'll use Philip Carey's excellent philosophy and religion in the West and he'll give us a sense of who Kant is and so we'll We'll jump in now Stay cars Now the turn to the subject remember means the turn to the subject of knowledge the subject of the sentence I know X right X is the object of knowledge I is the subject of knowledge Kant executed a turn to that subject of knowledge that I who knows that was more thorough than any any before him so the Now what's interesting about this as as Peterson notes is that You have this turn to the subject, but what we do with this is eliminate subjects It's a turn to an anonymous subject. It's a turn to a Mythical subject it's a turn to an impersonal subject. It's every man and any man which is also no man The notion that Kant is working with is that there's something which the subject of knowledge does Which makes experience of physical objects possible Now now this will be critical in the Jordan Peterson Sam Harris conversation and again the four videotaped conversations They all swirl around this issue Jordan Peterson keeps saying to Sam Harris You don't take Kant seriously doesn't say those words, but that's essentially what he says to him because we don't just see objects We see them through filtered eyes And we can't see them any other way and unless you account for these filters your whole Imagination of applying reason to a world of objects is simply fantasy right somehow Experience itself the sense experience of a world of experience of the empirical or natural world is Dependent on something that the subject of knowledge does I? Know is a very active verb The I who does the knowing in some sense makes the knowledge and That's the the notion that we need to articulate at this point in the lecture. This is the crucial notion How is it that I the knower make a world of experience possible? go back to Say the situation of an infant right we don't know what an infant's consciousness is like, but we can say a few things about it It's which is an amazing thing the fact that all of us have been infants And we don't know what that consciousness is like and so we we have psychologists and we test and we research but But we don't and when we say we don't know what it's like that's the Kono said in Spanish not the sabbath That's the that's this this deep sense of knowing that we know in how we know a person as Opposed to how we know some fact It seems to be unorganized the infant doesn't seem to have a notion of objects Kant suppose that without the organizing activity of the subject what you have is a rhapsody of sensations And you can imagine that as the situation of an infant right the example of an infant is my example rather than cons But I think it helps make sense of what Kant is doing Imagine the situation of an infant a rhapsody of sensations Kant would call it we've got sights Sounds smells all these sensations, but they don't cohere into a world of experience in particular What the infant doesn't have can be called object permanence. That's a phrase from modern recent psychology Imagine a rattle right you've got an infant looking at a rattle the infant closes its eyes opens its eyes again There's the rattle again we as adults will think of it as the same rattle as before But that's a concept that the infant doesn't really have there seems to be strong evidence that the that the in the infant really doesn't understand that that Blob of visual sensation as a single object and now when we say well first of all we can't peer into the brain of an infant But when we say the instant infant doesn't really have or the infant doesn't really understand What we're really saying here is that the infant doesn't really isn't really able to control That the infant isn't able to colonize that the infant isn't able to take whatever the thing is that is the self of the infant and Oppose impose it on its world and control it in a way that the infant can achieve the ends that it desires That's what we mean by this Doesn't identify it as a permanent object through time and doesn't connect the sound of the rattle and the touch of the rattle and the sight of the rattle Doesn't objectify those sensations and put them together as one object All right, it can't manage it like we easily manage a rattle and even an infant to the degree that we in fact do manage infants The infant does not to use comps terms synthesize the manifold in sensation Which means we got this multitude of sensations and in order to make it into a world of experience we have to put them all together and Attach them to this notion of objects the very notion of an object see and right there So it's the it's the it's the subject interacting with the objective world in a productive way That actually again implicit in all of this is that it's achieving the ends It's achieving the goals that that agent that infant that being has for it And and when we see as we call developing as that infant grows and rattles become dull Because you take that thing and you shake it and you shake it shake it. I could shake this rattle all day long I'm just gonna hear those beans move in the little plastic And we're bored with that and we're on to the next thing we're ambitious We've got the libido dominante that's that's working and working and working in us knowledge a continuing object of experience Is something that we in a sense have to make We the knowers we the subjects the eye who knows has to know that object We have to objectify it or to use the object to make it We have to objectify it or to use a term that I'll introduce at this point We have to conceptualize it as an object if we the knowers don't conceptualize those objects We don't get objects of experience. All we get is that Fantasmagoria that rat rhapsody of sensations a bunch of sights and sounds that are all kind of flowing around in our minds But don't add up to a world that we can experience a world about which we can have empirical knowledge scientific knowledge We have to conceptualize the world in order to have a world of objects that we can experience So the world of experience is in part a product of our conceptualizing activity Okay, the world of experience is in part a product of our conceptualizing activity And again This was the point that Peterson kept trying to make the Sam Harris in those videos and it doesn't appear that Peterson was ever satisfied that Sam got it In activity we start with what you could call sense data, right data means given So we got these givens these these sensations We start with them, but we have to organize them conceptualize them in order to produce a world of experienced objects So the subject the I who knows objects Contributes to the possibility of their being objects of experience That's constant basic notion if the subject doesn't conceptualize if I don't conceptualize and turn those sensations into objects Identify them conceptualize them as objects then I don't have any experience of all at all All I have is a bunch of sensations running through my mind that I can't remember can't Get any empirical knowledge about can't make any theories about right I'm just in the situation of an infant who doesn't know anything about the world So the key notion here is that there's a subjective basis a basis in the subject or the knower for the possibility of objects of experience there's a subjective ground for the objectivity of empirical knowledge in other words your Objectivity is dependent on the subject And again that you listen to that you say well that doesn't make sense because the definition of objective is that it's not dependent on the Subject but this is where we get into this question of a monarchical vision of an imagined clean room That there's this world of objects that I can somehow Interact with and cons point is you once you once you enter into that world you Contaminate it because the only way you can apprehend it is through the subject Consciousness Empirical knowledge Objectivity is dependent on a certain kind of subjectivity the kind of subjectivity that conceptualizes the world in terms of Permanent objects with permanent qualities colors and such which says oh that color that little baby blue color that belongs to the rattle Which is also the source of that sound right it connects things synthesizes things conceptualizes things and the result is a world of objects of rattles of people of The kind of objects you can do physics about the kind of objects about which you can get physical and experimental and empirical knowledge So empirical knowledge the kind of knowledge you get in the sciences is dependent on that conceptualizing activity of our minds right The objectivity of the sciences is dependent on that conceptualizing activities activity of our minds Now one of the basic principles of conceptualization To move to another illustration is cause and effect Remember the discussion we had about that with Hume Right we've got these patterns now We don't know what ultimately produces those patterns So how can we know? For sure that this pattern of cause and effect is going to keep on going right? Human said well we just have this custom right we have this custom of expecting Cause and effect to happen that way you know whenever a billiard ball hits another billiard billiard ball We have this expectation that the second billiard ball will move the expectation doesn't get disappointed So we've got this custom of expecting to happen and that's good enough to get by with But Kant wants to do something more than that. He's more ambitious than that. He wants to say In order for us to have scientific knowledge we have to have some a priori knowledge about causality a And if you remember again Sam Harrison Jordan Peterson how often in those videos Jordan Peterson presses this a priori knowledge It's what they dealt with over and over again a priori a space P r i o r i means knowledge in advance of experience right in order to have Metaphysical knowledge about the physical world and Kant thinks we can have metaphysical knowledge about the physical world He's proposing to make metaphysics into a science for the first time right in order to have that knowledge concept See now even that turn or he's proposing to make metaphysics into a science What does what does that mean? Again, I think it means this conceptualization that we will turn it into something that we can dominate that we can manipulate Then you have to ask the question well, who's we that knowledge Kant says we've got to have this Conceptualization going on but we have to have that conceptualization. We have to have a priori knowledge in advance of experience in order to have the possibility of Physical science because physical science has to depend on the assumption that there's cause and effect going on right physical science The kind of thing you do in a laboratory takes for granted that the law of cause and effect works It has to take that for granted in advance It can't prove that you can't go into a physics laboratory and prove that the law of cause and effect Will work in the future because everything you do in the physics lab laboratory takes for granted that the cause and effect already is operating right you can't prove what you've already assumed and Physics has to assume that cause and effect is valid. How can it do that? All right How can we establish in advance of all empirical knowledge that cause and effect is a valid principle of the physical world? Well Kant's argument is it's a valid principle of the physical world and we know that in advance Because we put it there our minds put cause and effect in the world of experience There wouldn't be a world of experience without us conceptualizing the world of experience in terms of cause and effect so that conceptualization in terms of cause and effect Generates the world of experience and the world of experience is the physical world for Kant So that guarantees that any world of experience we have will necessarily have cause and effect in it Right so physics which works in the world of experience will always find that things work in terms of cause and effect That's just how it has to go The way to think about this I'd suggest is that instead of finding the ultimate causal power in the essences of things in the world as in Aristotle Kant is suggesting that the source of causality is in us right in the subject not in the object That means that as in Locke we don't know the essences of things The way Kant will put it is we don't know the way things are in themselves Remember the numinal the way things are in themselves All we know is how we experience them The way they appear in our experience right that's what physical knowledge is It's knowledge of the way objects have to appear in our experience knowledge of the way objects appear when we conceptualize them using cause and effect and these other notions like object and Sensations or object and Colors for instance right when you think of a rattle with a color you're thinking of a thing or a substance With a quality or color right that's another category just like cause and effect if we didn't have those Categories to conceptualize the world with we wouldn't have a world of experience So every world of experience we can possibly imagine will have those categories cause and effect substance and Quality and so on so forth So that's why we can have a priori knowledge of the physical world in advance of experience But we cannot know things as they are in themselves apart from our experience that so we can't there's the gulf There's the gulf. Okay. Now we're not conceptualizing or representing it as a gulf between heaven and earth we're representing it as a gulf between the experience that we have and the things as they are the real World as we like to use that word Experience that's the crucial limitation that Kant wants to set on the ambitions of real reason so the way Kant will put this is That because we do know the world of experience we do know physical objects, right? We know that they will behave according to laws of cause and effect. That's a form of knowledge It's the knowledge of physics. So Kant will call himself an empirical realist in terms of the world of experience He's a realist. He thinks that we have real knowledge about those things Right, but he calls it also the world of appearance the world of how things have to appear to us in experience That's a real world for Kant, but it's empirically real. It's the real world of experience Whereas things as they are in themselves, right the deep inner essence of things or whatever we can't know that So con will call himself a transcendental idealist at the same time as calling himself an empirical realist Right the the world of experience is real. It's got real objects Even though you know, we contribute to how those objects are constituted Now at some point I want to bring it into you right in his Gifford lectures because one of the things that Wright notes is the difference between So we're gonna have all these Germans over here concept Prussian the Germans Austrian Swiss all these from North central not really Central Europe Central Europe's further Further east but but German the German the German language world These good they're gonna be German idealists and and you can see these You know, even these terms kind of get swapped around a lot but so you're going to have Kant and Hegel and then we're gonna go to Boltman and we're gonna go to tillick and we're gonna look at all these individuals coming out Of this coming out of the this German speaking world and now NT right then is going to contrast those to Some of the English remember Hume is English So so you're gonna get a different you're gonna get a different take on it from the English Philosophers then you're going to get from the German philosophers Dad just another confusing layer into this this long complicated story Constituted but what we can't know is the world of things as they are in themselves And that's the sense of which Kant is a transcendental idealist. That is Everything we know is something to which our mind makes a contribution our ideas Contribute to making the the world of experience and that sense Kant is an idealism an idealist, right? He's an idealist because our ideas help constitute the way the world is So conscious in effect denying that we had no essences He's denying that we have this intellectual intuition that Plato thought we had where you could see essences, right? We don't have anything like that We have sense perception and then we have this conceptualizing activity and that sets the limits of reason For what that means is that our reason cannot operate outside of the limits of experience Outside of the limits of conceptualization, right? Our knowledge is confined to the world of experience the world of physics Everything beyond that is belief not knowledge and yet now this is an interesting Right there belief not knowledge. So you've got another gulf that's developing there. We believe this belief We believe this but we don't know it. Well, okay. What do you mean? What does it mean to know something and and What sneaks in under underneath here is to know something is to be able to Manipulate it and control it and to colonize it and to master it Now this is an interesting point reason wants to have knowledge of what is beyond the world of experience That's why Plato talked about the the immortality of the soul and the forms which are beyond the world of sense experience Right Kant says we can't have knowledge of that sort of thing and yet we want it Reason itself desires knowledge of the whole ball of wax of the origin of the world why the world hangs together Whether the soul is immortal reason itself wants the kind of knowledge that Plato wanted Reason in a sense is romantic reason has infinite aspirations It keeps wanting to understand how everything hangs together, but it can't do that It can only understand how the world of experience hangs together We can only have a metaphysics of nature a metaphysics of how the physical world hangs together Not a metaphysics that explains God and the soul So reason with these infinite aspirations this desire to go beyond all experience needs to be limited needs to be put in its place That's the work of critique and that's why Kant's great Great work of philosophy is called the critique of pure reason Pure reason reason the reason of metaphysics Wants to get to prove the existence of God and the soul which are beyond all experience and it can't All right. All it can do is show about the metaphysical structure of Physics as we have to conceive it or conceptualize it when we're working with the world of experience So what we what is beyond the bounds of possible experience? We cannot know about we cannot know the essence of things as they are in themselves we cannot know the nature of the soul or God all those objects of traditional metaphysics the things that Plato and even Aristotle and Aquinas and Augustine thought that we could know about So you can see Kant is going to end up rejecting the traditional proofs for the existence of God now now it's interesting that this What Kant has pulled in here has become in many ways has has won has run the table and That then gets into our language that we say well Well, I can know That I'm holding a stapler but I can't know God and and right in there comes all of the religious language that no you can know God Back and forth you go back and forth you go and and so that's you know Jung says I don't believe I know and so now we implicit in Kant we get this movement towards well So so I can know things that are in my experiential realm within the realm of Consciousness within this this domain that I experience What if I can pull God into this domain? What if I can pull God into this domain well, then I can know him well, you've got the incarnation you've got Jesus of course Psychedelics I was just watching the the video that rebel wisdom posted today I'm an older guy who studied a bunch of this stuff and was thinking about maps of language for all of that maybe I'll do a video on that that I Think there's stuff to talk about in there, but but you know, well, what do you mean? You know, well I experience it. Well what you do then is you have obviously set up a hierarchy and you've said well now I've got experience over reason But now we have to bring Kant back in and say okay, but you have experience but that's the point experience is part of the phenomenal and And reason well, where does reason come in? Well, we bring So so I have an experience Well, what do you bring to that experience? I bring all sorts of things to that experience I bring all of these filters that experience I bring Interpretive filters to that experience. So let's talk about the Bible. The Bible is the Word of God The Bible is the revelation of God. I don't care what kind of whether you believe in mechanical inspiration Whether you believe that you know an angel of the God dictated this text to you every time you approach this text you approach it with your you approach it with your a priori filters and You might say well that sounds troubling. Yeah, but it also is explaining in terms of Why we always have the dilemma of interpretation because we're always approaching these things with our filters We can't help but interact with them with our filters. And in fact, we always violate the sanctity of the clean room and You know, I'm using that language and suddenly I'm using Clean unclean Common holy and you begin to say oh my goodness all this Old Testament stuff maps onto this stuff, doesn't it? Yeah, it does God as well as for the immortality of the soul and for free will Here's how the rejection goes And now mind you he's not rejecting religion he's not rejecting the existence of God he's saying we cannot know About God and the soul, but we can believe them what he's ultimately doing He's suggesting is setting limits to reason in order to make room for faith So here's his critiques of the the key Arguments for the existence of God. Let me give you first a sort of Example of the kind of critique he makes Think of the Aristotelian argument for a first cause Right all the causes in the world have to go back to a first cause or a first mover Remember that argument from Aquinas, right? You've got this series of causes within the world of the first cause And you've got this series of causes within the world of physics the world of experience which lead back to a first cause Now Kant claims that this argument can't possibly work because the first cause is not an object of experience We cannot have sense knowledge of the first cause or first mover, which is God We can know about individual causes and movers within the world of experience, but we can't know that first cause so we Prove the existence of this first cause reason is overstepping its bounds It's talking about something about which it can have a concept But it can't prove anything because we can only prove things a priori an advance of experience If it's bound into the way we conceptualize the world of experience, right? So a priori proves which had been the basis of metaphysics are now confined to the world of experience We can have a priori knowledge about the world of experience We cannot have a priori rational knowledge in advance of all experience about things that have nothing to do with experience at all We cannot know God that way Kant claims so Kant in fact goes through the three Traditional types of proof for God's existence He's the one who identifies these three types of proofs as the only three possible proofs for God's existence the only three Metaphysical proofs for God's existence There's the ontological proof which we identified with Anselm and Descartes there's cosmological proofs arguing from The existence of the world to a creator of the world and there's teleological proofs arguing from design in the world to an intelligent designer Although as a footnote Kant calls the teleological proofs Physico-theological It's been traditional since then to call it a teleological proof from the Greek word telos meaning purpose or design Well, let's look at those the last two types of proof first the cosmological and the teleological these are both proofs about the structure of the world and they they trace the structure nature of the world back to God Now that is they start with the world of experience Right. We see cause and effect in the world or actually we put it there by conceptualizing it We see design in the world we see the evidence of it and then we try to trace that back To God as the source of the existence of the world or the source of the order in the world So what we're trying to do is begin with matters of experience and arrive at a concept of God and there Kant says That's where we go wrong Because all we can get through pure reason is a concept of God, right? Pure reason can give us a concept of God But it can give us no experience of the reality that coincides with the concept all we get is reasons concept of God and that's not good enough because No Argument can show that we can get from the concept of God to the existence of God and in many ways again when you follow Peterson and Harris especially when they're with Brett Weinstein Because the two talks with Brett seemed to keep a little bit more philosophical The talks with Douglas Murray seemed to be a little bit more pragmatic and political But this is often the the complaint about Peterson is Peterson leaves us merely with a concept and I think again this shows the Kantian how how Peterson has whether directly through reading Kant or just by virtue of the way that we are all downstream from Kant and how he has so deeply impacted Our assumptions Peterson's conception of God is purely concept well and Then when you and if if in fact that was Peterson's that's where Peterson left off Sam Harris would be comfortable and Brett Weinstein would be comfortable, but Peterson doesn't leave off he keeps Stepping over the line and saying I'm not gonna shut that door. I'm not gonna completely close it and at some point Sam Harris tries to bully him on the resurrection and Peterson kind of concedes But you know Peterson then he he'll still step back. He's he's seen too much he's done too much and maybe Sam Harris should do more mushrooms or something because Peterson is is not willing to quite leave it there in the realm of conception But he's but he's kind of stuck there and he's stuck there in a sense with Kant and Andy's got his reasons of God The ontological argument would show that if it worked and that's why for Kant the ontological argument is actually the most basic and fundamental Of all the proofs for the existence of God the idea of the ontological argument is that you can start with the concept of God and Show that by the very nature of the concept This is the concept of something that has to exist that if you understand the concept of God then you know that this kind of thing has to exist and Kant's argument and this is really interesting and and again and again when I listen to Peterson the ontological argument comes to mind because And I think that's part of the reason Peterson is bread-pilling people because he takes him right to the line and you almost get to the point of believing well, then Everything is set for this For God to be there, of course, he must be there What's what's the downside and stepping over the line? But Peterson has a significant downside if Peterson does formally step over that line That line is a has a big social value And if you're on one side or the other The people on the other side will either accept you or dismiss you based on that So Peter keeps straddling Peterson keeps straddling the line and that's why again going back to my my office video That's why he's so So darn interesting. He keeps he's oscillating right on that line drives us nuts But also excites us Against that is classic and crucial Kant argues that existence is not a real predicate What he means by that is Existence is not like white or great or intelligent or any other quality of a thing, right? you can take a thing and say There exists something that is white and the whiteness is a real predicate or quality of the thing But the existence is not a real predicate The existence cannot be part of the concept of a thing Is the the concept of thing can contain all sorts of predicates, right? All swans are white. Let us say Or all human beings are rational. It's part of the concept of a human being to be rational It's part of the concept of a swan to be white That they thought this before they discovered black swans in Australia, but leave that be The notion is that that we can have certain concepts and certain predicates or qualities belong to the very nature of that concept but existence Existence is not such a quality. It's not a quality that you can add to the concept of things The way Kant will put it is 20 real dollars are not any more than 20 imaginary dollars The Difference between the real dollars and the non-existent dollars is not a quality, right? There's still 20 of them whether they're existent or non-existent the point is that The existence itself doesn't have the same status as the 20 or the white or the green or all those other qualities This is a hard notion to grasp let me see if I can illustrate it for you from modern formal logic It turns out that in modern logic again existence is not a predicate existence works differently than other notions For instance if you wanted to say all swans are white in modern logic You would say for all X if X is a swan then X is white, right? You've got the the predicate swan. You've got the predicate white and you link them Suppose you wanted to say there is a white swan Then you say there exists an X such that it is it is a swan and it is white, right? the Existence notion is an operator rather than a predicate right there exists an X Right such that X is white X is a swan The the predication is X is white X is a swan, but you don't say just X exists You've got to say there exists an X such that right? So the there exists an X is what's called in mathematics an operator, right? It's not a predicate It's existence and non-existence is handled in an entirely different way than this notion of predication So Kant argues as a result of this that if existence is not a real predicate Then you cannot get from the concept of God to the existence of God because no concept contains the notion of its own existence right No concept of a swan contains the notion that this swan has to exist, right? It's just a concept whether it exists or not is something we can only determine through experience Right. We can only determine whether a swan exists by seeing it right or having some kind of experience of it or Inferring from experience to some other thing that we can experience but God is beyond all possible experience and therefore We cannot infer his existence He's a cut the distance of God is a concept we can have we can have a concept of God But we cannot actually have experience of existence so The notion here is that? Metaphysics has its limits Kant is establishing this revolution because he wants to Establish metaphysics as a science for the first time He's gonna turn his back on the kind of metaphysics you get in Plato and Aristotle Augustine and Aquinas where you claim to have Knowledge Actually kind of intellectual vision of the forms of things. We don't have that kind of knowledge We don't have that kind of intuition. Maybe the angels do Kant is willing to suggest there might be such a thing as intellectual intuition or intellectual vision, but we don't have that kind of Intellectual perception we have to perceive things through the senses through our experience and we have to generate that experience to this Conceptualizing activity and we cannot know anything that goes beyond that conceptualizing activity So Kant is setting limits to metaphysical reason That does not mean that there isn't a God it just means that Our knowledge of God or rather our belief in God is going to come through a different way than through metaphysics We won't have knowledge of God. We will have Kant thinks belief in God but we're going to get to it through a different route than proofs and It's beyond our experience. It's actually is rooted in our ethical life our life as People who choose the good and the right We'll leave it there and the next chapter as he said earlier before I started playing us He gives two chapters to Kant the only part other philosopher He gave two chapters to was Plato because Kant is this important and then he'll go into the categorical imperative and the basis for religion and again, if if you've got an audible account, I highly recommend philosophy and Religion in the West, but I'm gonna skip over this next chapter although it's also very good you get to schleiermacher who Know what happens here and this is now with schleiermacher. We're not really dealing with the philosopher. We're dealing with a theologian and schleiermacher So we have this gulf between the noumenal the phenomenal and the noumenal and that's what Paul Maxwell talks about and And this is in some ways analogous to the gulf between heaven and earth and the gulf between the forms and our life in the cave for Plato So you've got that you've got this gulf and this gulf then haunts both German philosophy and German theology and now as many of you were listening to Philip Carey talk about Kant and his limits of reason and he's talking about experience I know again because of the conversation that we've been having a lot of years, but I can experience God and then you look at At Benjamin Boyce's Hierarchy of experience, you know, you have this mystic class and prophet class over cleric class and you know church pew sitter class This is commonly set up and so we can have this experience of religion and also within the church you have elements of this Pentecostals for example, there's a self validation of experience if you are speaking in tongues or if you're slain by the spirit or if you're in this Incredibly emotive religious experience you have this feeling of awe non-christian areas or I walk into Yosemite maybe a nature religion or I do a psychedelic with a Shaman and so then I have this other experience and so What happens is of course well, well now I experience so now I know and and that again is part of You know part of this entire framework we're dealing with. Well, well Schleiermacher Because of the skepticism that's built into Kant and because Kant wins so much. Well, then what is the basis for religion? And so what you have in is this this series of theologians that keep trying to save christianity from skepticism and and they no longer believe what is socially pressured to be naive Things such as the authority of the bible or the relationship between the bible and history and all that kind of thing So so then you kind of slip off into mythology And mythology is handy again. We can listen to NT Wright's Gifford lectures on this mythology is handy because well The bible isn't about The bible isn't about What stuff happened in history? The bible is speaking in mythological terms which are true for all times and places Okay, so that's a move that you make and peterson makes that move a lot. So It says well in contrast to the fundamentalists whatever happened in genesis Well, we can see that it's mythologically true and then then one of the interesting things that peterson does With with genesis as he says well, it's kind of historically true, but it's a Representational history in that you have the fruit and the woman and the snake and our development as as pattern Seeing creatures and and all of this going on and and so it's in that way again that peterson is so interesting because he's He's saying well the bible is history, but it's history spoken in a certain kind of way And you see that's not Many contemporary theologians will just look at the synoptic problem and maybe you know esther and I would have a debate on this but What how do matthew mark luke and john represent history? Now what we tend to do as NT Wright notes in the english tradition is we polarize it did or it didn't happen Well, then you say well, let's say let's say it didn't happen But then I really want to keep religion because I find it's helpful for keeping the family together and it's helpful for for for giving me a sense of meaning and purpose and and fulfillment and community religion is is tremendously Religion is tremendously useful It binds and blinds it brings communities together all the sociological stuff that you can hear from jonathan height or or adam friended Religion is terribly useful in those terms Okay, so we want to keep it around but we're skeptical in that the old beliefs of believing that the bible has Historical validity or we get the positism believing that the lot the bible is completely historically valid and to the point that there's two jericho's with the blind man and You can read josh mcdowell and and and some people take the bible so that Well, it has to be true in every way. So So this problem of whether jesus was crucified on a thursday or a friday We've got to solve this problem and we're not going to use let's say the move that john has jesus being crucified on thursday in order to have him align with the the sacrifice of the lambs thus connecting him to To exodus and you know all of these different moves that have gone on A lot if you listen to christians trying to work through the question of the questions surrounding the bible and history You cut through that if you just go to mythology and say well It's the bible is mythically true and and that's kind of nice in order to kind of push away the questions about about Uh history in the bible and you can see these things played out a lot I mentioned on twitter that that I was going to mention john suck sermon now john suck is a former christian reformed pastor who left the christian reformed church and Became a minister of the united church of canada a lot of this because he wrote this book Not john suck not sure a pastor's journey towards Uh From faith to doubt and he tells it's It's biogray. It's autobiographical, but he he talks about this journey that he makes from Being a good christian reform boy who actually rose to the height of the christian reform hierarchies He was an editor of the banner. He was a missionary in the philippines. He was a a pastor who pastored you know Important churches so john in terms of christian reform hierarchies john suck reached the top in many ways He reached elite status of christian reform hierarchy and he got all the way to the top and decided He was filled with doubt He had too much doubt to actually believe a lot of the more rigorous things that being a rigorous Subscriptional things that being a christian reform minister requires and so he jumped to the united church of canada He calls himself at least last time I read on his blog a weak theist And john and I will swap emails or social media comments and so on and so forth. John's a good guy He has a church in he has a church in ontario But he's no longer a christian foreign minister because he can no longer believe these things and so I noted this week He was he was talking about the virgin birth and the resurrection and and as is the as is the attempt in many churches After cont after all of this philosophical talk We can't we can't know these things We can't know if jesus came out of the tomb and and even john even sam harris can't completely say it didn't happen But sam harris will say almost certainly not and you know the same for the virgin birth and well We can't say these things. So so then what to do with religion. We've got all these buildings. We've got all these traditions We've got all this meaning and if you just kind of throw the whole thing away And some of you have done that and you know that there's a cost to that So so why can't we keep all of the stuff that we know is very real like the family stuff and the traditions and the things we feel why can't we keep all that stuff and not worry about all of the The messy questions about history and metaphysics and all of that. Well, well schleiermacher comes on the scene And and so then you get this this feeling Feeling as the basis of religion And and schleiermacher god consciousness piety as feeling the feeling of utter dependence I mentioned that in a previous video feeling of utter dependence as god consciousness And so what happens in christian theology and in christian churches, especially protestant churches, but also to some degree and In catholic churches, I don't know if the orthodox has their liberal wing. They probably do But but okay, so we want to keep christianity and so let's have it be about feelings and And then this really is the dawn of kind of this liberal church tradition within christianity and Because there's all this skepticism of things we can't know about so then you have schleiermacher And then you get to hagel which is a philosophical history of religion now What paul maxwell does in his video is he He talks about how He basically looks at jordan peterson looking at let's say a succession of ancient near east religions and wars leading to thesis antithesis and then marduk and marduk is Is other gods were subsumed into marduk? And and paul maxwell uses that as an example of peterson's hegelianism I I think actually the hegelianism of the waters that peterson is swimming in goes a lot deeper than that and I can we can see that as Hegelianism sets up fryerbach which will eventually set up freud and marx the and the hermeneutics of suspicion But what's important to see from hegel here is that This okay the skepticism which says well, we can't really have knowledge of god in this way As kant says we have limits a critique of pure reason We can't get to god from reason if we're working from below here. Remember we're trying to have the the tower of babel Well, then the question of where is god and what is god and now if you listen to hegel So i'm going to play some of philip carry on hegel If you if you listen and you begin to get to get a sense of what hegel is talking about about spirit or better geist Well, well god is And this comes through in peterson's conversation with sam harris god is the a priori structure now again peterson is an open Agnostic in that he's not he's not ready to close it off And say well, that's all god is Weinstein and harris are ready to close it off and say that's all god is but peterson's not ready to do that and and peterson Not ready to go there. And so peterson says at least we can we can see We when we talk when we use the word god we can do so with philosophical credibility Within this framework and and hegel is really important for setting up For in a sense relocating god from the heavenlies down here among us in a special way So i'm going to rearrange some things. I think i'll just pause while I do that So you don't have to watch me do it So I am going to play a little bit of carry on schleiermacher because I think this will help and this will also help contextualize when you look at what religious con what has happened to religious conversations in terms of for lack of a better term more new age or yungian or spiritual but not religious conversations because schleiermacher I think is important in that now schleiermacher was speaking to a Christian context well schleiermacher was deeply embedded in christendom And now here later we get to this but I think you can you can hear the connections Right as if what religion fundamentally is is the feeling I have when i'm alone in the woods Or when I get home and I get get in touch with my feelings As if religion didn't really have to do with our life in a community in a public space now schleiermacher does bring and and if you listen to my my conversation with with ron dart And we're talking about peterson and peterson Has not really made the move from the individual to the communal As such with respect to a lot of the values that he's bringing to the table And and that's where Religion is something now with peterson. It's not about feeling so much But with schleiermacher schleiermacher really says well, we can't we can't know this stuff So they've completely bought into khan we can't know this stuff, but I still have feelings. I do have experience and so That will be religion and that will be where religion lies It does bring the church into things because the church is necessary for communicating god consciousness, but that's secondary, right? The primary thing is god consciousness. The primary thing is that feeling likewise schleiermacher and and you can also have a sense in this of Well Let's say an evangelical one of the many evangelicals in north america who will say well i'm a christian I believe in god and and I was baptized at some point But I don't go to church and I don't participate in a community, but I do believe in god Well, how do you know you believe in god because I feel it here and I I wear a golden cross or I have a bible or I pray sometimes like when i'm in trouble or I need a parking space or Or it's it's again. It's about this feeling. This is now we're downstream from hagel and schleiermacher Likewise schleiermacher has a hard time making sense of christian doctrines, which aren't about consciousness, right? He doesn't have much to say about crucifixion and resurrection as or the role they play in redemption Um his interpretation of the events of crucifixion and resurrection focus on the god consciousness of jesus What we need to know about jesus is precisely his personality so later in the 19th century uh, you have the The liberal protestant quest for the historical jesus, which is fundamentally a quest for a lost personality I attempt attempt to recover the personality and consciousness of jesus to communicate it to other people And and you can again hear and so my friend john sook and his own personal journey from faith to doubt If you read his sermons he You know, this is this is about consciousness this is about Recapturing consciousness, but now in church we're going to recapture consciousness through moral activity again. That's post-continent We're going to recapture consciousness through through feelings through through knowing each other through action in the world through making this world A better place now now remember and what we're also beginning to subtly see remember in the axial age. We have this split world well part of what happens with with protestant liberalism Is that and and with and with secularism in the west is is well We're living in the iron box of of secularism here and there's no up. We're in this box. We can't know anything Maybe there's something out there, but we can't know it So So we're in this box. And so now what we have to bring heaven On earth utopian look at my look at my conversation with the south african filmmaker But as I think we've seen again and again and we saw in the 20th century Every time we tried to bring heaven on earth. We also seem to bring hell up into earth, too Because now suddenly and miroslav volff gets at this I think very well now suddenly You do have to sort out the good and the bad if If if we're going to realize the utopia that We want to expect and in fact demand Well, you're gonna have to break some eggs to have that utopia because here's the irony about utopia. It's always Turn to the subject your utopia This is utopia as you conceive of it Well, what if someone else doesn't conceive of utopia the same way what if in your utopia there's organ music and in somebody else's utopia There's heavy metal music. Well, i'm gonna like organ and heavy metal music because i'll transcend it all with music Well, what about well, how noisy is your utopia going to be maybe your utopia is going to be about? Silence Well, is he gonna have music or you're gonna have silence or you can have ocean or you can have mountains Or oceans and mountains together This is how people are and people are dramatically People are have a dramatically difficult difficult time figuring out in fact what they want So so schleiermacher says we're going to solve this by by going towards feelings now Now kant comes along and and god gets relocated into kant. Okay, so now we're going to pick up on hegel What arose early in the 19th century was a new historical consciousness a new philosophy of history where wherein history ends up having a Philosophical importance that it didn't have before One way of thinking about why this works this way is to To think about that romantic sense and that kantian sense that mind shapes nature, right? That the human mind categorizes conceptualizes objectifies nature so that if you look at nature you're finding out something about mind right well Likewise, if you look at society you're finding out something about the shape of human consciousness at a particular era, right? Roman society would presumably reflect roman consciousness greek society at the time of playda would presumably reflect greek consciousness and therefore history Both natural history and especially social history will be a history of human consciousness a history of human being That's a new way of thinking about history Before the 19th century history was More limited in its aims and goals for instance The history of religion might be what a protestant would do in order to explain why protestants are More like the early church than catholics are and of course catholics would return the favor by retelling the history of the church so that It's it's clear that Catholicism is more in continuity with the early church But now in the 19th century you get a new consciousness The early church for instance will be recognized as having a profoundly different consciousness than we in the modern 19th century There's a huge historical distance those people are a different kind of consciousness than than we are How does our consciousness relate to their consciousness? How can we appropriate their views? And then there's a story about how western consciousness got from Say the consciousness of the early church or the consciousness of ancient greece to where we are now That history therefore is the history of who we are To tell the story of past consciousness is like to tell like telling the autobiography of the western mind Now again every time you hear we ask yourself Who's we? history of who we are What is that we? The western mind Right, that's a new approach to history a new approach to philosophy If we want to know what the human mind is in the west We need to tell the story of its origin and its development. It's unfolding We tell the story of the consciousness of ancient greece the consciousness of the early church the consciousness of the middle ages The consciousness of the enlightenment and now finally the consciousness of 19th century germany where it all comes to its culmination At least that's what many 19th century germans thought the great representative of this philosophical approach to history and historical consciousness Was the german philosopher hegel? early in the 19th century Hegel's project was to show the rational basis of all history by uncovering the the logic that unfolds in history It's not an accident that we get from The consciousness of ancient greece to the consciousness of the early church to the consciousness of the middle ages Finally culminating in the consciousness of hegel himself. There's a logic that leads through all these stages History has a rational shape Because there's this logic working itself out in history One way that hegel puts this Is that the real is the rational the rational is the real what is real historically is ultimately rational it makes sense There's a a logic or a dialectic that leads up to it Well, we'll get to that point. But first I need to introduce you to hegel's key philosophical work Really his his greatest philosophical work by most destinations. It's called the phenomenology of spirit See right there. You got to pay attention to the title We've been talking about the phenomenal and the numinal Well, we can't know the numinal after khand We know the phenomenal so now suddenly we're going to pay all the attention to the phenomenal And and that's implicit in schleierbach's theology. Remember schleierbach is a theologian not a philosopher. Hegel's a philosopher the Phenomenology of spirit now this to us. Well, is that religious or or what what is spirit? What is spirituality? That's always again, it's a word that fudges every time you hear somebody use it You have to pause and ask yourself now. What exactly do you mean by that and you have to try and locate What are you mapping? What are you? What are you trying to say with this? Well khand is going to have the the phenomenology of spirit now spirit Again, if you listen to paul maxwell's video he talks about hegel with spirit now Now Peter carrey is gonna or philip carrey is gonna say let's use geist because if we use the foreign word with that Or the german word what that tends to do is help us help loosen us up in english From pouring in all of this stuff that we connect with spirit into that Which will actually probably lead us astray in some points and at least if we use this word We're less familiar about we can we can give it more of a pristine and newer a fresh A fresher context in terms of how to try to understand and hopefully hear hegel a little bit more clearly of spirit or phenomenology of geist The words in the title themselves need a little bit of explanation in fact need a lot of explanation and We can learn a lot about hegel just by explaining that those two key terms the phenomenology of spirit or geist Let's start with that word spirit or geist The german word geist means both mind and spirit like the french word espoil Uh, the word geistish means intellectual, right? But uh similar words are geistreich and so on can mean spiritual, right? so Geist is related to by the way the english word ghost But there's nothing ghostly about it sort of like the holy ghost in in ancient or old english liturgies, right if you use Uh the old anglican prayer books. It's the holy ghost which means of course the holy spirit Geist is spirit in that sense not in the sense of ghost but in the sense of spiritual being mental or intellectual being so, um, you can see that geist is related to that whole tradition in platonism of mind or intellect and it's it's related to spirituality because Of that tendency in christian platonism to associate the platonist dichotomy between sensible and intelligible To the christian dichotomy between flesh and spirit, right? The sensible is the fleshly the intelligible is the spiritual so that the realm of intellect is the realm of spirit Right. That's that's what geist designates for hegel So geist in hegel is a it's a good deal like platinus's divine mind Or augustin's divine mind, right that that divine intellect The difference and here is a crucial difference The difference is that in platonism both in platinus and in christian platonists like augustin The divine mind is unchanging. It's separate from the visible world separate from the historical world It's rich in intellectual content that has all those platonic forms in it And it's always eternally been rich in intellectual content In contrast hegel's notion of geist is historical Hegel's geist is a zeitgeist or zeitgeist in german z-e-i-t Geist g-e-i-s-t That's the spirit of the age it's usually translated right the zeitgeist or spirit of the age is geist The divine mind in its environment is the spirit of the age And the spirit of the age is the spirit of the age And the spirit of the age is the spirit of the age The divine mind in its involvement in history now what's critical here again is If you walk up to someone on the street and say the phenomenology of spirit Well, they won't listen to phenomenology because it's a word that's too complicated. Once you hear them say spirit. It's like Spirit Spirit transcends spirit now they think about the force and star wars spirit spirit invades Spirit is cool spiritual, but not religion. Well The subtle change that has happened now with hegel is that spirit is not really transcendent Spirit is down here with us and spirit is what we do And and spirit is right here. You can have this phenomenology of spirit within the iron box of secularism And and it's all down here and so Again, this is a spirit that brett weinstein and sam harris can both sign on to because we're just using this word spirit or Spirituality as something down below. So even if you're a materialist you can say well all of the All of the things that materialist people are doing and thinking and saying and dreaming and all the talk all this down here That is available to us and access this is what is spirit and this is what is god Okay, so that's this is all this is god all down here And so then you can be a materialist And believe in god and this god spirit zeitgeist geist That's all down here and see now hegel is going to say ah, but the spirit is is making progress In history and the divine mind or geist doesn't get any content doesn't get any ideas Without being involved in history it goes from a simple immediacy hegel will call it into involvement with the external world of history and time and sense Experience and finally culminates in self-understanding with philosophy So what ends up happening is that geist externalizes itself in human history? It in fact loses itself in the externalities of human history And then toward the end of history it finds itself again through philosophical self-understanding Oh and now we have to look at that other word Phenomenology, what does that mean comes from the greek word phenomenon meaning appearance. It's a word that hegel actually made up Phenomenology means for hegel the study of the appearances of consciousness in history, right? How does consciousness? And ultimately geist make its appearance in history well, we study uh the geist of ancient greece the geist of ancient rome the geist of the early church the geist of the middle ages and Thus we trace this unfolding of geist this externalization of geist as it makes its its trip through history Okay, and and what's interesting when you when you listen to the way carrie phrases it i'm going to take carrie at his word He's a very competent scholar When you hear that then okay. Well now it's kind of personified now. It's kind of moving now. It's kind of Transcendental and and and but it's moving among us. We we don't we don't need to imagine You know, so okay, let's go back to frodo and tolkien So let's say frodo is let's say hegel drops into middle earth Well, well where is where is geist and and frodo well geist is the working through of Sauron and the ring and and all of these things but you don't need tolkien To have geist in middle earth Okay And and in fact if someone if if gandalf would would whisper to frodo and say tolkien Jrr tolkien Frodo now we're going to get more into foyerbach frodo would say well tolkien is the name that we use to represent The development of geist within middle earth this whole war with sauron and good and evil thesis antithesis synthesis This is how we process this but you don't actually need tolkien Writing or thinking or imagining to To create middle earth tolkien is the product of middle earth Okay, so that's Phenomenology of geist the the history of the appearances of geist in human consciousness as it goes through the history of the world now We need to introduce at this point another key element in hegel's thought And this is the element that hegel's known for history history unfolds according to a logic that hegel calls the dialectic That's why the real is the rational the rational is the real what happens what is real in history is rational because It unfolds logically according to this dialectic Now a dialectic is a greek word Uh in plato and aristotle well in all of greek language. It simply means conversation in plato and aristotle it means The kind of conversation where you have a logical argument you have a back and forth right you have a back and forth Uh, you have refutation you have criticism and you have discovery right dialectic is the kind of thing that socrates got us started doing right so for hegel History is like an argument like a socratic argument right like a back and forth between two people who are arguing with each other the dialectic of history is a back and forth a positive and a negative and resolution of the argument so in fact, there's three stages at every um Movement of the dialectic for hegel. There's a positive stage say, um, what he calls it immediacy You can call it a positive, you know, yes position. This is what I believe and then there's a negative stage No, it's not like that and then there's a resolution which captures both the positive and the negative it's like the kind of argument you have where You know your argument with someone else and um, you don't just beat them in the argument But you recognize that the other person has a point But you have a point too and the other person recognizes that and at the resolution of the argument the two of you agree In a way that that captures the point of the other person and captures your point does justice to them both But combines them in a richer view of the whole right imagine that you have that kind of argument, right? It changes your mind but you don't give up the view that you had Rather you incorporate it into a larger vision that includes both your view and the opposite view That's the dialectic of history according to hegel right history unfolds like that kind of argument Um, let me give you an example Heraclitus By the way, this is my example not hegel's hegel's examples are more complicated than this Heraclitus back in ancient greece said everything flows everything's in movement. Nothing stands still You can't step into the same river twice. Heraclitus said Then along comes parmenides and says change is illusion, right? only Uh, the only real being is is unchanging being the world of becoming is illusion So for heraclitus the world of becoming is everything for parmenides the world of becoming is illusion All there is is being and then along comes playdough Who gives us a two-tiered universe? There's a world of becoming down there in the cave then there's the world of being up there outside the cave They're both real although one is more real than the other So what playdough has done is said well heraclitus is right about the world of the cave Parmenides is right about the world above the cave They both caught one aspect of the truth put them together in the right way and you've got um A richer concept of what the truth really is. So that's an example of a dialectical movement, right? You've got a thesis stated by heraclitus It's antithesis stated by parmenides and playdough proposes a synthesis this language of thesis antithesis and synthesis Was devised by a later hegelian actually by a marxist, but it's it's Reasonably good language to describe the movement of the dialectic a thesis Which is a positive statement an antithesis which is a negative statement And then a resolution or synthesis at a higher level Hegel's own word for this resolution or synthesis was subsumption i'll translate it the the german word is aufhebung It means literally picking up And this can be used in the sense of removing something hence canceling or abolishing those previous positions But it can also be used in the sense of raising to a higher level Right as in the sense of preserving it at a higher level Now again even implicit in our language all this talk at a higher level this idea of So we think of it say progress we often think left to right So you have this progression but at a higher level you get the thesis synthesis synthesis thesis synthesis synthesis And so you're building your tower of babel and Well, what is what is happening to the geist? Well the geist is Growing and so again back to tolkien there is there is no tolkien You have geist in middle earth that say frodo and sam sit down and have a philosophical conversation and geist is growing in middle earth, but but no tolkien is We project tolkien onto the sky At a higher level so this resolution this third movement or moment in the dialectic Is a subsumption of picking up or raising to a new level which Abolishes the one-sidedness of the early opinions right play to play to is not a heraclitian He's not a parmenadian right in a sense. He rejects both heraclitus and parmenides. He cancels their positions He abolishes their positions, but in another sense he preserves both their positions, right? So this this word outhebung with its ambiguity the sense of both canceling and preserving or lifting up in the sense of both removing and And raising to a higher level that ambiguity is crucial to hagel's thought It's very useful because it captures this logic where the earlier positions are abolished in their one-sidedness But preserved in their essential truth, right and incorporated into a larger whole That's the movement of consciousness for hagel. That's the movement of history. It's the movement of geist in history now This movement of dialectic of subsumption Overcomes opposition right that third movement is a resolution it unifies It takes what had been in conflict and incorporates them Incorporates these i'm gonna jump ahead a little bit because I want to get to some places Self-alienation its externalization. It has now recognized itself In absolute knowledge or at least that's one interpretation of hagel Maybe hagel is thinking that the that absolute knowledge is yet to come but he's just pointing the way, right? but in any case hagel clearly thinks that his own philosophy is a crucial stage in the Self-realization of geist the self-understanding of geist Now Let's place religion in this story Think about first of all, uh how geist is related to traditional concepts of god So let's look at the Geist First of all geist is not ultimately other than the world, right? This is not a transcendent god who stands outside the world. This is not the god of classical theism, right? It's more like spinosa's notion of god. It's more like pantheism because Geist really is present in finds itself in the whole external world Ahistorical the way spinosa is right Also like the classical tradition now, um, uh, there's platinus's notion of divine mind which we compared guys to And in platinus again, the divine mind is is the seek the hidden secret at the bottom of the human mind, right? So once again Geist is present not only in history but in human consciousness, right? Like spinosa geist is there in nature in fact, everything is geist and especially our mind is geist And yet different from spinosa and platinus we have to see geist in motion in history. That's the the uniquely hegelian thing Now in order to understand why Hegel wants to set geist in motion Get it involved in history. I think we need to look at Hegel's concept of religion Because it turns out that the last stage in the development of geist before absolute knowledge Is the stage of religion? And in particular the highest stage of religion is the revealed religion interestingly enough not natural religion, but revealed religion And for hegel, of course the revealed religion is christianity Now for hegel the key idea of the revealed religion is the incarnation Revealing One of the interesting phenomenon in later 19th century german philosophy is is that these german philosophers are interested in making sense of orthodox christian doctrines Schleiermacher had a hard time making sense of the incarnation whereas for hegel the incarnation is absolutely central to the revealed religion However, it's the incarnation understood in a specifically philosophical way for hegel takes the revealed religion christianity to be um Kind of mythological right it's all about uh particular figures in history sort of like pagan myth What we have to do is sort of In an extended plateness way allegorize this history Uh hegel will call it conceptualize it right take it from the level of representation Or picture thinking and lift it up subsume it into a conceptual form See now when you listen to peterson Peterson does this peterson does this a lot and now You'd have a conversation with peterson whether this is what he is merely doing or and again I would assume that peterson he's an open agnostic It's so hard to categorize but This is what he does with his with his with his mythological teachings Because the the the cool thing about mythology Is that it's so infinitely translatable Is that you can make almost anything you can go almost anywhere from somewhere else And you can watch the avengers movies and you can relate to it. And so so mythology mythology is very Translatable and and hegel sees this so then of course hegel deep 19th century germany deeply deeply christian place, you know You know look at Many, you know, you've got nicha dealing with christianity. You've got kirkegaard dealing with the christianity Hegel's deeply embedded within christianity. And so he's he's wrestling with these things and so now There's a mythology that comes about and we can use mythology and now because of the skepticism we have because of our new knowledge about With darwin and via this we can't go with the fundamentalists anymore But we want to save christianity and we want to see christianity as This this great triumph that has been presented to us But we don't know how to use it anymore because the old traditional ways of using it seem naive and uninformed and Uneducated and so now we're going to move and we're going to do we're going to use it mythologically But now of course later in the 20th century as I talk about Christian morality will continue to be assumed in 19th and early 20th century Into the 20th century then the christian morality gets reduced and at that point we're just at the layer of geist run wild and and geist in all and then we take a look at these These these lowest common all lowest common denominator religions And say, okay. Well, this is what we can find in common with all the religions That's we're gonna we're gonna locate geist and then you get into something a little bit more full-fledged pantheon pantheism lewis again in in miracles and some of his other books he believes Pantheism is the most natural of all religious moves that's interesting to think about When you think about like this this conscious this this continuous cosmos Taylor's thing and then the axial age split things now now pantheism comes back and it's okay one One whole thing but then you're going to have splitness within it because the world that we experience is illusion And we're going to get to the place we want to see beyond illusion. We're going to call that enlightenment So on and so forth But I want to get to the end here of of what he's going to say about about hagel because he makes some good comments form So what happens when you take the notion of incarnation and subsume it in conceptual form hagel thinks Is that you recognize that? Geist is what is incarnate in the world, right? The incarnation is a kind of mythological Indication of the real truth, which is that it is geist that enters the world of history Enters the world of alienation division negativity and suffering There is a kind of speculative good Friday in hagel. It's called there's a there's a suffering of geist as it as it becomes incarnate in this world that is Alien from it because it's a world of material being of division suffering of misunderstanding of not Understanding the whole and geist is all about understanding the whole So philosophy has the job of subsuming Religion right religion is a form of picture thinking religion is a form of consciousness which thinks about ultimate truth in terms of stories about individuals like Christ and What philosophy does is it subsumes this picture thinking lifts it up to a new level a level of? philosophical conceptuality it takes representation or picture thinking for stelling in German and subsumes it at the level of a concept a Begriffe so it preserves its true content while abolishing its mythological form So we're making our way to boltman in Paul Maxwell's little Sequence and this is critical because what happens is Modern people read let's say about Jesus ascension and they say, huh? But heaven isn't up there. We send satellites up there the Chinese just put a Put a machine on the the backside of the moon They didn't bump into Jesus and our dead relatives Well, so what are we talking about? Well, we're gonna conceptualize this and when you go from concept into mythology and and again Peterson is agnostic with a lot of these pieces and Peterson's main argument is that if we lose the mythology if we lose the Metaphorical underpinnings we will lose the game because this is how human beings work Peterson is a Psychologist and he's saying this is what we need with with well-being and for flourishing and again Paul Maxwell begins that video about Well-being and flourishing and so we need this stuff But then of course other people come up and say but how real is it? Is it is it just that we need these stories do Frodo and Sam sit down and say, you know It's really one of the dramatic interesting things about Tolkien and Middle-earth is that there is No religion there per se and that was intentional on Tolkien's part Well, why Well, it's interesting. Why we can have the Church of Tolkien and Middle-earth What's going on and so Sam and Frodo sit down and and they say well we should we should really have a religion well, well why well because Geist needs to subsume religion into philosophy and now here's Here's the move that you know to Follow the hermeneutics of suspicions it just seems all too convenient Well a philosopher decides that religion is subsumed into philosophy of course theologians decide that philosophy is subsumed into religion and and so then what we begin doing is all of this constant thing now the Someone sent me an email about integral thinking and I've watched some of their videos and I think they make some good points But there's there's a deeply Hegelian notion going on there and and the difficult thing with With really indulging in a lot of Hegelian thinking is that I almost always find myself at the top of a long process Well, why is that? Am I really at the pinnacle or is Now to play the postmodern or is that just me telling a story that privileges me in certain special ways? well, I should I should Be careful of that impulse in myself. It's very real so but the key thing here is that so You have all this mythology and what we have in the Bible is this mythology and so well now the question is going to Be well, how can we? What can we learn from this mythology in terms in terms of being able to conceptualize it and apply it within our life? That's the move Now this isn't a unique move and again as I talked to Ron Dart this is this move has been made again and again and again and again and it's not a It's not an immoral move or a move that shouldn't happen every time Jesus tells a parable Now we don't when Jesus tells the parable of the father with two sons We're not really imagining that over here in this other country There's a man with two sons and one asked for his inheritance and so on and so forth We understand what a parable is and we understand how a parable works and we hear the parable and we say that's a story and We should Conceptualize it and derive a meaning from it and this is what preachers do and then we spin this off and we Conceptually derive a meaning and try to apply it. There's nothing wrong with any of these moves But but what I want to pay attention to in this are the deep ways in which the history of these moves Changes are subtle biases and presuppositions about the way the world works and and in some ways for centuries or just at least two or three centuries We've been saying oh all this Christian formation has given you all these presuppositions that you believe there was a there was a Mary who had not had sex and then found herself pregnant and an angel shows up and tells her about it and Joseph has a dream and an angel shows up and I've never seen an angel So I'm skeptical about angels, but then the person who's spiritual over here says I've seen lots of angels I have no problem believing those stories at all because angels are all over the place and there's Jesus and Mary and Joseph and then there's all of these other people too, there's there's Fred and Ethel and and and Lucy and Ricky and little and you know, I Was gonna say a little Fred, but that would really mess up. I love Lucy little Ricky. So There's angels everywhere and so then the question is well where can how how can we have discipline of Canon, how can we have a coherent story because in the Enormous complexity near universal complexity of the world action requires that we take all of this stuff down and we apply it somewhere Am I gonna pray to Jesus or am I gonna pray to some other name? Well, how do I know how do I decide is Jesus just the manifest get manifestation of Geist or Is Jesus one manifestation of the divine or the top? How do I know this? Well that you're near at the question of contemporary contemporary pluralism But all of this is set into motion through this history of religion and so Again as Paul we had Kant we have Hegel we have Feuerbach and for your boxes Well, we got all this stuff below. Oh Tolkien and or Frodo and Sam are saying well, where did we get this? I Gandalf once said this name Tolkien Well, we're Tolkien is a useful Conceptualization of Geist that is working underneath the surface of Middle-earth You've also just fundamentally changed Tolkien and you've also fundamentally changed the nature of that entire drama and Okay, let's say you've done it be aware that you've done it and be aware that that move is going to have implications and probably unforeseen Implications in terms of how Frodo and Sam conceptualized their lives and the decisions that they make About should they carry this ring to Mordor? And they're taking the whole they're taking the Hobbits to Isengard So So, what is the world this is this is our quest we want to know but can we know I'm about out of time. I've got some things I got to do but I again we're We're we're gonna be jumping now then back into Paul Maxwell's because I wanted to talk more about Kant I wanted to talk more about Hegel back when I talked about the three craters video I talked more about fryer Bach because fire Bach because again Rachel Fulton Brown I think quite rightly in a blog post had brought fire Bach in it so at some point we're gonna have to get the Boltman and then we'll probably take a look at NT, right and and some of that history because Again, the question is well, how do we locate Peterson? well Well He's he's here in the mix. And so some people listen to him and say well he fits right in with with mainline Christianity all of this move towards symbolism, but mainline Christianity has now moved on to their their their social justice political activist agenda that makes Peterson poison and the the evangelicals well, they like they hear a lot of they're interested in Peterson because He's making people interested in Christianity, but they listen to him and say well does he really believe in God or is God just a concept and trying to figure that out and then a lot of people are listening to Peterson and hearing this and Stuff outside of their consciousness frame is getting strangely moved and it's leaking into their conscious frame and they think well maybe I'll read the Bible. Well, maybe I'll listen to Paul VanderKlay. Well, maybe I'll go to church and Okay. Well, let's Let's talk about what you've been listening to and let's talk more about this and let's start to piece this stuff together and and Let's start to figure it out. Let's read Peterson's footnotes like noted in network and let's Let's do some homework and figure this stuff out and see what we can learn. Okay, that's that's this whole project So I'm out of time Leave a comment. I'll post this on a Friday or Saturday. I just did the sermon thing and Anyway, thanks for watching