https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=hOQRgxtIbIk

 This is Paul. Twitter is Twitter. But an interesting conversation broke out under my posting of the variety piece about Jordan Peterson and Olivia Wilde's movie. This back and forth between Dr. Luao Ji and Martin Zarathustra. Dr. Ji wrote, historically having a large number of angry, alienated young men in your society has tended to end badly, violently badly. To the extent that Jordan helps ameliorate this at any kind of scale should actually put him in the running for a Nobel Peace Prize. Martin Zarathustra responds, do you have any evidence other than anecdotal stories that Jordan has helped ameliorate any of this? Sending people into the arms of right-wing conspiracy world views does the opposite of what you're claiming. Dr. Luao Ji responds, do you have any evidence of that? Writing off large swaths of young men, young male population, which our society seems to be doing is historically exactly the condition for right-wing populism. So anything which gives them hope to build a responsible future within society helps combat that. A couple of thoughts on the exchange. One of the things that I noted with Twitter is often I only see replies and if I really want to read a tweet in context I have to sort of back out and see the back and forth sort of in context which was very helpful in this case. Of course I have amassed a considerable amount of evidence that and anecdotal one person at a time I haven't done a survey but considerable amount of evidence that Jordan Peterson has helped a variety of young men sort of push back from the brink of alienation and engage in society in a very healthy way usually in terms of improving their marriage, improving their relationships with their parents, pursuing religion which tends to put them into a matrix of social relationships that go beyond but include their family and usually especially if they're pursuing some sort of Christian religion should lead them to a place where they are not violent but in fact are hopefully like Jesus productive and self-donating and self-giving because that is of course the Christian way. So in my opinion Jordan has been very helpful in that kind of way. I also thought about this politically for a couple of reasons. First of all when I listen to people make a big part of the I think the fear and complaining about Jordan Peterson is this idea that Jordan Peterson is going to turn people politically conservative. Now it's helpful to up the resolution behind that a little bit and ask yourself first of all what does that mean? First of all he's a Canadian. He doesn't generally advise for one particular candidate or another. Most elections that we have going on are distributed among states and local and Jordan doesn't go into that. The second thought I had was I don't know that I've seen Jordan change a lot of people politically. Now I've seen a lot of people that were politically conservative to begin with sort of begin to cheer Jordan on because he seems to himself have become a little bit more conservative politically although I'm not always sure exactly what that means because again he's a Canadian in terms of where he votes. He votes in Canada. He doesn't vote in the United States. He doesn't vote in the UK. He doesn't vote in the Netherlands or Germany or any of these places. He tends to highlight certain issues and while I've seen many people who are already conservatives cheer his content I don't know that a lot of people that I know that I've spoken to have migrated themselves in terms of their politics. I think they've migrated themselves in terms of their religion but not necessarily the politics. That's no statistical data but that's just the perspectives that I've seen. But it really initiated in me a lot more thoughts in terms of what we imagine our participants participation is. So Sunday I preached the sermon. I had the rough draft on this channel. I preached the sermon about participation in the Apostle Paul has two analogies in 1st Corinthians 3. God's field and God's building and I worked those and this meaningful participation in something larger and has been noted by many people the primary focus for this participation generally speaking at least in places like Twitter and on the news tends to be political participation tends to be getting people to vote for one party or another and that tends to be the predominant tug of war that people seem to be concerned about on Twitter. Is Jordan moving the needle? I imagine people think in the broadest possible terms having people in the United States vote for Democrats or Republicans. I'm not even politically aware enough to name the predominant Canadian parties much less the parties in the UK or the Netherlands or Germany or Australia. I don't pay any attention to it and frankly I don't care that much. It's simply not an area of my interest but what we sort of have is this imaginary that we participate loosely in which we cheer. Now that has become I think for a good number of people their primary field like or building like participation that they have been able to really imagine themselves participating in. It's sort of become the common space in the culture and I think this is especially true with respect to younger people especially younger people that say don't participate in church that and Jordan has made this point he had a young individual on not too long ago who basically making the point that when you sort of lose your focus in religion your politics becomes your religion and sort of becomes the all defining point. If you're looking at statistical data a number of people have pointed out that studies about people and their friend groups have found that the salience of political party participation has risen above race or religion in terms of anxiety over their children's potential life partners to the degree that people are even imagining a life partner at this point. So in terms of the specific question of this tweet Jordan Peterson I think is much more has had a much bigger impact than the other in people's individual lives rather than on the political spectrum and I think that whether or not that Jordan's happy about that I suppose that's up to him. I'm always reading too many books at one time and after making my last video which I posted on Monday which I made on Friday it's really sent me down a rabbit hole into the Iliad but in my office pondering what I might want to talk about in this video I picked up George Marsden and Bradley Longfield's The Secularization of the Academy. When Duke University was established in 1924 its founding bylaws stated the aim of Duke University are the aims of Duke University are to assert a faith in the eternal union of knowledge and religion set forth in the teaching and character of Jesus Christ the Son of God. The founders this is 1924. The founders built a massive gothic cathedral at the center of the campus and next to it a well endowed school of religion which suggested the medieval pattern that placed theology alongside medicine and law as a preeminent professional faculty. Not until the 1960s did the new university give up required religion courses for undergraduates. Duke was not unusual among American institutions of higher education of this era in any of these respects. In 1924 chapel attendance was still required for undergraduates at the nearby University of North Carolina in Chapel Hill as it was in Yale and Princeton and administrators spoke of the Christian character of their work. In 1939 nearly one fourth of state universities and colleges still held at least voluntary chapel services and most routinely subsidized campus religious activities. You know all this pearl clutching over Christian nationalism. When Duke University built a gothic cathedral at the center of their campus they weren't they didn't just have extra cash they were throwing away they knew exactly what they were doing and what's amazing is how that project was dislocated and one might ask especially in terms of what it has been relocated into. A number of state schools gave credit for their coursework offered by denominational campus ministries. Most of the leading private universities included divinity schools. New cathedral like towers were the architectural centerpiece at the University of Chicago Yale and Princeton. Wellesley College founded in the 1870s by friends of Dwight L Moody that's Wellesley in Boston Massachusetts as Wellesley Massachusetts and any of you who are at all familiar with that college. Can you imagine a relationship with Dwight L Moody gave up its religion requirements about the same time as Duke. This is by this is forward by George Marsden by the way. Nationally as late as the 1950s college educated persons were somewhat more likely than other Americans to be active in religious groups a trend that has since been dramatically reversed. Such positive relationships between Christianity and higher education in the 20th century were residues of a much stronger connection that had lasted for the better part of a millennium. In the United States for example until 1870 the great majority of colleges had their presidents clergymen who taught senior courses on more philosophy that included Christian apologetics and applications of Christian principles to many areas of life and thought. In other words if you wanted a college president you look for a minister and the minister would not only hold chapels but that minister would give college lectures on moral philosophy. Can you imagine that today. Protestant colleges often served as virtual public institutions and state colleges were dedicated to quote unquote non sectarian Protestantism. Although much about these colleges including most of their classicist curricula was secular they also provided guarantees through the presence of Christian faculty and by means of considerable coercion of a strong Christian presence as well. Almost all had at least one required daily chapel service and many required Sunday church attendance as well. Catholic and frankly sectarian schools typically had even more rigorous religious ties. In Western society higher education had long been under the aegis of the church and the two domains had not yet been clearly differentiated. The many educated people today are unaware that until so recently leading American schools promoted Christianity is one index of how secular the current scene has become. Winners get to write the histories first so the histories of higher education generally have been as secular as the academy itself. Histories that deal with American colleges before 1870 of course have to take religion into account since its presence was so pervasive although a few institutional histories have almost succeeded in ignoring its influence. While with respect to the rise of universities since 1870 as D.G. Hart's biographical essay in chapter 11 shows a few general works recognize the place of religion many more in the vast literature of higher education ignore it. Strikingly few published studies provide a sustained focus on what has become of the religious dimension of the modern university. Until now no general history has been published on this subject. Secularization of the Academy edited by George Marsden Bradley Longfield has a variety of essays on the topic 11 different essays by a variety of scholars. Why was why did this come across my path while I was thinking about things like the Iliad. You can find the book on Amazon but given what I've known of what I've done to certain books like this one which I bought for like six dollars and now you can only find it for hundreds of dollars if you want a copy of the secularization of the academy get it soon or it'll probably go away. Mine was first purchased by I bought it used D.J. Fisker Ogden spring of 1993 probably brought bought it for a class. Part of Marsden's thesis about the humanities which has been cut in many universities is that humanities literature stories have sort of replaced what the chapel services and the religious the religious the overt what we would call religious formation was about. I'm tomorrow I have to drive down into the valley and attend my own classes classes is the regional judiciary of the Christian reform Church. I'm a synodical deputy so I was just in Southern California for two different meetings. I have to go down and make sure that certain procedures are are performed correctly for for usually ordination of clergy. But for this classes I had to listen to a variety of interviews of new clergy coming in. Every time I go to classes I'm going to I'm struck by just how different my classical conversations are from the conversations that I have in this little corner of the Internet. It's just such a different language. Yeah you see some of the new religiosity that is now sort of replaced the overt Christianity that was in the institutions before the 1960s. When all of the attention so so part of what I focus on now when I listen to so many of these conversations is what are the areas of concern or interest and and as is often the case the the church the things even in a sort of moderately conservative denomination like the Christian reform Church there's just sort of a mimicry of the concerns in the broader institutions speaking with local public school teachers local community college instructors university professors at secular university. The predominance of concern for all the DEI questions just has seemed to basically take over the register that had been previously occupied by the overtly religious elements. In other words there's always going to be a certain register that has its concern in a certain area of value for humanity and either you can fill it with something overt this is part of Peterson's argument about ideologies as crippled religion and the other is that you can fill it with something overt or other things will flow into it and there's a deep connection between that area and the stories that occupy us because I think in many ways the stories are the are the sort of the moral imagination. So I pulled out a couple of ideas a great courses course on the Iliad that's on audible and some of the introductory chapters I found very interesting in terms of their connection with what has happened in biblical studies and the parallel to what has happened in classical studies of something like Homer. One of the one of the big controversies that was in the 19th century was was Homer a real person or were these and it's sort of parallels a lot of debate and biblical studies in the same period. You have the rise of the documentary hypothesis of the Old Testament and you you sort of had a parallel documentary hypothesis of Homer until someone basically came out with an argument that made the case that however it was we have received this ancient text from Homer great care had been put into we're not exactly sure of the rendering of the text but by virtue of the the strange Greek meter at least strange because it doesn't really work very well in English the strange Greek meter there seems to be a high degree of intentionality that was maintained in both the maintenance of the stories in their society and then at some point the inscripturation of those stories into the text that we have. Dactylic hexameter is an extremely beautiful fluid flexible usable meter there you just sort of have to take my word for it if you don't know Greek but again just to give you a slight sense of how it sounds the opening lines of the Iliad would be main and I aid if they are paleo deo Achilleos ooluminein heimuria high way all get. Some of you Pentecostals out there might think she's speaking in tongues but no it's just archaic Greek. Palaus divthimus psoecaus aidi proeopsin hero on autus dea heloria teo che cunessin oe annoisite posidios de te lea et obule. Now if you don't know Greek as I said you kind of. Now what's interesting about that is that of course this is a modern classic scholar trying to render trying to render the. Trying to render the archaic Greek and to the degree that you can but but then you think in terms of things like set and setting and you think about the recitation of the Iliad and you think about you know how to what degree that recitation and the story was in a sense religious for a whole group of people and and to what degree was was this sort of a psycho technology that that that put a group of people and framed their world in terms of these are the values and priority of our world these are the things that matter and of course the the thing that we have that's analogous to it is quite obviously the Bible and the Bible has functioned in that way in the West I mean all the way to the present day and it wasn't until fairly recently that in fact even on the American frontier that the Bible functioned in many ways as the book that sort of shaped the moral imagination of the country and then even in the university up until the 1960s. Now let me let me see if I can find that the particular is a really cool argument in terms of how I have to take my word for it but the main point is that Greek works much better with an alternation of long and short syllables that fits into the dactylic examiner line than English does what Perry discovered with his theory of formulas was to put put it at its simplest that in many many different situations in Homeric epic when a hero is mentioned by name Achilles Hector Paris Menelaus or when a god is mentioned by name there will be an adjective associated with that name an epithet it's often referred to that is not necessarily important for the given context but that is very important for the given meter. Now this is really fascinating because what it shows is that when we read an ancient text and we look at something like Homer which is this epic poem we getting into vervecian relevance realization we think about physical beings and the action and all the kinds of things that maybe we can put into a movie they're looking at the meter well why is the meter so important well and now we've got relevance realization acting with respect to that well maybe the meter is important because that will help them remember it yes but probably the meter is also important as the entire community is listening to the recitation of Homer and and all of these values and all of this imagery and all of this mythology is just getting into the community and shaping the community it's it's in many ways the gothic cathedral at the center of duke university for instance if the poet wants to refer to hector at the end of a line and that's a great name to end a line of dactylic examitor if he wants to refer to hector at the end of a line and he needs only three beats before hector he calls him phytomos hector glorious hector but if he happens to need five beats before the name hector at the end of the line he calls him korythiolos hector hector of the glancing helmet hector's most most famous epithet but and this was perry's essential point hector is not called hector of the glancing helmet only at moments when it is important that he has a glancing helmet he is called hector of the glancing helmet at moments when the poet needs five beats to fill out that part of the line similarly swift-footed achilles podas ocus achilleus is called swift-footed sometimes even when he's sitting down at times when he is by no means swift-footed but at times when the meter requires him to be swift-footed furthermore the cases i've just mentioned are the names of these heroes hector achilles in the nominative case that is working as the subject of their sentence greek like many other languages has a case system in which the form of a noun is a little bit different if the noun is the direct object of the verb rather than the subject of the verb if the noun is in the possessive case and so forth in each one of those different cases these heroes have a different epithet when hector is in the genitive case the possessive case suddenly he's horse taming hector instead of hector of the of the glancing helmet because that's what fits metrically in that position in the line so perry's basic argument was that homer's formulas exhibit what he called thrift that is different ways to refer to a particular character will not occupy the same metrical position or putting it the other way around for each metrical pattern there's only one way to refer to usually only one way to refer to a particular character the implication of this and this is the keystone of perry's argument is that in performance a bard is not thinking creatively what would be the best adjective to describe achilles in this particular situation this is priority this is relevance realization rather he's using traditional set formulas when you want to mention achilles at the end of a line and he's in the nominative case you call him swift-footed this seems to go against what most of us think of as creative or poetic inspiration and it works very well for a kind of poetry that is done in performance in which the bard is not so much thinking about shaping wonderful poetic language as he is about producing a song given the building blocks that he's learned in his tradition to work with perry's theory of aural composition if you take it beyond purely the formula helps to explain two other notable features of the homeric epics the type scenes so-called and the oddities of homeric dialect and and now these type scenes you have all throughout the old testament that you know why does everyone in genesis meet their wife at the well type scenes are rather like formulas spread out over several lines they are exactly as they sound scenes that are repeated over and over again in an epic that are done in exactly the same way exactly the same wording anyone who has ever read the illiot or the odyssey will have noticed these in the odyssey for instance when people are going to have a meal we don't get a different description of the meal every single time they sit down and a grave housekeeper comes in sponges off the table then she puts baskets of bread in front of them then they put their hands out to the bread and then when they have taken their fill of eating and drinking you go on with the story there's a whole little section of a good many lines that the bard can just more or less rattle off whenever he wants to say in effect then they ate paris theory of oral composition also accounts for oddities of the homeric dialect the dialect of the homeric poems differs from standard greek in having several odd forms and many archaisms the form of greek spoken by the illiot now now pay attention to our own filters here standard greek well what exactly is standard greek well it's probably something like a a common majority you know the not common denominator that that we have sussed out based on the text that we have available to us then the odyssey is not a form of greek ever spoken as far as we know by any actual living greek person rather it's an amalgamation of very very old-fashioned words for sooth quote off that kind of thing would be the english equivalent with odd formations words that have been stretched a little bit so that they take more syllables than they normally would be or words that have been compressed a little bit so that they fit into the line in a way that they normally would not which again in paris argument seems to indicate a traditional poetic language that developed for this kind of poetic performance rather than an individual poet creating as he goes along now paris already formed his theory by studying the homeric epics themselves okay and then they'll go along on that and of course if you're interested in the audiobook yeah amazon amazon's never sent me an email and said gosh vander clay you're just selling our stuff for us that's that's quite all right amazon that's quite all right as long as you don't start giving me strikes on youtube i'm happy to be the way i am but but all of this flows into this this far deeper question of community formation especially not only community formation horizontally but community formation over time duke university putting a gothic cathedral right in the middle of their campus in the 1920s with a statement that well if we build if we build the cathedral then it will somehow root the school in what we want it to be rooted in well not so much apparently and and this gets into the the question of okay as i mentioned last time part of the difficulty that we have is that we're not only jumbling propositions we're also jumbling values and um for the most part this stuff has been mapped on to us inherited and and they're always sort of in competition with each other even as we're we're going through time attempting to get somewhere better but again once you have that idea of better you've got the normative then you've got the values and even though we're we've been deeply shaped by by christianity and these stories that we have been um that our civilization has sort of been marinated in we're now marinated in the tsunami the tsunami of stories that is coming at us through streaming tv and youtube and everything else and what kind of society will those engender so anyway just a few thoughts before i head down to classes and i have my my culture shock of being once again in a place that i used to be very much immersed in in sort of an insular pond and just looking around and thinking my this is water and it tastes really funny so just a little video i gave you two hours yesterday so no complaints on the length here