https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=fuggQgBpuqI

 Hi, this is Paul and this is RefRef for Sunday where I run through the current version of my Sunday sermon. This is Ascension Sunday where we remember the ascension of Jesus. This is from the Heidelberg Catechism. What do you mean by saying he ascended to heaven? That obviously from the, maybe not obviously to some of you, that's from the Apostles Creed. That Christ, while his disciples watched, was lifted up from the earth to heaven, and will be there for our good, until he comes to judge the living and the dead. How does Christ's ascension benefit us? First he pleads our cause in heaven in the presence of his Father. Second, we have our own flesh in heaven, a guarantee that Christ our head will take us, his members to himself in heaven. Third, he sends his Spirit to us on earth, as a further guarantee. By the Spirit's power we make the goal of our lives not earthly things, but the things that are above where Christ is, sitting at God's right hand. Why the next words, and is seated at the right hand of God. Christ ascended to heaven, there to show that he is the head of his church, and that the Father rules all things through him. Now another explanation for Ascension Day I picked up a number of years ago from a sermon from N.T. Wright. The early Christians, like their Jewish contemporaries, saw heaven and earth as the overlapping and interlocking spheres of God's good creation. With the point being that heaven is the control room from which earth is run. To say that Jesus is now in heaven is to say three things. First, that he is present with his people everywhere, no longer confined to one space-time location within earth, but certainly not absent. Second, that he is now the managing director of the strange so-called earth, though like many incoming chief executives, he has quite a lot to do to sort out and to turn things around. Third, that he will one day bring heaven and earth together as one, becoming therefore personally present to us once more within God's new creation. The Bible doesn't say much about our going to heaven, but it says a lot about heaven, in particular, heaven's chief inhabitant coming back to earth. Now recently I caught a conversation between Francis Collins and Richard Dawkins. It was an interesting conversation, and as I've been paying fairly close attention to conversations like these for the past few years, I was interested to note that again, the skepticism that someone like Dawkins has with respect to God's creation of the world has a lot to do with the shape of the world today. He sees the waste, the cruelty, and the brutality of genetics and genetic selection to support understanding that the world is not created by a good, intelligent purpose of God. At least not a good one. With the news this week from Texas and the shooting up of children, I think a lot of people are asking, well, is this Jesus' administration? Is this God's administration? There'll be a lot of speeches about enough is enough, but those speeches come after every mass shooting. And of course, this shooting in particular, the slaughter of children who did absolutely nothing to deserve such treatment. We point and we look for causes for suspects and all the usual causes and suspects, maybe better gun legislation, maybe better mental health care. On and on we go. For many people, the creation issue that Dawkins points out is very similar to the experience of the world that they see today. And with a story like this, they just ask why. Now, we might think a little bit about the fact that despite what happened in Texas, things in this world have probably never been better for children. And that might strike some of you as odd, but if you read much history, do you discover, well, as Pat Benatar said, hell is for children. They regularly suffer abuse, neglect, and throughout the history of the world, often endured slavery, all sorts of, you know, if you would counter, if you would conquer a city, the men would be killed, the women and children enslaved in some of the most brutal conditions imaginable. Kids large and small are standard operating procedures for civilization pretty much across the board. Herod massacring the babies born in Bethlehem is in some ways unsurprising given the brutality of most of world history. Children have had to endure this throughout recorded history. Today we feel ourselves so much more enlightened. An unborn fetus feels pain at 20 weeks. And we are horrified, rightfully so, of the massacre of children, yet how much protection do we in fact give children based on their geography? If they are out of the womb, they are afforded full rights. If they are within the womb, less so. In fact, increasingly, it all depends if their parent wants them. It's an irony of the law that if you harm a baby in utero, if the baby is wanted, someone could be charged for murder. If the baby is unwanted, it's not seen as a human life. Hell is for children. But how do we talk about Jesus' rule then? Because if we read the Ascension Day teachings, well, Jesus rules over earth. He still rules over earth in which wars and earthquakes range. Another interesting question might be, well, how did Jesus' ascension change the administration of heaven over earth? I think in all of my years as a Christian preacher, this question has never occurred to me. And I'm by no means going to be able to give a full answer to it, but I think it is significant. And I think the catechism points towards what this means a bit. We've been talking about this in terms of the Easter sermon and in terms of the Doubting Thomas sermon and the themes that we've been looking at since Easter. We've seen again and again how, in fact, Jesus and his spirit through his church over the centuries has been changing the world. We are rightly horrified at the massacre of children. And the fact that we are horrified by it demonstrates that our expectations of what this world should bring and how this world should be have, in fact, changed. Something has been happening. Was there an outcry when Herod slaughtered all of the boy babies two years old and under? Well, certainly there was from their mothers and there probably was from their people. But in terms of the story of planet Earth, not an unusual thing. Did this seem to be a break in the status quo of the world? Christ has been conquering bit by bit throughout people, throughout his church, through his spirit, through the centuries. The fact that this shocks and abhors us is a sign that, in fact, even those who do not consciously follow Jesus have been impacted by the value changes that he has brought to our expectations about how the world should be. We talked about Philippi for the last couple of weeks. I preached about it about six months ago and then mentioned it again a little while later. Paul founded a church through Lydia and the women by the river. Paul exercised the python spirit. He showed the jailer the mercy of Jesus by sparing his life. And we begin to see through his church bit by bit that who God is as seen from the world begins to change by virtue of seeing Jesus and understanding him. He sits at God's right hand and bit by bit, the regime owning the world. Well, we see that kingdom of heaven, kingdom of God come bit by bit. In the epistle to the Philippians, Paul is writing back some 12 to 14 years later after the events of the book of Acts. And even though Paul had all sorts of things to deal with when he was there, being imprisoned, being tortured, eventually being released and shuffled out of the city when they learned that he was a Roman citizen, the small church there continued to struggle. And so Paul wrote them a letter. And that letter is the book, the epistle to the Philippians in the New Testament. And it is a favorite of many Christians because it is full of so many loving and encouraging messages. The church continued to struggle in a very hostile context. Well, how should they? Actually, an article written a few years ago actually by someone named Aaron Wren talked about sort of the change in polarity even in our own country. Before 1994, in many ways to be a Christian was to be an exemplary citizen. Before the end of the Cold War, if you went to church or often synagogue or temple or something like that, people would have considered you, well, morally at least above average, just by virtue of participating in a religious community. That seemed to change between maybe 1994 and 2014. Its changes were in different ways in different parts of the country. And Aaron Wren described it more as a neutral space at that. Well, going to church, being a religious person would be something indifferent, not necessarily good, not necessarily bad, indifferent, harmless. By 2014 to the present, the polarity in many places in the United States has seemed to change. You might not get a job. You might lose status in the minds of your neighbors. You might be looked at with suspicion. If you are a Christian, you might not be considered one of us. And well, if we feel these tensions today, even so minor, the context within which Paul preached and encouraged the Philippian Church was far more negative than most Americans experience today. And this is the tone Paul strikes. This is the tone that Paul assumes by virtue of Christ reigning in heaven over this world. Therefore, if any of you, if you have any encouragement from being united with Christ, if any comfort from his love, if any common sharing in the spirit, you see how he assumes Christ's reign over this world through all of these words. Any tenderness and compassion that make my joy complete by being like minded, having the same love, being one in spirit and of one mind, do nothing out of selfish ambition or vain conceit, rather in humility, value others above yourselves. What a radical message to a world with sharp elbows. Not looking to your own interests, but but each of you to the interests of others. Paul is declaring that this is the new kingdom that is coming. And in the world he was living in, it was an alien kingdom indeed. But Paul was establishing that, well, with Christ's ascension, he is now on the throne. And this is the new administration. And if you want to be in alignment with his administration, this is how you should behave. Who being in very nature God did not consider equality with God something to be used to his own advantage. Rather he made himself nothing by taking the very nature of a servant, being made in human likeness and being found in appearance as a man, he humbled himself by becoming obedient to death, even death on a cross. For God exalted him to the highest place and gave him the name that is above every name, that at the name of Jesus every knee should bow in heaven and on earth and under the earth and every tongue acknowledge that Jesus Christ is Lord to the glory of God the Father. You see right there the pattern of Jesus' life, the character of his reign and his dominion in fact over the earth, although it is not yet complete. Therefore, my dear friends, as you have always obeyed, not only in my presence but now much more in my absence, continue to work out your salvation with fear and trembling. For it is God who works in you to will and to act in accord in order to fulfill his good purpose. In other words, this reign is actually coming through Christ's servants who bear witness to him and what we mean by that, who represent him and act as he would act in a cruel and ungenerous world, a world which not only has little regard for children but little regard for almost anyone who has little power or little chance. For many of us this world seems to have turned negative in the last few days. Christianity grew in a far more hostile context. Paul sees the cross of Christ as the revelation of God in the darkness. Loving is always a costly path in positive, neutral or negative worlds. Jesus did it first. The cross was the beginning of his conquest and he, unlike anyone else, does not conquer with the cost of the blood of his enemies but conquers by the cost of his own love. How does Christ's ascension to heaven benefit us? First he pleads our cause in heaven in the presence of our Father. Second, we have our own flesh in heaven, a guarantee that Christ our head will take us, his members, to himself in heaven. Third he sends his spirit to us on earth as a further guarantee. By the spirit's power we make the goal of our lives not earthly things but the things above where Christ is, sitting at God's right hand. I think a lot of people hear that, think about immaterial things. It's not really the emphasis of it. The emphasis of it is Christ's kingdom now established from his throne as seen through his representatives living Christ-like lives here below. All of the language of the New Testament looks like that. Things that are above, things that come from above. Remember how he told Nicodemus, you must be born from above? There it is. Christ's spirit descends upon us from on high. Notice the language. The kingdom of heaven is at hand. The kingdom of heaven is coming near. Followers of Christ are citizens of that kingdom and they ought to look like that kingdom and they ought to reflect that kingdom and they ought to bear witness to that kingdom and they do so in exactly the way that Philippians 2 shows, seen in Christ's life as we become like him.