https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=DJ0CI28kcLA

 So Mr. asked a question about faith and he shared with us that he doesn't have faith, he doesn't believe, and he wants to know how you get it, how this happens, what's it like to be a Christian with this. Mark 9, that's in the New Testament, the Gospel of Mark, which is the second book in the New Testament, chapter 9 has this very interesting story about this boy who's got some kind of ailment, possession, something going on, and Jesus' disciples try to heal the boy and they fail. And Jesus comes and expresses frustration about his disciples, which Jesus often does regularly, and then he talks to the father and the father is desperate to have his son healed and his father says, it is often, it often, meaning the spirit, throws him into water and fire to kill him. If you can do anything, take pity on us and help us. And Jesus says, if you can. And although it's very interesting because the man obviously isn't a disciple of Jesus and the man is taking a chance on Jesus, the man is frustrated, so he expresses a very human side that, please, if you can do anything, because he doesn't really believe in Jesus yet, and Jesus pauses there and says, if you can, what's going on with that? Why does Jesus want him to believe? Well, Jesus will heal his son, so Jesus says, if you can, and Jesus says, everything is possible for the one who believes. Immediately the boy's father exclaimed, I do believe, help me overcome my unbelief. In other words, even faith is a gift that we get from God. It's not something that we generate ourselves. Now, again, that's always for human beings a difficult thing because on one hand, if it's something we're responsible for, we feel more comfortable with it because we don't trust God and so if I can do this myself, I want to do it myself because I trust me. And Jesus kind of turns that around and says, this is a gift from God and the whole point of this is to trust God. One of my definitions of a Christian is that Christians trust Jesus more than they trust themselves. So this business about faith is a difficult thing. So John 20 has the very famous story of doubting Thomas where Thomas doesn't believe that Jesus rose from the dead and Jesus says, here, put your hands in my, put your fingers in my hands, touch the holes and then Thomas believes. Luke 11 talks about how God wants to give good gifts to his children and talks about that God will surely give his Holy Spirit to anyone who asks. And so I think the first thing about all of this is if you actually want to believe, the first thing you need to do is simply pray. Ask God for faith and the Bible gives us a lot of assurance that God will give it to us. Now let me give a disclaimer here because I believe that God is faithful but God is also sneaky and patient and as many Christians will profess, sometimes frustrating. God has his own way of working in our hearts and lives and does so in ways that often frustrates us, sometimes angers us, and sometimes in fact brings us into this area of doubt and we wonder. And there are admonitions to believe and belief isn't something that you just manufacture. It's not something we're fully in control of and then so I'm gonna, if some of these questions are from above, I think one of the things we need to do again is to ask God what to give us faith. Some of the things from below I think we can think about too. One of the things about human beings is that we are herd animals and that we very much believe what the people around us believe and what the people we admire believe. This is just human nature and so the truth is if you want to change what you believe and what you think, start hanging around people who think the way you want to think. A lot of times people have questions about the church but a big role of the church is to simply help Christians believe because we believe in herds and it's very common for Christians to have moments of doubt or even seasons of doubt and the church is very important for this because we believe together and when we're in church, I often have this during the week, stuff may go bad, sometimes I wonder what is this crazy business I'm doing following Jesus believing that a guy rose from the dead and when I get here on Sunday morning and I'm surrounded by the Saints and I know their lives and they know me and we're together, I find myself believing all over again and so the church itself is a huge help for the doubts that we experience. Another thing, as I said before, doubt is pretty normal for Christians. This is a process. God changes us through time and now you might say well God should deliver us from doubt completely. If God delivered us from doubt completely, how could we share our faith with those who doubted? We simply couldn't relate to one another but I think finally the real challenge here is the fact that we are not actually saved because of our faith. We may be saved by our faith but the important thing is not so much the strength that we can generate to hold on to God. The important thing is the strength that God has to hold on to us and that's finally what we put our faith in because as human beings we have emotions that go up and down, we have faith that goes up and down. If you talk to Christians you'll find that some people have had decades of quiet disbelief and God moves in their heart and brings them back and brings them to faith. One of the doctrines of the Reformed tradition of the church is the perseverance of the saints. You know saints because they persevere and that means there are difficulties, there are doubts, there are things they overcome. So again I want to come back to this definition I have of a Christian. The main thing here is not that oh my goodness I need to believe and I've got to work on this myself. First ask and then do some things that are part of this. Be around Christians. Go to church. Find a church where actually your faith is encouraged by others. Maybe not even directly but just being together and then finally just do it. Just say Lord I hardly believe, grab on to me because that's finally what the Christian, what the Christian faith is all about. I hope this was helpful. Again if you have another follow-up question please ask. I'm trying to make a bunch of these little videos because these answers I hope will help other people too. So thanks a lot.