https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=jwGgT-K9NsY

 Eventually, I go to college and... Where'd you go to college? American University in Cairo. Okay. After high school. And the thing about being by myself and not having a lot of very close friends and so on, is that you do a lot of people watching. In Egypt, everything is always busy. So everybody lives in apartment buildings and we live on the third floor. So sometimes when I'm just, my brain's fried doing too much schoolwork, you go out to the balcony and you watch people. And it's just fascinating what you see and what you learn. And especially during the Atai Eid, where they slaughter the lamb, the Muslims do the sacrifice and so on. You see all kinds of people slaughtering animals right in front of you, right there in the open. And then they would butcher the thing in the front of the building and then all the poor people would come and they would hand them bags of the meat because part of the deal is you're supposed to give to the poor on that particular day. It's fascinating to grow up watching that. Always look forward to that time to see this happen. And one year, this one house in the corner was really, guy was really wealthy, so he butchered an actual bull. They bought a cow and they butcher the cow. In an urban area, out in the open. Right in the open. And then you would take, the culture is that you take the blood of the animal and you would dip your hands in it and then you would put the handprints on the wall of your house, on your car, on your, just to bless everything. And so you would see like just handprints of blood. Just all over. Can you imagine doing this? I've been talking to my church, I said, cause I'm trying to give an illustration. I said, if I put a pile of rocks and some fire and I took like a goat and I killed it right at the corner of Florin Road and Amherst here, I think the city would first cite me and then jail me. I mean, if I start putting handprints of blood on the church, people would be calling my city council person to say, I don't know what's going on in that place, but you gotta send somebody over there and make him stop. Right. Because you know. Right. Yeah. So one year while I'm doing my people watching, I noticed that in the building across from me, there's this really beautiful blonde girl in the balcony, right on my level. Too far for me to actually see what her face looks like, but you know, by the figure I know, yeah, she's pretty. So, you know, always get looking forward to seeing this girl, you know, 16, 17 years old, of course. And eventually, you know, I go to college and I study engineering at the American University in Cairo and I do theater. I don't minor in theater. I just take some theater classes and I do some theater stuff because I enjoy theater, did it in school and so on. I was pretty good at it. And I get all these like really nice leading roles at the American University in Cairo. And eventually I did a play where my love interest is this girl who is half Norwegian, half Egyptian. And you know, we're getting to know each other and she's pretty cool and everybody's really nice. And it's kind of interesting the contrast between my engineering friends and my theater friends, you know, very different people. A lot more girls in one side than the other. You better believe it. And eventually we discover that we live across the street from each other. And remember that girl that- Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. Broke across the window, it turns out to be her. All right. Now, in that type of environment, in that type of, you know, environment that I grew up in, one of the things that, you know, in the absence of a religious kind of framework, one of the things that happens is that your, a relationship with your spouse becomes really important and necessary for surviving. You know, my grandfather and my grandmother's relationship was just really beautiful and their love story is really nice. And then my mom and my dad's love story is also very, very nice. And everybody, like all my friends, you know, their parents are like how they met and how like, who knew who and what the circumstances were. Just, you know, romance was in the air. You know, I don't know if you remember the 1970, there was a famous movie called Love Story. Where Do I Begin song, you know, reminded me a lot. That Where Do I Begin song reminded me a lot of the video you had about, was it Ernest Becker or something like that? Yeah. Where, you know, the relationship between a man and a woman becomes sort of like a deistic relationship where you're looking for your life fulfillment through this person. So I grew up thinking that that's my mission in life, is to find my spouse. And so, you know, for a while I thought it was going to have to be an Armenian girl because that's what my parents would really like and my grandparents would love that. And eventually I start to have this really deep emotional connection with this girl across the street. Problem is she's Muslim. Her dad's Muslim, so she's Muslim. So her and I can't have a relationship because I would have to be Muslim for me to have a relationship with her. And we're getting pretty serious in this relationship to the point where I am seriously considering, you know, it's just something on your passport. In the Egyptian passport, it says either Christian or Muslim on your passport as part of your identity. Yeah. And so what's the difference? Egyptian, Muslim, same thing. But I knew the cost. And the cost was that I would probably be disowned by my grandparents and I would be disowned by my parents. Maybe my parents, I could win over over time, but definitely my grandparents would not have any of it. Even though my grandfather grew up in sort of the world where, you know, he's doing a lot of work in mosques. At this point, he's getting better and better at his craft. He's traveling all over the Middle East, working on mosques, putting chandeliers up in the mosques and in some churches as well, and in hotels and casinos and so on. I mean, really like impressive work. And all of his employees are Muslim. Some are maybe Coptic Christians, but majority are Muslim. And so you really live a life where you say, yeah, Jesus, way truth in life. No other way to God except through me. You kind of say, well, we're all children. It's all Abrahamic faiths. We're all worshiping the same God. And that's the atmosphere that I grew up in, where you say, we all worship the same God. That's just the reality of it. And so to me, it's like, it's all the same God, right? I mean, that's how I grew up. So what difference does it make? So as things progressed and things got more and more serious, then it became like, well, we have to, we wanna get married, how do we do this? And I can't really live in Egypt and get married. So there was an opportunity for me to come to the US as an exchange student. And my mom always wanted that because my mom had lived in the US, because her side of the family had immigrated to the US. And part of the deal was that my dad and mom connected after she had moved and then got married and she moved back. And all of my family relatives, on my dad's side and my mom's side, they all lived all over the US. So growing up, I was always visiting the US in the summers. All my summers were spent in either New York or in Florida or in Texas or in San Diego, just all over the place in the US. It was great fun to see my cousins and aunts and uncles and so on, and my mom's parents, my grandparents on my mom's side. So this is my life. I'm living partly in the US, partly in Egypt, and I'm really popular in school because I come back with all the American candies and share it with kids. And if I hadn't known any better, because you see a lot of American YouTube channels about being entrepreneurial and kids selling their candy, if I had done that to my Egyptian friends, I would have been the most horrible person to not be willing to share the candy, but to sell it to them. I would be the most horrible person. And my parents would have been mortified that I'm making money off of my friends. So the culture is so different. Here, it's all about make as much as you can, take advantage of whoever you need to take advantage of. There, it's buy friends, make friends with the stuff that you have, bless others. So eventually what happens is I have an opportunity to go to the US, and this is perfect. I can become an exchange student for a year, maybe settle there, get an internship. This would have been my junior year in college, so get an internship, maybe make a life. So I leave in June of 2002 to come to the US, which is a very interesting time because 9-11 had just happened. Yeah. And I remember exactly where I was in 9-11. And I was in a theater class. It was around three o'clock in the afternoon because of the time change. And all of a sudden we hear massive cheering and yelling outside of the classroom. American University in Cairo is in downtown Cairo, very near Tahrir Square, where the revolutions of Arab Spring happened. So I'm hearing all these cheers, all Allahu Akbar, Allahu Akbar, what's going on? And of course the theater teacher was an American woman, and somebody came in to grab her and let her know what happened, and it's very emotional, of course, for her. And we are terrified. We're all considered to the... A lot of my classmates were Egyptians, Arabs, but we're considered Western to the average, of course. You're going to the American University in Cairo. And so for a split second we were like, are we in danger? Is this a revolution happening? What's going on? And I called my dad and I'm like, Dad, do I need to figure out how to come home as quickly as possible? Are you going to go home as quickly as possible? And my brain is starting to think, how do I try to go from downtown Cairo to my house without having to depend on main roads and to kind of be incognito more? And he goes, oh, son, you'll be fine. Don't worry about it. Everything's fine. It's okay. It's not fun what happened. It's not good what happened. It's pretty terrible. We feel terrible, but I think we're safe. Okay, good. But it's an exchange student program. So what's supposed to happen is one person is supposed to come to the American University in Cairo while I go to the US and that never, the person who was supposed to take my place never did. And thankfully for Penn State, they said, come anyway, it's okay. So that was wonderful. So I come to the US and I stay in New York with my aunt and uncle, my mom's aunt and uncle, from June to about August until school starts. And the thing about New York, and the reason I came early is because I'm trying to get my citizenship because I have a green card, because my mom is an American, but I can't really become an American. Rule changes, you know, I have to go through a naturalization process. Eventually what happens is, again, I'm in a very serious relationship with this girl. I would like to become Muslim. I need to learn something about Islam. I mean, I can't just be like, whatever, I'll sign whatever. So I got to learn stuff and I buy these books and I go to the, in Jamaica, New York, which is right next to Queens. There's a very big Islamic area. And if you've been there, but like, you know, it feels like I'm little Cairo. It's crazy. Walk in there to Islamic kind of bookstore type of thing. And I buy a couple of things. I buy Quran and I'm reading through it and I'm terrified. Absolutely terrified. And there's a small voice in me that says, you know, you know nothing about Christianity and you're living all this reading about Islam. Maybe just to be fair, you ought to just learn a little bit about Christianity. Yeah, that sounds reasonable. So I go to Fifth Avenue to Barnes and Noble, the biggest Barnes and Noble in the country. And I'm expecting to just go to the Bible section and pick one up and leave. Should take 30 seconds. I get to the Bible section. It's the length of a stinking football field. Yeah. How are there so many Bibles? Different Bibles, different widths and sizes and dimensions. How is this possible? Not so the Quran, you know, there's just supposed to be just one. Right, right. I literally spent four hours looking through every one. And I'm going through like, this is too much information, process of elimination. Get the biggest thing you can because you want to make sure everything is in it. You don't want any Bibles missing half the, you know, the good stuff or whatever. Well, I walk out of there with like a big hunk of Bible and it's an Aramaic Bible. It's like translated from the language Jesus spoke. It says, I still have that copy. It's a horrible translation, but it's still, all right, fine. I'm reading through this. And of course I do what everybody does, start a Genesis. And I am not understanding this at all. What is going on with people getting raped and people killing everybody and God saying, get rid of them and eliminate them. And I'm, what is this? Where is the good Christians that like I grew up with and all the nice stuff. So I'm super confused at this point. And I eventually make it to Penn State. And I'm going to the, I'm going to the dorms and right by the food court area, there's a table outside, a raffle table. There's an American football, some Penn State shirts, a boom box. I wanted the American football. I need an American football. So I go to the thing I say, what do I have to do to win this American football thing? And they're like, oh, fill the survey. It's a raffle. Oh, perfect. So I fill this out and it says, would you like to discuss with a group of people, the Bible? I said, yeah, this actually is amazing. Finally, somebody to help me out. And so I fill this thing out and I don't put my phone number. I only put my email. And a few days later, I get an email that says, unfortunately you did not win anything, but you did say you were interested in talking about the Bible. Would you be willing to meet with in a group? And so on. And I said, I emailed back and I said, I don't really wanna meet in a group. I wanna meet one-on-one with somebody. And I, but I wanna make sure that I can ask questions cause I'm really, you know, like I don't wanna be lectured at. I wanna be able to ask questions. So if you're willing to have me ask questions, then let's talk. So I sit down, I meet somebody at this particular location. Now my name is Ashot Tumaez. I'm sticking to my real original name in the beginning of me coming to the US. My name is Ashot Tumaez and I am going to stick with that. I'm not changing it for anybody. Now this guy is expecting to see a middle Eastern looking guy, somebody foreign, like not a regular old white vanilla dude, right? So I sit there at the chair where we're supposed to meet. And I see this guy who really looks like he's looking for somebody. He's wearing like regular jeans and a Penn State sweater. And I'm thinking, this guy's gonna tell me about God? Where's the clothes? Where's the, where's the dignity? Like where's the collar, man? Like, what is this? Who are you to tell me about God? So finally I'm like, you're looking for Ashot Tumaez? Yes, that's me. And he gets upset with me. Like he looks at me like, I've been having walking around you for 15 minutes. I'm like, yeah, I was trying to figure out if like, what are you telling me about God? So we meet for like several weeks and I'm just peppering him with all kinds of questions. And my big questions are, okay, help me understand this. Christianity, Islam, is it all one God? Is it not? What's going on here? And what about the four or five year old kid in Saudi Arabia who dies not hearing the so-called gospel of yours? What about his fate? What's going on with this whole, what's going on with this whole like American Christianity versus Armenian Christianity? I mean, is there gonna be like different sections of countries in heaven? It's like the Armenian church, we're part of the Armenian church. And I'm like, this doesn't make any sense. Like we're just gonna have like an Armenian quarter in heaven, is that what it is? So I have all these weird questions and he very patiently goes through and tries to answer them. Meanwhile, I'm still reading about Islam. I'm trying to understand it. Talking with my girlfriend on a daily basis and things are going great. Until about October, I get the phone call where she says, you know, maybe this thing isn't gonna work out anymore. I was changing my whole life, you know, willing to like, heaven and I'm sweet, like get disowned by my own family, changing my religion. And you just think, eh, we're good. This is insanity. And it wasn't like I was ignoring her or I was like posting pictures without, it was nothing to post back then. Facebook had been invented to low four. But you know, there was nothing like I'm, you know, not responding to her or anything like that. Very attentive, very loving, very kind, but just, you know, we're good, we're done. So that really threw me for a tizzy for a while. You know, for a whole month, I'm like, I'm just confused. I'm so confused. Here I am just absolutely willing to give my life, just literally give my life to this person, you know. And she was just willing to just say, no thanks. So just bizarre, just absolutely bizarre, so confused. And I think it was during that time where eventually Dave Hatfield, the guy who was reaching out to me, he was the campus pastor of a particular church group. He eventually said, you know, I spent a lot of time answering your questions, but I think it would be helpful if we start actually going through the Bible and looking at some verses so you can see it straight from the Bible and you can do your own reading as well. Oh, he sits down with me and he, you know, I surrendered to that and we go through the Bible study and you know, he goes through all these scriptures about God so loved the world that he gave his only son. And I'd never heard John 3.16. And I know for a lot of like even nominal Christians or deconstructed Christians, that sounds really weird. How are you raised as a Christian, took religion classes in Arabic because you had to take religion as part of the Egyptian educational curriculum, took religion classes in Arabic and Armenian and never heard of John 3.16 before. But it's the culture, it's a different kind of format where you say, well, you're part of the church, you were baptized, you're in, you're good. There's nothing to worry about anymore. I mean, you know, just be a good person, be moral. I knew a lot of the parables, the prodigal son, all those things, but it was a very moralistic sort of teaching as opposed to a, what's the spiritual significance? Almost very little about the Old Testament, almost knew nothing about the Old Testament at all. You know, we'd read about Daniel and prophecies about Jesus, Jeremiah and, you know, and Moses talking about how I want everybody to prophesy. And, you know, just no connection. I don't get any of this. I don't understand why this matters. Why is this important? Why do I need to give it any attention, you know? But after this breakup, a lot of these verses that he would kind of read and I would read and they would just go over my head, a lot of them started to sound different. A lot of them started to kind of make me realize that there is a God who loves me personally, not just humanity. There's a God who has a personal vested interest in what becomes of me. And I thought, that's interesting. And it finally clicked one day that this adoration, this love that I had for this person was the kind of adoration and love that no human could hold and she couldn't handle it. And it wasn't because there was anything wrong with that person. It's just that a human is not meant to hold this devotion, this level of self-sacrifice and this absolute, you know, I mean, you know, let's be honest. I leave Egypt, I come to the US. I'm in a university in the US. Let me tell you, the women in the US are a lot prettier than women in the Middle East. I'm sorry, it's just, you know. A lot more women watching this from the US than the Middle East, so I think we're safe. All right. That's good. And so it's very natural. I mean, a lot of Middle Eastern men go through this, by the way, and this happens in Europe too, right? It's very natural. I mean, the assumption is, unfortunately, the assumption is that Western women are easier. And I think that's part of the reason why there's a lot of all this mess happening from Eastern men coming to the West, is they assume that like, I should just be able to like, I want and be given, you know? And I never really was even tempted by any of the beauty that I saw or any of the, I was like, I know my one, you know, and I'm dedicated to this one. And to just kind of, all that to just be dismissed was weird and really strange. And eventually what happened was, I finally realized that the love that I had for this human being was meant to God, that it wasn't meant for another human being, that my fulfillment, my desire to be fulfilled in myself, my desire to feel like I am home was to be met in not just a person, a human being person, but the creator of all. And the wonder of that creator being willing to condescend himself to become flesh for our sake, to bear our burdens, to suffer with us and for us, and to pay the price of our inability to ascend to God. And I always, you know, when I was in high school, I had this sense of like, there has to be a God. I mean, you know, I read Descartes and I read some philosophy stuff with Plato and so on. And I had this sense early on that there has to be a God, but the problem was like which God and who God and what God and how God. And it just felt impossible to try to climb up to this God. And I remember having these really simple innocent prayers of like, God, if there's a God, if you're real, I'd like to kind of know who exactly. Especially when I'm going through this whole Islam, Christianity and so on, I'm just like, am I doing the right thing? Am I, you know, there's this slight doubt in me of like, yeah, I'm willing to do this, but is this the right, is this the right thing to do? Right in its own sake, not just right for my wellbeing or whatever. And eventually I decided, you know what? I think I need to give my life to God. And I don't say that in an evangelistic kind of like, come to the altar sense. I've never been to a church, by the way. Never been to an American church at this point. This is only strictly through meeting with the one guy and reading the Bible and having this event happen. And an event, I need to give my life. I need to live life dedicated to this being and to worship Him above all else and to hold Him as the highest thing that I can serve in my life. And that from that, He is worthy. And...