https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=jxFmv5eImmY

 Hi, this is Paul and this is Rough Draft for Sunday where I run through the current version of my Sunday sermon. How big a miracle would Jesus have to do to convince you he's the Messiah? Since Easter I've been referencing a lot of video conversations. In this case you had Michael Shermer who is a known skeptic. He writes books about rational skepticism. Talking to Jordan Peterson about the resurrection. And then Jordan is sort of on the fence in terms of the physical resurrection of Jesus. Shermer brings out David Hume's big point which is large claims require large evidence for us to believe. Belief has to be justified even though real people just believe. They don't really work that way in terms of our belief. But Jesus' physical resurrection is a really big miracle. But then again when I listen to most of these guys talk all miracles would sort of have the same issue involved. And I want to bring back Pope Joe's point last week which I thought was quite an important point. I don't believe Jesus the man came back from the dead. I think they argued that for years after he died because without Jesus' little resurrection then Jesus the historical man couldn't be the Messiah. The Messiah was supposed to end depression for his people. Jesus didn't. Sort of left unanswered by that point is why would they want to purport a man who number one lost his culture war and number two didn't accomplish the goal if in fact something quite astounding hadn't happened. Lately there's a lot of news about aliens. What does aliens have to do with the resurrection? Well in some ways some of the answers remain the same when we watch human dynamics about belief and unbelief and our lives. This particular article by ABC News I mean this isn't some fringe national inquirer magazine says the US military takes UFOs seriously. Why doesn't Silicon Valley or academia? The government knows wants to know if these unidentified objects pose a military threat but they also represent an opportunity to advance science and technology and for me what they do is presented a case study in belief and unbelief. If we had photographic evidence of Jesus outside the tomb Easter Sunday morning what would that do? What kind of physical evidence would be required for you to believe in Jesus' resurrection? Now a point that I've made almost every week the resurrection stories don't really focus on the first five minutes. The resurrection stories focus on the impact that his resurrection makes in the disciples and that impact then reverberates out into the world. If you said you believed if you said you believed in UFOs and many people do I haven't looked up the statistics what difference would that make in your day to day life? Now one of the things that I've also pointed out repeatedly is we seem to have this idea that seeing something miraculous would sort of change our life and I've spoken with people who have seen miraculous things and they testify that their perspectives or their ideas changed after that but how dramatically? So just let's look at the biblical accounts. You have the disciples in the boat when the storm comes up and Jesus calms the storm with a word and even the winds and waves obey him. You have Jesus walking on water and Peter at least for a moment goes out to greet him and well looks away from Jesus and begins to sink but then Jesus pulls him up and puts him in the boat. Jesus is transfigured in front of three of them. We saw raising the dead and multiplying loaves and fishes but none of this stops the disciples from running and hiding when the heat goes on and when Jesus is crucified. What that leads me to believe is that witnessing miracles or the kind of evidence we seem to demand doesn't really make the kind of difference in our lives that we think it should. Now this morning or this afternoon or this evening depending on when you're listening to this we're taking a look at, well I started with John chapter 10 but then as I kept reading backwards it became evident that John chapter 10 is part of a far larger portion in the Gospel of John and the Gospel of John unlike Matthew, Mark and Luke has these long sections that get involved in complex conversations and dialogue between various parties and it sort of begins in John chapter 7. Jesus went around in Galilee. He did not want to go about in Judea because the Jewish leaders there were looking for a way to kill him and we've noted in a lot of my Wind Midweek videos that if in fact the accounts from the canonical Gospels are true about Jesus it's amazing he lived as long as he did. But when the Jewish festival of Tabernacles was near Jesus' brothers said to him leave Galilee and go to Judea so that your disciples there may see the works that you do. No one who wants to become a public figure acts in secret. Since you are doing these things show yourself to the world for even his own brothers did not believe in him. So what's the motivation of his brothers? Maybe they're just calling him a pretender or calling him a fool or calling him crazy. His brothers don't believe that he's the son of God. What does that have to say about the matter? Jesus' brothers have advice for Jesus in terms of how to be the Messiah. Okay if you're going to be a public figure well get out there in public and do something. Now these brothers were likely older than Jesus probably from Joseph's first marriage but they didn't believe in who he said he was. And what chapters 7, 8, and 9 really focus on is this question who is Jesus? Is he Messiah which would be someone who came as Pope Joe says to lift oppression? Is he evil? Is he insane? Is he a prophet? And no one can seem to find agreement on this. Sometimes they say things like no one could teach like this if he's not from God because his teaching was somehow spellbinding and fresh and new. Some said he's demon possessed. Others said he's deceiving the people. Jesus keeps saying he's from God but Jesus isn't falling in line with what their expectations of a man from God would be. Some say he's the Messiah and he's going to liberate us from the Romans. Some said he's a prophet sort of like Elijah from the Old Testament doing these miracles. Some said he's a Samaritan because all up there in Galilee you know the kinds of people from that area of the country where you have Samaritans and Jews and Greeks all living together it's a mess up there. If he were the Messiah he would do bigger miracles a number of people say. Well what kinds of miracles do they expect? Maybe the kinds of miracles that you read in the book of Exodus of what Moses did and that would maybe drive the Romans out of the land. So at some point they send the temple guard to arrest him and in fact if you read chapter 7, 8, 7 and 8 you'll find that people are often saying well why don't they arrest him if he's such a mess and well finally they send the temple guard to arrest him and it turns out like this. Finally the temple guard went back to the chief priests and Pharisees who asked them why didn't you bring him in? That's what you were sent to do. You're soldiers. This is your job. No one ever spoke in the way this man does the guards reply so they're just kind of they don't know what they were they're not I'm not going to touch him. You mean he's deceived you also the Pharisees retorted. Have any of the rulers or Pharisees believed in him? No but this mob that knows nothing of the law there's a curse on them. So what are the Pharisees saying? They're saying well anybody who knows any theology would see through this mess but the rabble and the people out there who don't know anything they're all following him. Have you ever heard these kinds of arguments in terms of religion or politics? They won't change that much. However Nicodemus who had gone to Jesus earlier and who was one of their own number asked does our law condemn a man without first hearing him to find out what he's been doing? They replied are you from Galilee too? Look into it and you'll find that a prophet does not come out of Galilee and so Nicodemus who they couldn't sort of push aside they sort of say okay well you know you're not making any sense Nicodemus and so they're divided and it seems Jesus sort of popping in popping out they close in on him he kind of disappears blends in with the crowd and there at the beginning of chapter 9 he's walking along and there's a man by the side of the road who's a beggar and we've talked in a previous sermon sort of the role that beggars had in society there they were in some ways doing a service because the people had need to to give alms and to care for someone and beggars provided that service and in fact their disability was their meal ticket. So as they went along they saw a man a man blind from birth and his disciples asked him rabbi who sinned this man or his parents that he was born blind. Now of course if someone had a an idea like Hindu karma you would say well he sinned in a previous life and so now he's paying for his sins in the previous life but that's not exactly their idea it's usually the idea that despite the book of Job if someone is suffering something well they've done something really bad to deserve it and for this man to be born blind well but at least he's blind and he can beg and everybody knows who he is so they give him a little something and you know he's doing okay. Well Jesus sort of unearths that neither this man nor his parents sin said Jesus now he's not saying that the man and his parents were sinners what he's saying is that the man and the parents blindness didn't just come about because this man or his parents sin that's the point Jesus is making but this happened so that the works of God might be displayed in him. What do you mean by that Jesus as long as it is day we must do the work of him who sent me he keeps talking like this this Jesus night is coming when no one can work while I am in the world I am the light of the world and then Jesus does something after saying this he spit on the ground made some mud with saliva and put it on the man's eyes now notice this man didn't ask to be healed this is sort of a an unauthorized healing that Jesus is doing and he's using the mud and saliva and what is Jesus doing you can imagine this this man born blind sitting on the ground hearing all this commotion and then suddenly this Jesus guy comes up and and you know puts mud on his eyes go he told him wash in the pool of salome this means sent so probably had somebody help him so the man went and washed me okay and give me something after came home seeing Jesus just a seemingly random miracle random blessing for this guy Jesus first kind of tipped his hand and said well so that the works of God might be displayed in him well looks like Jesus is doing some displaying his neighbors and those who had who had formally seen him begging asked isn't this the same man that used to sit and beg has he been you know pulling the rug over our eyes all these years some claimed that he was others said no he only looks like him and so here we go here you have a basic story and well they're asking for evidence and well they don't have fingerprints or DNA but is he or isn't he because something has happened and we're trying to get our minds around it so we're looking for evidence but let's imagine that everybody in the town eventually figures out that yeah in fact it's the same guy used to beg and now he sees and Jesus healed him what does that mean how does that work out in our lives now obviously well then everybody who needs a miracle goes and looks for Jesus because of something like this and that's exactly what happens in Galilee but well there's an issue here so others say no it only looks like him but he himself and says that hey I used to sit there I'm the guy then how were your eyes open they asked he replied the man they called Jesus came and put some mud in my eyes then he sent me to go to Salome and to and wash and so I went and washed and then I could see and you almost think of you almost think of Naaman and Elijah or Elisha and him going and bathing and coming back healed of leprosy so where is this man I don't know because look at the story put mud in his eyes said go there of course Jesus goes someplace else and the guy can the guy goes home and he sees and I don't know where he is I didn't track him I went and washed and now I can see they brought to that they brought the man who had been blind now the day on which Jesus had made the mud and opened the man's eyes was the Sabbath therefore the Pharisees also asked him how he had received his sight he put mud on my eyes the man replied and I washed and now I see this guy is one of my favorite characters in the gospel because he's just so funny and he's like a lot of street people I know they get to a point and they just they don't care who they're talking to they just say what they want they just say the truth sometimes some of the Pharisees said this man is not from God meaning Jesus for he does not keep the Sabbath okay so that is the way we can tell a good man from a bad man Sabbath observance all right but others asked well how can a sinner perform such signs so they're looking at evidence and they're trying to piece this out and they're trying to figure out who Jesus is but now for the last three chapters this is exactly what they've been trying to do who is Jesus what how can we fit him into our world it's obviously important how does he fit so they turned again to the blind man what have you to say about him and you think about this guy's begging mud washing sight that's all he knows what what have you to say about him it was your eyes he opened see now you can already begin to detect some double meaning here that the gospel of John is layering in that we're gonna see a little while later the man replied he is a prophet well that's a very reasonable thing because prophets were people endowed with the power of God who did miracles like this he knows the stories of Elijah and Elisha and Moses and so he must be a prophet it's a very reasonable answer they still do not believe hmm so what size miracle is going to lead to what belief they still do not believe that he had been blind and that he had received his sight until they sent for the man's parents well we got to figure out identity here so is this your son they asked is this the one you say was born blind and it's like everybody in town walks by this guy he's doing it for years you know you're you're you're pressing credulity here in this argument well we know he is our son the parents answered and we know he was born blind but how he can see now or who opened his eyes we don't know ask him he is of age he will speak for himself his parents said this because they were afraid of the Jewish leaders who already had decided that anyone who acknowledged that Jesus was the Messiah would be put out of the synagogue and so the parents aren't dumb and well it was kind of a tyrannical situation so it's like hey here are the facts he was born blind we all know this I don't know anything that happened he's old enough done that was wise parents said he's of age ask him a second time they summoned the man who had been blind give glory to God by telling the truth so you're saying I was lying we know this man is a sinner well he replied well whether he's a sinner or not I don't know one thing I do know I was blind and now I see evidence just the facts there they are the whole story I've told it to you before then they asked him what did he do to you how did he open your eyes and you get the feeling the guy has just had it by now he answered I have told you already and you did not listen do you why do you want to hear it again do you want to become his disciple too do they didn't take that so well then they hurled insults at him and said you are this fellow's disciple it's a con it's a con you just acted like you were blind for all those years and now suddenly we are disciples of Moses the real prophet the great prophet we know that God spoke to Moses but as for this fellow we don't even know where he comes from we hear he's from up there by Galileans and Samaritans and you know a real prophet would come from someplace we know and there might be I don't know a star in the sky and maybe angels reporting something like that we didn't see it ourselves so well dramatic dramatic conclusions require dramatic evidence there the man answered now that is remarkable you don't know where he comes from yet he opened my eyes we know that God does not listen to sinners he listens to godly people who do his will nobody's ever heard of opening a man's eyes of a man born blind if this man were not from God he could do nothing he's using logic to this he replied to this they replied to him you are steeped in sin at birth ah remember how this whole conversation started Jesus and his disciples walking by and his disciples look at him and said hey Jesus give us this answer this is this philosophical theological question we've always sort of been pondering didn't pay a lot of attention in job class so who sinned this man or his parents now here at the end of the story the religious leaders say you are steeped in sin at birth that's why you were blind oh but the man is seeing who isn't opening their eyes how dare you lecture us you are the ones who asked to come him to come in and answer the questions and then they threw him out Jesus heard that they had thrown him out and when he found him he said do you believe in the son of man you mean that guy in Daniel seven who is he sir the man asked tell me so that I may believe in him Jesus said you have now seen him in fact he is the one speaking with you then the man said Lord I believe and he worshiped him these are Jews Jews had gotten worship of anything else but the creator God beaten out of their system by almost 500 for 400 plus years of subjugation by pagan empires now the Greek term is fairly common and you might say he bowed before him but even that is dramatic now knowing the story it seems reasonable the man can see he was there he's answered the questions they've they've asked him all kinds of questions about Jesus and his status he said hey look I just have the facts these are the facts and Jesus comes to him and he worships him Jesus said for judgment I have come into this world so that the blind will see and those who see will become blind some Pharisees who were with him heard him say this and asked what are we blind to we're the good Pharisees Jesus we haven't put the cuffs on you we're sort of watching you and maybe hoping to enlist you perhaps or or maybe just wondering we're sort of on the fence Jesus we're sort of on the fence in the book of acts talks about some Pharisees that eventually joined the disciples and became part of this movement Jesus said if you were blind you would not be guilty of sin but now that you claim you can see your guilt remains because it's the cognizant or guilty in ways that the ignorant aren't all of this reading is to set up John chapter 10 a very famous chapter about the good shepherd and for years I've read John chapter 10 and studied it thoroughly but I never really put it in the context of John chapter 9 because this blind man was one of the lost sheep of Israel and Jesus has now enfolded him that's quite clearly what the chapter is about now part of the problem we have is that we have all these chapters which aren't necessarily put in the greatest places so if you are sort of reading naturally through the story you would not have ended at the end of chapter 9 and started a new section at the end of chapter 9 chapter 10 this quite obviously flows from chapter 9 that what we're looking at are Jesus and those that he is gathering in this man born blind is a man born blind who has not been born blind and is now a part of the chapter of the Lord this quite obviously flows from chapter 9 that what we're looking at are Jesus and those that he is gathering in this man born blind that Jesus heals is now a sheep of his pasture a sheep of his fold he worshiped Jesus others are still on the fence and in fact everything that's happening around Jesus they are pushing him away and they are plotting his death very truly I tell you Pharisees anyone who does not enter the sheep pen by the gate but climbs in by some other way is a thief and a robber the one who enters by the gate is the shepherd of the sheep the gatekeeper opens the gate for him and the sheep listen to his voice notice the man born blind heard his voice and worshiped he calls his own sheep by name and leads them out when he has brought in all of his own he goes on ahead of them and his sheep follow him because they know his voice but they will never follow a stranger in fact they will run away from him because they do not recognize a stranger's voice Jesus used this figure of speech but the Pharisees did not understand what he was telling them well they didn't have the whole chapter in front of them with the whole chapter in front of them you can sort of see it can't you therefore Jesus said again very truly I tell you I am the gate for the sheep all who come before me all who came before me come before me are thieves and robbers but the sheep have not listened to them notice the man born blind and his back and forth with the religious leaders I am the gate whoever enters through me will be saved they will come in and go out and find pasture the thief comes only to steal and kill and destroy I have come that they may have life and have it to the full oh what does he mean by that well the man born blind was not having a full life he saved him from his blindness and he's having it to the full I am the good shepherd the good shepherd lays down his life for the sheep the hired man is not the shepherd and does not own the sheep so when he sees the wolf coming he abandons the sheep and runs away then the wolf attacks the flock and scatters it now there are a variety of Old Testament prophets who address this and basically condemn the kings and the leaders because the sheep are scattered because they've not kept them kept them the man runs away because he is a hired hand and cares nothing for the sheep I am the good shepherd I know my sheep and my sheep know me just as the father knows me and I know the father and I lay down my life for the sheep now that's something what's worth more a human being or a sheep we butcher sheep we shear sheep we eat sheep this man the good shepherd lays down his life for the sheep I have other sheep that are not of this sheep pen I must bring them also they too will listen to my voice and they shall be one flock and one shepherd the reason my father loves me is that I lay down my life only to take it up again so no one takes it from me but I lay it down of my own accord I have authority to lay it down and authority to take it up again what's he talking about he's talking about Easter this command I received from my father the Jews who heard these things were again divided so in other words the miracle of healing a man born blind a man born blind resolves nothing except for the man except for those who believe many of them said he is demon possessed and raving mad why listen to him but others say these are not the sayings of a man possessed by a demon we see crazy people we know what that sounds like it's crazy this guy's not crazy can a demon open the eyes of the blind would a demon open the eyes of the blind now this past week this little video emerged on social media and just went crazy the most common biblical metaphor for humanity is a sheep and here's a sheep the shepherd pulls the sheep out of this ditch rescues the sheep from this ditch lets the sheep go and what does the sheep do puts itself back in the ditch I saw this and thought this is kind of like being a pastor you pull someone out of their trouble and guess what they do they get right back into the same trouble they were in before maybe just a little separate section of the ditch now what does this sheep believe does this sheep believe it got pulled out of that ditch well yeah I don't see how it could not why does the sheep go back and when we watch this video we think why does the sheep go back and we say well the sheep is dumb well it's not that dumb there are reasons the sheep goes back sheep is scared you know who knows what they are but this is us this is me this is you this is what we do and so when we argue like sheep about well what happened here or what happened there well it's worthwhile doing and maybe we'll come to some kind of decision but when it comes to how we act we're not going to be able to do that when we act this is sort of how we act now Jesus resurrection is more than just evidence that Jesus is God if we can struggle to understand and comprehend God that Jesus is powerful not subject to death that's an awfully big claim isn't it and the evidence for the claim is of course the resurrection itself but Jesus resurrection is a cosmic act that goes beyond our normal ideas of getting a sheep out of a ditch or believing in something Jesus did lots of miracles those didn't convince the disciples sufficiently to be what we can hardly imagine to not basically to be bold which is something that we will find them described eventually in the book of Acts but only after the day of Pentecost something's going on in this deliverance we need to be delivered from something which seems to be inside the sheep because the sheep keeps putting itself back in that ditch the sheep needs to be delivered delivered by something far deeper than this ditch the sheep needs to be transformed at a level we can only partly grasp but can also sort of into it what would a better sheep be? what would a better sheep do? well we kind of have an idea of what a better sheep wouldn't do which is go back in the darn ditch the oppression of the ditch is obviously not the sheep's worst problem now on my channel this week I posted a conversation with a woman and she told her story and her husband leaves her for another woman when she's one month pregnant and now years later she continues to stand by her marriage even though her husband is with someone else and they have joint custody of their daughter who's now about five now a lot of people think she's a fool most people won't say that in church they might not say it in the comment section seems awfully noble but perhaps a little dim why would you stand by a husband or at least a marriage doesn't really stand by the husband stands by a marriage now if you listen to the video she had been raised a Christian but wasn't really practicing as a Christian and then after all of this happened she was sort of flailing about and wound up in church going to church with some friends and eventually the light came on and all of that stuff that she had learned as a child suddenly started falling into shape and she realized what she needed to do she didn't want to be bitter she didn't want to be vindictive she didn't want to make her child the tug of war in the particular unhappiness between her and her ex-husband in terms of biblical if we want to talk about those terms divorce and remarriage she has all the grounds she could marry if she chose she'd be able to find another man and have happiness which is of course exactly what our culture says you should do go out and find romantic love because that will make you happy but she does it for the sake of the gospel and for her daughter and not to succumb to bitterness and resentment it's been quite amazing reading the comments from this video and the private emails that I have received people see in her a witness to a transformation and for some people it sort of encourages and ennobles them for other people it sort of disturbs them it's a picture of transformation and there's no doubt that people would have art in their hands there's no doubt that people would have arguments about what she should or shouldn't do what she can or cannot believe does she have sufficient reason for this or that it doesn't matter she's made her choice she's living by it how big a miracle would Jesus have to do to convince you he's the Messiah to define for you what Messiah is that miracle needs to be out there it needs to be public and physical in a way but that miracle also needs to be inside the sheep how do we get that miracle inside the sheep I'm not sure we do it at all I think someone else does it how do you know which shepherd is good how do we know what to think of Jesus is he a liar is he demon possessed is he from God Jesus tells us how to look the good shepherd lays down his life for that foolish sheep that's the one you follow you