https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=zxRymRwasLM

 Hi, this is Paul. I mentioned this article in a previous smaller video. Again, I'm continuing to play with length. Those of you who love the two three-hour videos, I'm sure there'll be more coming down the line. A lot depends on the time I've got available, what my schedule's doing during the week, how ideas are popping. I'm rearranging how I track ideas that I have that I want to turn into videos. I always have four or five times as many ideas as I have videos. If I can figure out how to manage everything, there might be more videos. I don't know if that's a welcome thing. I just figure with YouTube, you don't have to watch. This article really grabbed my attention, partly because I've lived through a lot of this period. I've done a lot of thinking about it, especially one of the videos I want to make is the second piece on the evangelism series. This split that we are experiencing in the church right now is really a big piece of it. The title of the article, it was on Pathios, it was by Daniel K. Williams. The title of the article is How the Civil Rights Movement Converted White Liberal Protestants to Secularism. Now, a subject like this is way bigger than any article or even any book. The world is just that big and complex. But I thought especially how the first part of this article framed the issues, I thought it was very helpful. This is Daniel K. Williams. I don't know anything about him except that he teaches somewhere. When I began studying American history as a PhD student at Brown University 20 years ago, I quickly realized that my professors and fellow students were operating by a different moral code than I was. Now, he says 20 years ago, so it's 2021, so he's talking about 2000. It makes me feel like I'm getting old. It was not the purely secular moral code that I, as a conservative white fundamentalist Christian at the time, well now I know he's white, I didn't know the first time I read it. I'm not that careful of a reader, especially when I'm sort of skimming things. Naively expected to have that have. Instead, it was the right's consciousness moral code that seemed to draw on the fervor of Christianity, but without the name. And again, Tom Holland and his work is really in the back of my mind during something like this. Many of the people who shared this moral code had not visited a church in years and few professed any love for Christianity. Yet they spoke as if they were driven by a moral zeal of religious conversion. And again, what we saw in the wake of the George Floyd, the George Floyd demonstrations, the bowing, the pleading, the confessing. I mean, this was all over that. In time, I realized that they had been indeed converted, not to a church or a revival service, but in the 20th century, American Great Awakening, known as the Civil Rights Movement. Now language has the power that when you read something and you hadn't had that idea for the first time, it hits you. And so part of what I did was I immediately went out and I picked up George Marsden's George Marsden's Fundamentalism in American Culture. And I've been reading that and it's great. It's a classic. It was written in the 80s. I had Marsden, I was privileged enough. Some of the few Calvin lights were still there in the 80s when I got there. I had a class with Waltersdorf. I had a class with Mao. I had a class with Marsden. Never had a class with Alvin Plantinga. I had plenty of classes with Neil Plantinga. But American, you know, the fundamentalism in American culture is a classic and it's a must read book for anything like this, especially with a few weeks ago, there was all this hype about Christian nationalism and it's like the 19th century, Christian nationalism, battle him with the republic. I mean, people are like, this is a this is a thing that's sweeping the nation. It's like, no, it's really more receding from the nation and the civil rights movement has everything to do with it. And so framing the civil rights movement as the 20th century American Great Awakening. Yeah. And how this connects with Tom Holland and secularism and Christianity. Yeah, that's that's right. Indeed, all of white academia has been baptized in this same religious revival, I found. And so had most white Democrats. And when I looked into the matter more closely, I found that this religious conversion experience explained the secularization and the institutional decline of white mainline Protestantism and the tensions that many contemporary educated white evangelicals, especially evangelicals with graduate degrees in the humanities, experience as they try to reconcile the values that have been reinforced by their academic studies with a counter perspective that they heard in church. Yeah. Yes, yes, yes, yes. Dead on right. And explains a lot of deconstruction. If you listen to those narratives, this was a great awakening and it's a religious conversion. Indeed, an understanding of the conversion experience that white mainline Protestants underwent in the civil rights movement in the 1960s might offer the best explanation for the moral class of visions that has divided our nation and is currently rending several conservative evangelical denominations as they debate whether to endorse repentance for past racial injustices or warnings against against critical race theory. But now, of course, that's just on race. What's been really rending even mainline denominations is, of course, same sex marriage and gender issues. So that's just the beginning of it. And so in that little video, when I was thinking about it, I was thinking about the civil rights movement 50s and 60s and then right on its heels, the counterculture. And I wish burn power live next door. Burn and I probably need to do another conversation because burn burns a little burns about 10 years older than I am. And so he lived through a lot of this and he was much more I was at the epicenter of the race thing and burn was closer to the epicenter of the Jesus movement and a lot of the counterculture things. And he knows music and all of that better than I do. So you know, in a lot of ways, his channel could be a companion channel and he's still making longer videos. So but this this is really key. And Tom Holland again, in his conversation with Andrew Doyle, really went here. And so I really want to focus on that because I just finished my conversation with Andrew Root today. And you know, Andrew is working through this via Charles Taylor and there's a lot to be mined there. But part of the difficulty is that we're still living in the echo of the modernist fundamentalist fight. And that was a big one at the end of the 20th century, at the beginning of the 20th century. But the counterculture and the 60s, Tom Holland's idea that this this is a this is a major movement. You can only know these things in terms of perspective. I mean, Holland is right. The fact that the civil rights movement was a religious revival of sorts is, of course, well supported by the historical evidence, led in part by the ministers in the southern Christian leadership conference, supported by tens of thousands of black and white Christians who believe Jesus was on the side of racial equality and fueled by a gospel and fueled by gospel music that was taken from the slave spirituals with only slight adaptations. The movement was inspired by an African-American Exodus theology that had been forged in the fires of centuries long experience of injustice. No doubt during the upcoming Black History Month, we will once again have an opportunity to revisit these themes on Christian blogs, websites as we should. OK. But what about the whites who participated in the movement? And quite frankly, what about the blacks? Because you know, I see you can't see any of these new streaming services and not see all of the promotion of black voices. But the black community is as complex as any community of its size. And it all just sort of gets, I don't want to say whitewashed, all of the terrain just sort of gets flattened in it. And it's in this new woke promotion. And it doesn't look flat to me at all. Just from the people I know in my life and in this church. That's one of Jordan Peterson's great points. All of these low resolution identity aspects and the way that these things are being appropriated, I use the word, for sort of cheap political ends is marginalizing and disenfranchising a lot of the nuance within these communities. And this is what has annoyed me about this thing all along. It's in fact the entire appropriation of this has, in my experience, been mostly a white phenomenon. Black folks know who they are. They know they have opinions. They know they have differences. And if we want to understand what happened to American progressive politics after 1968 and why progressivism became increasingly estranged from the rest of white America that did not experience this conversion experience, we need to ask what sort of conversion white progressives experienced on the march to Selma, Montgomery, or Birmingham in the 1960s. Now it's important to locate myself here. This was a movement for my father. And my father raised, again, Dutch Calvinist, pastoring in Patterson, New Jersey. This was his story and the story of Northside Chapel and the church growing up. But of course, all within the context of our peculiar Christianly Forum Church CRC perspective. And that was in many ways the context of this church and its planting too. Little different from Northside because racial politics on the East Coast are different from racial politics on the West Coast. I learned that very quickly when I got here. The Great Migration, the book that's right here, Isabel Wilkerson's, when I read this book, I felt that someone took my black and white memories of childhood and well, they're about black and white and made them color. And in some ways, yeah, it's a great book. The white American liberals who experienced the Civil Rights Movement as either marchers or sympathetic observers were by and large Protestants because most Americans in the 1960s were Protestants. There was even more, there was even more true of the college educated population who were especially likely to be mainline Protestants. Before the early 1960s, mainline Protestant clergy and academics had promoted a civil religion and you know, Robert Bella, he's the one that coined the term and you can go back and Google that term and read, I've read it on this channel before that original paper on civil religion, promoted a civil religion of Judeo-Christian democracy and that's where this Judeo-Christian really got going after World War II. The Holocaust was finally a tremendous shaming and embarrassment of how much anti-Semitism in culture and you know, Judeo-Christian civilization it was called. The Muslims were sort of over on the side and that is continuing. The Holocaust religion was good and secularization was bad. Mainline Protestant clergy in the 1950s said because the values of Americans care, because the values that Americans cared about, human dignity, equality and above all democracy depended on a spiritual view of human nature that atheism, especially in its materialist or Marxist variety refused to recognize. Now as some of you know because in some ways I'm forking this channel between the various different elements of my listeners, some of you listen to almost everything, some of you listen to just certain kinds of things that I post, we're writing about the spiritual worldview of the Bible or reading that in Machu Pajos book. Now the use of spiritual here, a little bit different and yet very, nobody's explaining it but if I would push them to explain it, my guess is most people would stumble. But there it is. And that's going to sort of go into this article because now in my experience people who grew up in the mainline are really different from people who grew up in fundamentalist churches and some of those issues came through quite clearly in my conversation with Andrew Root and that was really interesting for me in terms of reading his books and understanding what his project is. This was the message that one would have heard even from the most liberal Episcopalian bishops in the 1950s but it is also what one would have heard from the president of Yale University or Oberlin College, both of which were still Protestant institutions representing the liberal consensus of that era. And again George Marsden in all of this, maybe that's one guy I should have on here, I don't know he's getting up there in age, he wasn't young when I had him at Calvin College in the 80s. But his work both on the Twilight of the American Enlightenment published not long ago, Christianity and American culture, George Marsden has done a lot of this basic work and if you look at let's say what the president of Yale Divinity and the president of Christian colleges all over America were writing in the wake of the Civil War in the 1870s, that has a lot to bear on this story and again George Marsden has focused on this probably more than anybody else. And though evangelicals and mainline Protestants were divided on many points during the 1950s, the idea that organized Christian religion was essential for the preservation of American freedom and democratic order was a point of agreement that transcended all other theological divisions, uniting not only the majority of American ministers but also many academics and politicians. And this is why when a couple of weeks ago I heard people usually more from the progressive evangelical side running around crying, American, you know, Christian nationalism, I thought, what a grief people! Christian nationalism was the establishment position of the United States and so when it comes up in the 1980s it was finger pointing back to the 1950s saying you've abandoned us and what this article tries to get into is what happened in that migration, the great secularism and the great sort of falling away and leaving of the church. Now I've been approaching this issue from a whole variety of aspects, the science and religion aspect, but here the moral aspect is really a vital piece to play in this because at some point these institutions that would have overwhelmingly considered themselves overtly Christian in the 1950s, that, you know, again George Marsden, see if I have that book here. Anyway it's Marsden's book about the transition of the American universities and that transition again happens in the same period from the from 1870s into the 20th century but as this author noted, 1950s these institutions were continued to be proudly American partly because they recruited God in their war against godless communism and obviously with the fall of communism that radically changed American conversations with respect to atheism and a whole bunch of other things. The civil rights movement called this faith an institutional Christianity in the American state into question. Now again in the little video that I made, when I say little I mean 20 minutes, the little video that I made, this, we've got really pressure on institutions, challenges on institutions from the right and the left right now. I was commenting to Rick the other day that with Iantifa on the left and with the storming of the capital on the right, we have people on both ends that are making suggestions that well maybe the whole system is corrupt and we would do better to get rid of it all. It's dangerous when you've got people on both sides thinking that way. Young white mainline Protestant seminarians who traveled south to Selma supported the movement initially because it accorded well with the values they already held, that is the values of racial equality and democracy which all mainline Protestant denominations had been preaching for decades and it's important to understand here that again I was reading a biography of Martin Luther King Jr. not too long ago. If you look at his education, it's very much in that realm because you really didn't have the rise of black culture as let's say Thomas Sowell calls it and so they very much were you had historically black Christian colleges, historically black Christian seminaries, but in many ways they were sort of keeping pace with the broader white culture and doing so without any embarrassment necessarily. Today with the way these conversations are going there's going to be a lot more contention with it. But whites who joined the movement quickly realized that the problem of institutional racism was much more pervasive and systemic than they had imagined when listening to polished white ministers denounce it as it is in the comfortable all-white upper middle class sanctuaries of their home of their home churches. Now he used institutional racism. I just this morning caught another article and someone made a YouTube of it which was quite interesting. Tim Keller and Progressive Evangelicalism and the title of the YouTube video was The Problem with Tim Keller and as I was going through the YouTube video and oh there's an article oh Tom Skinner I know that name my father read him quite a bit and Tom Skinner, Bill Pannell these were these were people that my father knew these were these were household names for me growing up and then when I began to hear contemporary critical race theory sort of poured on to these people I thought hey wait a minute that was not how we talked in the 70s and I still contend I still contend that we're dealing with second and third wave anti-racism and that there are distinctions between them and it's very interesting watching this piece on Tim Keller a critical piece basically basically say well see there it was and this is Marxism it's like this is going to get complicated. So was the problem institutional racism in the 1970s or was it just racism and well what would we mean by that well it would depend how you defined it and and it was it was indeed institutional it was institutionalized in the laws of Jim Crow and it was perpetuated socially in segregation and again Martin Luther King Jr. claimed you know quite rightly probably that 11 a.m. was the most segregated time in America is this is something that I heard my father talk about often and I heard it come from the pulpit from him so yeah but again these words are tricky because and this is part of my own dissonance with what's been going on because these words have different valence than they had different associations than they had 50 years ago. Worse they were dismayed to find that a large part of the white institutional American church was on the wrong side of the civil rights cause and that was true it certainly was true of the Southern Church and again I have memories of being a child sort of on both sides of this line because on one hand you know we went to church mostly with black folks and I went to school mostly with white folks and some of those white folks did not like what was happening and as you'll generally hear with children what the parents are saying the children are repeating those first drafts are getting imprinted on those children and and I remember at that point there were there was a lot of effort my parents were involved in ECUMP which was trying to get scholarships to for African-American children so they could go to better schools the same school that I was going to and so a few were there in those classes and this to get a Christian education and then eventually Dawn Treader was started and you know there were there were divisions over that too but a Christian school right there in the city mostly white teachers again see that little video that I made that's why I said that's probably the nub of a video or at least maybe the seed of a video and maybe this is some of its flowering even at its best they thought the white American Protestant Church gave the civil rights movement omen only tepid support letter from a Birmingham jail I mean read read King's letter that that was his outcry he was looking to he was looking to leverage sympathetic whites because he knew that that would turn the page for them with respect to the court fights but remember as I said in that little video the civil rights movement in the 50s and 60s and well before it was was deeply institutional because America was deeply institutional and so these you know you almost the American or the the Southern Christian leadership conference you started an organization and you had officers and again just read primary material from the times there's plenty of it you know even look at Malcolm X the nation of Islam and and and Elijah Muhammad and that whole story again read a good biography of Malcolm X learn this history and you'll notice it's very different from today the the the culture has changed dramatically well you know much to my surprise and sometimes dismay I realize this is 50 years ago and I still remember it I'm getting older and throughout the evangeline let's see where did I lose my place even at its best they thought white American churches gave the civil rights movement only tempered support and more commonly it was a platform for ministerial complaints about Martin Luther King Jr.'s law breaking and pious excuses for those who refused to to to get involved on the civil rights marches the righteousness of the cause and the brotherhood and sisterhood of those in the beloved community who helped them bear witness in the struggles gave young white liberals a sense of moral fervor that nothing in the white church could ever equal yeah highlight that one I'll read it again on the civil rights marches the righteousness of the cause and the brotherhood and the sisterhood of those in the beloved community who helped them bear witness in the struggle gave young white liberals a sense of moral fervor that nothing in the white church could ever equal well and I think this if there was fervor in the white church given the way things were laid out a big part of that would have to be anti-communism in some of them and so this is where you begin to see sort of a division America love it or leave it that was a big phrase back in the 70s and and and so some Americans were lined up against to fight godless communism and that was let's say continuation from the 19s and 1950s and 1960s and you can very much see how a little bit later when you hit Vietnam that more and more there's going to be more and more skepticism about the righteousness of the American government and its institutions and and that of course fought you know with Vietnam you're going to have Richard Nixon and the Watergate break-ins and and again just comparing you know now the double impeachment of Trump versus the time of Nixon again I was pretty young during Nixon I was you know Nixon's impeachment I was 10 11 years old but I I've always sort of been a news junkie and my parents were news junkies and we watched the news and I remember I don't know if my mother still has it I remember getting the newspaper a Nixon quits I remember keeping that paper I'll have to ask my mother if she still kept that paper because I kind of like it be kind of fun to put on the wall back to the article some of them lost their faith in organized Christianity entirely my question would be when because Martin Luther King Jr. he was organizing southern black churches to fight the fight that was organized Christianity now maybe they lost some of their faith in white Christianity but but this this this experience of the righteous cause I think is deep here in let's call it the great awakening of the 20th century many came to believe that the mantle of prophecy had passed from the church to the movement right there from the church to the movement away from the institution into the movement or at least that the movement constitutes the prophetic voice of the church and you see that then that's not one thing that's two things and you still see that tension today and often for many the church is is sort of a is sort of an also run or a lag and if you go back to um I was blogging then I wasn't doing YouTube but I did I talked about some of this early on probably in 2018 you know you look at Ryan Bell who you know he had this his year of being an atheist and he had been a minister in the I think Seventh-day Adventist Church but but when I see a lot of deconstruction a lot of it follows along this line they're having a an experience of a righteous cause that they participate in but it's not in the church it's in a movement and I think when people who have participated let's say in some of the George Floyd demonstrations you see that all over the place there's this there's this religious hagiography that happens around the the martyrs for the cause the stonewall riots etc etc and and we see we see a lot of this embroidering let's say this religious embroidery happening all over the place in our culture and and it's not being done in it's being done somewhat in churches but you know when churches do it it's sort of you know Rick Sunday looks around at the sanctuary and says this place kind of looks like the 1970s and nothing's changed here since then and I kind of thought it kind of looks like a lot of the houses of of people who bought all their stuff in the 70s and it's still perfectly good and they live simple and thrifty and frugal lives and that's the way it is and it looks like houses I remember as a child so I was growing up in the 70s houses I would go into and they'd look like the 1930s or the 1940s later on I I could sort of or the 1950s I could sort of target I remember going to violin lessons and we had a young violinist who was teaching violin at Eastern Christian and I had lessons at her house a few times and I remember going into her house and that was very much of the 70s and she had modern furniture and it was like oh this is this is different than what you'd see in most of the other houses I went into the church has this sort of ballast the church has this sort of inertia that that sort of retards fast change especially in certain types but but this this movement from church this this this the mantle of prophecy had passed from church to movement or at least that the movement constitutes the prophetic voice of the church as the progressive Mennonite sociologist Paul Pitchy phrased it in 1964 after the 1960s mainline Protestant denominations experienced a decades-long continuous decline in membership while the causes of that decline are complex most analysis have pointed to one central factor the failure of mainline Protestant churches to retain their children first with the baby booners then with the gen xers and millennials and while few of those youth left may well a few of those youth left mainline Protestantism for conservative evangelical or Catholic churches most became non-religious now right there it's really important because integral in this thesis of a great awakening of the 20th century is the idea that the and this ties in with so much other stuff that there was a a religious fervor to the demonstrations and that experience in youth of a religious fervor sort of you know sets people and and they discovered they didn't need to have that in association with a church you could have that well what what how was the church functioning so so if you think about even of sort of the creation if you think about the southern Christian leadership conference as sort some sort of a civil rights parachurch organization part of what we see happening technologically is now instead of the institution of the church managing the community of the church and i mean really doing the groundwork to keep that community together now this is happening through television and it's happening through radio and it's happening through again and again the printing press and and you no longer need the institutional backbone of the church to do these things now we have other things parachurch organizations of sorts who are actually doing this work sometimes when the texting gets going on my watch i really have to shut it down or i'm just going to be distracted by it and so in many ways i think a lot of the departure from the church is not so much it's not a departure from religion we see religion popping out all over it's a departure from the institutions and the organizations and from the clergy the clergy who very much had a role of managing and doing all of that now suddenly people are sort of on their own out there managing and and and leaders would call for protests and people would come and you no longer dependent on the institutional resources of the church to to affect these things even those who stayed lost most of their faith in the church's moral authority and and notice the the emphasis on the sentence is lost in the church's moral authority or was in fact the moral authority transferred to the leadership of these movements and to the and to newspapers and television and you know if if walter cronkite was the most trusted man in america it's significant that it wasn't the reverend walter cronkite and so i think in in terms of whereas the church before had been in many ways the media outlet there's a replacement from church and this is a long slow story in many ways after you know in late antiquity the church replaces the roman empire and and the church is always sort of you know fighting back and forth with kingdoms during the middle ages and and and we see this long replacement narrative as as in many ways after the protestant reformation nation states replace the church you know the piece of augsburg it's the it's the religion of the prince that decides the religion of the people now you've got to think about that thing all the way through and you know a lot of tom holland's work has been helpful for me in terms of opening my eyes to some of what had been happening in the eastern roman empire and there are more stories to be told in all of that so so lost their faith in the church's moral authority or perhaps their faith was displaced into other moral authorities one in which they had a personal experience their own great awakening of moral consciousness i was just watching someone mentioned jesus it's not jesus creed that's um so jesus culture sacramento is the offspring of bethel in redding and i've mentioned bethel a number of times in this channel bethel redding is the place to be right now in terms of signs and wonders and healing and this is if you just open up their website jesus culture dot com slash sacramento this is what you see and well what what's just just look in the background at the young people what what is happening to them you know if if the civil rights movement was a was a great awakening of the 20th century the greatest there's all these other little awakenings this is this is church revival culture in many ways what what these young people are having all the way up to and including justin bieber and we can talk about hill song and this entire movement where christianity in some ways larry norman why does the devil have all the good music here what churches are reliably producing we don't we don't have this um this b-roll of a preacher preachers make crappy b-roll and even if you put them in skinny jeans you have oh come on don't stop now um you have this i mean what are they having i mean you went down to selma for that experience of moral fervor well this isn't moral fervor right now what what are what are they experiencing they're they're experiencing liturgical release and bliss and now again i mean think about the black churches in the south think about think about you know the you got the frozen chosen and a lot of northern european churches that are state and liturgical but that ain't this and and this is in some ways closer to the liturgy of the black church but but what now is is being associated with what now is being associated with you know this these weekly experiences of union with the divine you know this is why people that you know who you are the people oh we got to get everybody on psychedelics and it's like you know these these people are doing psychedelics every week baby or maybe it's not the same okay i'm sure it's not the same but but just watch them they're in bliss they're singing their heart out they're having an intimate relationship and and this is powerful now again some of you have deconstructed from it etc etc and why i don't think it's a i don't think it's a coincidence that it's often the guitar player and the and the people who are leading this that are having the experience of well i just learned that if i just i just hold that note a little longer if i hit that note a little higher and if i just if i just tweak that music a little bit you just put people over the edge and it's like well isn't that what we're doing in a secular thing but what's really fascinating is that the main line didn't go here so much not as much that that this is much more connected to conservative christianity along the evangelical fundamentalist it's it seems to be easily paired with that there's got to be something culture countercultural about this just like there was something countercultural about people's experience in the civil rights movement back to the beginning of the paragraph even those who who stayed lost most of their faith or i'd say again their faith was relocated into the movements and into the voices of the movements if church teaching contradicted their sense of morality they followed their own moral compass as pro-choice feminist catholics did when they denounced their church's teaching on abortion or as numerous pro-gay rights methodist clergy did in the early 21st century when they publicly defied their denominations prohibition on same-sex weddings and risk being defrocked for their social justice stance okay well it's it's again it's a counter institutional it's a counter culture it's but in the broader culture this then evokes a fervor you know here am i standing against the man here am i standing against the institution and you know how many movies isn't this just simply the main plot line again and again and again this has deep resonance in our culture dare we say it's a spirit and it's not a new spirit it's it's martin luther at the diet of verms here i stand i can do no other though the post civil rights socially conscious clergy might continue to wear a collar or put that collar on transgender people or tattooed people or or lesbians or what have you and preach in a church they now viewed their task as prophetic not salvific or let's look at let's think about my go-to books here move let's think about i should probably stack them better steve smith's idea of paganism in terms of imminentism now again if you think i'll fly away well that means one thing but we have overcome well also follow marsden's tracking of post millennialism to pre millennialism so though the post civil rights though the post civil rights socially conscious clergy might continue to wear a collar and preach in churches and in the church they're not going to be able to do that because they're not going to be being compensated for by the Quebec City Aqupoint society of the meets recipes healthy Christian cookie holiday society, they now believed, was no longer secularism or materialistic atheism, but instead the moral hypocrisy of racial injustice and inequality. And that was not merely an external threat but was instead just as likely to come from within the U.S. government or even from within their own congregations. Again, notice institutions and how they're functioning here. In some ways, the parachurches and the movement leaderships are sort of like Halloween pop-up stores. They come up and they go down dependent on the movement that is required according to in a sense the zeitgeist of, but they're not just expressing the movement, they're also fueling the movement. And as we talked about before, part of what happens is that, well, when you sort of succeed, well, now you've got this institutional framework, well, When the March of Dimes beats polio, well, now we're going to fight all children's diseases. And you know, when you finally win and have gay marriage given to the United States by the Supreme Court, now it's on to the trans. So here we are. Armed with this new truth, as they saw it, they were eager to confront the evils of organized Christianity and to judge the church by its moral code rather than see the church as the moral beacon for society, just as they might have only a few years earlier. Now, what's interesting is that in many ways, the atheists who probably have already made this transition do this, but now make the whole point about God by virtue of political association, it really is, just thinking about this right now, it really is a little funny that, you know, Sam Harris sort of gets shellacked because of association when he was kind of doing that the whole time with in this other way that, well, now we have a certain moralism and we have moral institutions and moral leaders and we have all of this moral machinery and now we're going to bat against the church. Which church? Well, and now then, of course, they become civil wars within churches. Indeed, the clarion moral call of civil rights was only foundational, was the only foundational moral certainty than many, armed with this new truth, indeed the clarion moral call of civil rights was the only foundational moral certainty should it be that many mainline Protestant clergy now had. That's exactly right. Now that this was what Christianity meant, just like in Jesus culture, this is what Christianity is. You know, the sermon can tank, but it's awfully helpful for the preacher. If you've got 20 minutes, you know, the old seeker liturgy, three fast, three slow, meaning songs, three fast, three slow, one to get ready and one to go. There you have it. Three fast, get the crowd going. Then three slow, get them into a meditative mood and then preach that sermon and deliver that point at the end so that tears come down and everybody's hearts move. So you cement that fervor from the liturgy into their hearts and then send them out to do it. Young ministers, University of Chicago Divinity School, Professor Langdon Gilkey, where have we seen that name before? Shantung compound, didn't read that so long ago, wrote in the Christian century in 1965, are by no means sure of anything they learned in seminary, except perhaps the subject of race relations. And so religion will basically become race relations. At exactly the same moment that white mainline Protestants underwent this conversion experience, white American academics did the same. Numerous nominally Protestant colleges cut their ties to the denominations that had long exercised at least minimal oversight over their affairs or, in other cases, acted as if those ties no longer mattered. College administrators gave up their attempts to police students' sexual behavior and instead, like the students and the faculty, embraced the new ideas that social justice, not individual behavior, especially not individual behavior relating to consensual sex between adults, was all that mattered. Now, again, I think there's a little bit of sliding through because he sort of skipped over the counterculture, and that's an important piece of this. And I think he should have paused because I think that juncture is vital. I think what he laid down before here is correct, but that juncture is vital. But rather than fill this religious void with vague commitments to secular academic freedom, as one might have expected, the humanities programs at least, or to a large extent, the social sciences and programs and education and law, embrace the new moral commitment to racial justice as their reason for being. I'll just say it in English. Nowhere was this more evident than in programs in American history. Before 1968, which is, of course, the academic discipline of this individual, scholarship in American history had been driven largely by the mainline Protestant commitment to American democracy. And, well, of course, what was the 20th century about? Fighting fascism, then resisting communism. It was all about democracy. But, well, what if we can have a woke theocracy? Well, that's going to come a lot later, but in some ways, maybe we're seeing the roots of it. Andrew Jackson, the subject of Arthur Schlesinger Jr.'s seminal monograph, The Age of Jackson in 1945, was widely heralded as a pioneer of democracy. He isn't seen like that now. Remember whose picture was on Donald Trump's wall of the Oval Office? Remember who came into saying he's a Jacksonian? And a little bit ironic when, you know, sort of, oh, well, who really did win that election? Google will put a little thing under there to clear it up for you. And Twitter was widely heralded as a pioneer of democracy. And Woodrow Wilson was an even greater, to an even greater degree, look at what would just go and find in the American experience the documentary on Woodrow Wilson and the Versailles Treaty and Wilson's desire to. Now, remember, at the end of the First World War, they're dealing with basically the end of monarchies in Europe, all right? And so when you looked at the Kaiser, well, remember the Kaiser was the cousin to the British and the Russian, you know, that era wasn't that long ago. And so for Wilson, the answer for peace in Europe was democracy. Well, the Weimar Republic didn't go so well. And of course, communism was now starting in the Soviet Union. But now, again, look at Andrew Jackson and Woodrow Wilson and the light they are today and what happened, for example, in Princeton with respect to Woodrow Wilson. Well, Wilson and Jackson are Southerners. And don't forget, I believe I'm correct. Woodrow Wilson was there as a boy at the end of the Civil War, seeing them, you know, seeing Jefferson Davis taken in chains. This history is not that old. And all of this history is connected. Political history and especially magisterial studies of American presidents and U.S. diplomacy thus held a privileged place in the academy. But in the late 1960s, this changed almost certain, almost instantly, as a new generation of assistant professors who were hired in large numbers due to the insatiable demand for new faculty that occurred as soon as the first baby boomers entered college quickly came to dominate history departments and replace the values of their older colleagues with a new moral commitment driven almost entirely by the values that they had learned from the Civil Rights Movement and opposition to the Vietnam War. There it happened. It's religion. It's fervor. A quick look at the books selected for the Bancroft Prize, widely considered to be the most prestigious academic book award in U.S. history, reveals this instantaneous shift. Before 1968, the vast majority of Bancroft Award winners were books of political or diplomatic history, usually defined in the narrowest sense of the word. There were always liberal sprinklings of presidential biographies. In 1967, for example, the prize was given to the second volume of Charles Sellers' multi-volume biography of James Knox Polk, which covered the years 1843 to 1846. Those who wanted to read about the second half of Polk's one-term presidency would have to wait for the third volume. Page Smith's biography of John Adams won the prize in 1963. Arthur Link's study of Wilson's pre-war diplomacy received the award in 1961, but after 1968, no book like Sellers' biography of Polk would ever again receive the award. Just look at the kinds of things James Polk did. Manifest destiny. Instead, the prize would be given in almost every year to at least one book on African American history. A little bit of white guilt, I think. When the Bancroft Prize Committee of 1968 gave the award to Henry Allen Bullocks, A History of Negro Education in the South, 1619 to the present, it was the first time in the awards' decades-long history that a work of African American history won the Bancroft. But it was hardly the last. The following year, the Bancroft Award was given to Winthrop Jordan's White Over Black, and in 1970, it went to Dan T. Carter's monograph on the Scottsboro Boys. Indeed, for eight of the ten years from 1968 to 1977, a book on African American history or slavery received the Bancroft Award. Perhaps not coincidentally, nine of the ten authors of Bancroft Award-winning books on African American history during these years were white. Isn't this interesting? And most were young. Carter, for instance, was only 30 years old when his Scottsboro book won the Bancroft, and Jordan was likewise well under 40. Young enough to have been deeply shaped by the Civil Rights Movement, they spent the rest of their writing careers producing monograph after monograph devoted to uncovering themes of racial injustice in American history. So did an entire generation of American scholars, and so did the next generation of academics they trained. Nobody's writing books on the history of, oh, everyone's writing books on that. And again, I'm not complaining. It's just interesting, noteworthy. The Bancroft Prize selections were only a reflection of a much larger shift in the historical profession and in the broader academic world. Textbooks, college lectures, and prelim exam reading lists were quickly revised to take the new scholarship into account. Students of American history were now learned a narrative that was largely driven by the new racial consciousness in the academy. This was also the newfound view of the Democratic Party, especially after the party transformation had resulted from Robert Kennedy and Eugene McCarthy's campaigns of 1968 and George McGovern's presidential campaign of 1972. That's how the Democrats captured the black vote. Campaigns that enlisted a new generation of baby boomer Democrats who had been politically mobilized by the causes of the civil rights and opposition to the Vietnam War. For the next four decades or more, even the most centrist of Democratic presidential candidates, such as Bill and Hillary Clinton, were people whose politics had been shaped by the vision of the civil rights movement. And for that reason, now pay attention, Hillary Clinton went to Wellesley. Hillary Clinton in many ways is a deeply mainline figure, whereas Bill Clinton himself is quite a bit more Southern Baptist. And it's very interesting looking at the lines here. And I know I just triggered some of you, Bill Clinton, Hillary Clinton. Ooh. And for that reason, I only trigger people in the United States, all you folks in Great Britain and Australia and Germany and the Netherlands, you won't get triggered at all by that. And for that reason, there was usually very little discernible difference between the rights consciousness expressed by the mainline Protestant journals of the Christian century, the prevailing opinions among humanities professors and the views of the Democratic Party leaders. It was the Democratic Party at prayer. It's the mainline church. To be sure, many humanities professors considered themselves well to the political left of particular Democratic presidential nominees. That hasn't changed. But these are usually matters of degree, not orientation, because both groups shared a common belief in the values they had learned from the Civil Rights Movement. Now, again, pay attention, Joseph Biden Jr., that's the one in office, is Roman Catholic. And so this spread out beyond the Protestant framework. Because of the value shift in mainline Protestantism in the academy, which the Republican Party after the 1970s refused to embrace, but which the Democratic Party, of course, did, because you got a two-party system, it's got a little opponent processing there. Graduated educated whites and mainline Protestant clergy left the Republican Party in droves in the late 20th century, since they now considered its stance on race, poverty, and other human rights morally objectionable. Now, remember sort of the flag of morality has shifted. It's no longer in churches so much. It's out there in general publishing, in newspapers. Is the New York Times a religious newspaper? More religious perhaps than the Christian Science Monaster? Among African-American, among American voters with at least some postgraduate education, Democrats now outnumbered Republicans nearly two to one. You know, Jordan Peterson and all the hand-wringing about the academy, well, this thing happened decades ago. And among college faculty, the moral outrage against the Republican Party has become so strong that in 2017, we've got Jonathan Hyde in here, in a comprehensive 2017 social science survey revealed that 39% of the nation's 51 leading liberal arts colleges did not have a single Republican among the tenured or tenure track faculty and that an additional 39% had a faculty with that was less than 1% Republican. So much for equity. Striking after surveying, strikingly, after surveying the voter registrations of more than 8,000 liberal arts faculty, the authors of the study could not find a single anthropologist who was a registered Republican. Not a one! By comparison, departments of history were slightly more balanced there. Registered Democrats outnumbered registered Republicans only by 17 to 1. To register as a Republican in 2017, a humanities or social science professor would have had to implicitly reject the association of the assumed values that had guided the humanities disciplines from the previous half century, which is why in many elite colleges, registered Republicans among the humanities and social science professors were almost as rare as young earth crenationists among the biologists and paleontologists. That's a good line. What values did those shaped by the moral visions of the civil rights movement believe they were defending when they voted Democratic? A commitment to equality and human rights was the foundational principle, but beyond that was an assumption that structural racial inequality along with other inequalities, including those of gender, sexuality, and social class was deeply embedded in American society and that only an ongoing political commitment to social justice could address these inequalities. Those who never experienced the transforming religious conversion of the civil rights movement held a very different worldview and as a result, they became increasingly suspicious of both the Democratic Party and the university humanities faculties. Initially, they were often suspicious of mainline Protestant clergy as well, but as membership and those denominations declined to the point of near irrelevance in much of the country, progressive Protestants no longer received much attention in conservative complaints. They were just complaining about the Democrats and they just weren't, you know, whereas you'd still have some of those people maybe going to church like Hillary Clinton or Joe Biden or John Kerry. I mean, John Kerry's a terrific example of this. I mean, throwing away his medals. I mean, maybe we should look in a, maybe I should get John Kerry on the channel for a conversation. That would be kind of fun, but Democratic politicians and professors, both of whom seem to have more influence, remained popular targets. Because there were, and now, you know, you're really setting up the 80s here with this and the sort of the pushback by the religious right, the moral majority, because their worldview had its foundation, had as its foundation, a commitment to racial equality, the rights conscious progressives believed that their white conservative opponents were committed to the preservation of inequality. Yeah, that's what we're hearing. It would have been more accurate to say, I think, that many mainstream white conservatives, conservatives, the vocal racist friends accepted, were committed to racial integration and equality under the law, but disagreed with the progressives about the pervasiveness of structural racism in contemporary American society. Now, he just wrote this. And so again, we're using language that we're using today, but we're talking about the people of the sixties and fifties, sixties and seventies. And, you know, so you got to watch our language. This created a dilemma for white evangelicals who entered academic programs in the humanities at any point after the 1970s, because they were confronted with an internal clash of moral visions. Their readings and coursework were constructed almost entirely around a moral vision, a commitment to rights conscious equality forged in the civil rights activism that in all likelihood, their own churches never shared. If they fully adopted this vision, they would likely spend the rest of their lives critiquing their own church traditions, hoping that their fellow believers would experience the moral conversion that they themselves had and see the light. Maybe they would even leave their church traditions altogether, believing they could no longer tolerate a worldview that they now thought amounted to racism. That this dilemma that many white evangelicals, and that's the dilemma that many white evangelicals still face. Plenty of books out there that are targeted this way. How many blog posts, how many things do I hear? You know, this is it. And deconstruction awaits because, well, will you stay in church? Well, the moral center of the movement isn't in church, hasn't been there for 50 years, at least. This past year, the struggle has been particularly acute because national political events made it impossible to ignore, as well as, well, just national political events. Well, how about the media telling of these national political events? That's part of it too. How churches responded to the killing of George Floyd, the demonstrations of Black Lives Mather, the presidential contest between Trump, Pence, Ticket, and the Biden-Harris campaign, and most recently the attack on the U.S. Capitol offered fresh opportunities for conflict between those whose vision had been shaped by the civil rights conversion experience and those who had not. It would be easy to say that the whites who converted to civil rights activism were right and those who never saw the light are simply wrong, but I don't think it's that simple. Like most historians of modern America, I've been shaped by the civil rights movement conversion experience of my academic mentors, and after years of reading African-American voices, there's no way that I can deny, now he's using contemporary language, structural racism that has pervaded the United States from its inception and continues to plague it today. And so, in that sense, I believe that the whites who experienced a conversion to anti-racism as a result of their encounters with Black activists were correct, but as a Christian, I am also deeply suspicious of the moral conversions that move one away from church and even away from Jesus. Ah, now his roots as a young man are manifesting themselves, this sort of placing, you know, Jesus sort of on top of this and moving Jesus' lips, not quite done so easily. Jesus talks about other things too, and that religious root goes deeper, which is sadly what happened to a lot of whites who became more secular even as they became more morally fervent. There it is, another great sentence. This was especially ironic given that their secular conversions occurred in a movement that was largely led by Black Christians, including many pastors. It was also tragically ironic that their secularized view of racial justice caused them to become further removed from the worldviews of most African-Americans, the demographic group in the United States that are most likely to be church-going Christian believers today. By making a particular needed moral cause an ultimate cause, as though it would substitute for God, oh boy, there's so much in here, and leaving the spiritual, there's that word, out of the equation entirely, they undermined their own ability to fully comprehend the African-American civil rights voices that had initially inspired them. They were appropriating. Which is why, even today, there is a substantial difference in viewpoints between white secular democratic progressive democrats and African-Americans and Hispanic democrats who are much more likely to have a worldview shaped by a Christian faith. So again, this is part of the reason I keep hitting these worldview and spiritual questions when I'm reading Peugeot's book, because these terms, when Peugeot uses them, they're sort of over in the little church cloister. The words mean slightly different things when they're outside of it. In the year that the Bancroft Prize Committee gave its first award to an African-American author, it was also awarded the prize to Richard Lyman Bushman for his book, From Puritan to Yankee, a study of how New England puriches gradually left their Calvinist faith commitments laps and became instead worldly-minded Yankees. Let's travel through New England, look at all those congregational churches right there in city squares that have a few people go to them with all the different BLM or rainbow flags on the pavement. We welcome all, just not many bother caring to go. After that volume, except for three more books on the 17th century, no book whose primary subject was American religion would receive the Bancroft Prize until 1995. It was as, oh wait a minute, hang on, I gotta look something up. I thought I remembered this, The Twilight of the American Enlightenment by George Marsden, 1950s and Crisis of Liberal Belief. Winner of the Bancroft Prize, well what do you know, what year did George write this? Basic books, come on, where's the title page? Anyway, yeah, Marsden's book won the Bancroft Prize. It was as though among all the scholarship on the moral issue of racial justice, American historians found no room to inquire about the deeper spiritual beliefs that had inspired those moral commitments to begin with. Okay, what do we mean by spiritual? Like Bushman's Puritans turned Yankees, they might have retained a heightened moral consciousness even in the absence of the original faith, but there was something hollow and desiccated about the moral cause with no spiritual groundings. What on earth does he mean by spiritual? And without, you feel it, but can you describe it, can you define it? Without any grace for those who did not believe in the cause to the same extent. Perhaps what the white progressives needed to What the white progressives needed to experience in the civil rights movement of the 1960s was not conversion, but repentance. And perhaps if they had, they would have returned to their churches with a humble determination to learn from African American Christians, renounce their past blindness, fight structural racism, show love and mercy to those in their own churches whose perspective might differ. But here's the thing, if you've got to choose between repentance and moral fervor, moral fervor is a lot more fun. It just is. So today, a half century later, we are left with polarizing conflict between white Christian conservatives who don't understand the conversion that others experienced on the road to Selma and white secular liberals who don't understand how the conservatives could remain so blind. Okay, but what to make of this? So, when I read this article, I thought, all right, point taken. And this guy grew up fundamentalist, so he's got some mercy for his own people. Good. But it doesn't seem to have any, we're sort of dealing again back with this duality. How can we understand these movements? So, all right, it's a different religion. What do you make of that religion? And again, you get into it a little bit at the bottom when he talks about roots, that a deeper spiritual, but there was something hollow and desiccated about the moral cause with no spiritual grounding, and without any grace for whom they did not believe in the cause to the same extent. And so here we still are. Well, what are we talking about with moral fervor and what is this moral fervor connected to? And when you look at all of the drama around churches that look at the moral fervor, and the moral fervor that they look at, churches that look like this and that are, you know, Justin Bieber goes to a church like this, and well, does Hillsong or does Bethel, are they really down with the movement? And which movement? The same sex marriage movement. Bethel isn't going to be down. Hillsong isn't going to be down. Now, they might not forefront these issues, but to a certain degree, they don't care. This is their moral fervor. So it's a good article, and understanding it in the matrix of moral fervor and seeing the poverty of a deeper foundation, I think, is helpful, but we have a ways to go yet. So I hope you enjoyed the article. It's a good article. The link to it is below. Let me know what you think in the comments.