https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=8kZwuYRIUFo

 Hi, this is Paul and this is Rough Draft for Sunday where I run through the current version of my Sunday sermon. Now I know some of you don't read your Bibles, some of you don't have Bibles, some of you don't want to read the Bible. This is sort of a little different from preaching in church where there's at least an expectation that a lot of the people know something about the Bible. So that little disclaimer that won't be in the sermon. Well, if you do have a Bible and if you do open it or if you ever think about opening it, why do you open it or for that matter, why do you go to church? As a pastor for years, people show up and in many cases it's because there's been a problem and they need help. Were you in trouble? Do you have a conflict with a loved one? Did you have a fight with your wife or husband? Are you short on cash? Did a health issue suddenly arise? Is life feeling meaningless and you're trying to find something and so sometimes people open up their Bible for sometimes what's called the Holy Dip, where you open it up and you read whatever passage the Bible falls open to. People feel they need some sort of intervention and from this book maybe they'll read something and something will change and it will help them arrive someplace. Now the Bible grew out of the story of a people. Now if you read the if you read Joshua, Judges, Ruth, 1st and 2nd Samuel, there's a progression as to how people related to or tried to relate to God in a very religious way and it was usually through sacrifices. You'll find sacrifices every time after, you know, you find sacrifices starting with Cain and Abel. Early in Israel's history you find people doing sacrifices all over the place and bit by bit those sacrifices eventually get centered in Jerusalem at the temple on the one altar and the sermon isn't about that process but that's an important process. Now when the Babylonians came through and destroyed the temple, everything had to change and many scholars believe many of the books that we find in the Old Testament began to get compiled and put together and became a much more important life of the people, of the Hebrew people at this point in time. Part of what grows out of the Babylonian exile is people need to find ways to pray and to continue to relate to God and so this book, the Torah, which is the first five books and then the prophets and then the writings all grow out of this experience and another one of the things that grows out of this experience are the synagogues where regularly the Hebrew people will gather together and they will read from the book, they will offer their prayers, they will encourage each other. Synagogues spring up. Now we meet a lot of synagogues when we're going through the book of Acts and Paul is something of a synagogue buster. He goes into town and within a few weeks or months there seems to be a division in the synagogue and there's a lot of conflict and hostilities. Now we usually find mentioned in the book of Acts two groups in the synagogue. The first group are often simply called the Jews. Now ever since the Holocaust, Christians have needed to take a little bit more care with this word because the Holocaust opened a great many more people's eyes to the long history of anti-Semitism and the persecution of the Jewish people under Christians in Europe. So this word sometimes has an ethnic label and sometimes a religious label. This is complex in the New Testament partly because fairly quickly in the history of the church Gentiles came flooding in and so when you read in the Gospels about the Jews they're not paying attention to the fact that Jesus, well it's obvious in the text but Jesus, Paul, the early disciples, they're all Jews. So what do they mean by the Jews with each reference to them? Sometimes it's a religious label, sometimes it's an ethnic label and New Testament readers have to be a little careful when we read that word to try to figure out what's going on with it. The other group of people we keep finding are God-fearers or at least in Acts 17 which we read last week God-fearing Greeks. Now Greek is in many ways just as sloppy as Jew in terms of it's a broad cultural definition, often Greek speakers. Hellenistic culture if we say it in that way in English it's something that goes far beyond people who were ethnically Greek. It's this broad cosmopolitan multicultural culture that developed in the wake of Alexander the Great's empire, the various Hellenistic kingdoms that happened after the breakdown of his empire and then the Romans coming through. Now these God-fearing Greeks are worshipping in the synagogue so what are they doing? Well they are praying, they are listening to lessons about the Hebrew scriptures, they are thinking about the God of the Jews and the Hebrews and they are trying to relate to that God through the synagogues all strewn out throughout the Eastern Roman Empire. Now there's also to a degree a certain elasticity to the use of the word God. Now this again gets very complex but God-fearing Greeks are sort of somewhere between good people and church people. These are people who are responsible, their lives are in order and they are increasingly being found adjacent to the community of the Jews participating in their community, supporting their community. We find these people all throughout the book of Acts and these people are often some of those who are most eager to receive Paul of Tarsus, in this case Paul and Silas, and to listen to what they have to say and to consider maybe the possibility that Jesus is the promised Messiah because of his resurrection from the dead. These are individuals who for whatever reason were participating in synagogue life but had not fully committed by undergoing for the men the ritual of circumcision. Now last week we saw Paul and Thessalonica and we noted how the city had a long history of pursuing the patronage of the Romans for their economic and political aspirations. It had prospered doing this and as we mentioned before we have a lot of reasons to believe because of the expulsion of the Jews by Claudius from Rome, Jews all over the empire that were in close communion with Roman politics knew they had to be on guard. Jews had long managed the difficult dance of maintaining their distinctiveness and yet surviving in an empire for whom to sort of step out of line could very much get you dead. Now Paul's dividing the synagogue and attracting attention from high status Greeks and women was seen as an existential threat to the Jewish community in Thessalonica and they reacted quite violently attacking the house of Jason. Now just this week a friend of mine John Van Donk called me and quoted me this passage from 2 Corinthians. All this is from God who reconciled us to himself through Christ and gave us the ministry of reconciliation. Now I mentioned to my friend John that that sort of seems a little ironic given what we read in the book of Acts. Paul seems to be in some ways a big divider not a reconciler because it seems he can't a synagogue that he won't explode into conflict. I'll continue reading. That God was reconciling the world to himself in Christ not counting people's sins against them and he has committed us to us the ministry of the message of reconciliation. Well if that's a message of reconciliation why does it keep dividing people especially Jews between Jews. Now this as we read this passage in in First Thessalonians I want to say all of this so we can have a better understanding of how to read that. If you've been following along you'll notice that Paul can't go into a city dwell there in the synagogue and not seem to blow it up. So what reconciliation are we talking about in terms of Paul's ministry. Now we read the Bible to try to recover some of what we feel has been lost. We are cruising through the month of October and at the end of the month of October Protestant churches often celebrate Reformation Day. Now the Protestant Reformation is an enormously important and complex historical event but a great deal of it had to do with Christians at the late Middle Ages increasingly feeling that the church had lost its way and their hope for getting the church back on track was a closer more serious more reading of the Bible and closer devotion to its words and practices. This book gives us and now the book of First Thessalonians I changed the picture on the slide now I better fix the slide. First Thessalonians gives us a very early picture into life on the ground as the Christian faith was breaking out in the Roman Empire among the Gentiles. That's really a very exciting thing because we read these amazing stories in the Gospels and in Acts and sometimes we feel like oh I'd love to be there. So to read a book like First Thessalonians is about as close as we can imagine. This book was written quite soon after Paul's visit to Thessalonica and so it gives us sort of a just in time picture of Paul's desire for the Thessalonians and some feedback as to actually what was going on with them. Now these writings in the New Testament these letters become a template for the faith to follow as it continues to go out in the Roman Empire. We are looking for God to show up so often when we read the Bible to learn for ourselves and to rescue us from whatever it is that we're feeling or feel that we're coming under the power of. Now we've been working on this sermon series for a while and as I've mentioned before it will abruptly stop when the season of Advent comes and we'll pay attention then to the season of Advent but we will continue this series in a way in the adult Sunday school as we dive into the book of Romans. Sometimes we sort of read the Bible as as Deus ex machina. What does that mean? You often hear this reference with respect to movies. It's sort of bang God from the machine. Suddenly there's something that happens that sort of breaks the story open. Sometimes it feels fabricated and so that's sometimes often in reverse what we try to do to the Bible. Our life is a mess and bang let's dig into the Bible and pull something up and a little bit of wisdom or a little bit of guidance or have God speak to us sort of like he might speak to us through the magic eight ball and and then we will get our life on track. Now it's amazing how often this works and I don't disparage people for using the Bible this way at all. Christians have been doing this for a very long time but a lot of what we do in a series like this is we try to contextualize Paul so that when we read the book of First Corinthians we have a little bit of awareness at least to the degree that we can of what is going on behind the scenes in this book because in many ways reading these books are sort of like reading someone else's mail. Now it's quite not quite that bad because these letters were often intended to be read publicly so it's not like we're reading someone's private mail necessarily but Paul knew who they were they knew who Paul was and so when they're having a conversation they know a lot better about what they're talking about than we do. Yet with the Christian Church we found these letters to be encouraging for us in terms of helping us grow in the faith and continue to refine and stay near to God's work through the church. Now what we'll find in this letter is that it's deeply personal and it's full of pathos which is sort of another word for feeling. Paul Silas and Timothy to the Church of the Thessalonians in God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ. So Paul Silas and Timothy Timothy at this point had left Thessalonica and last week we read the situation in which they left. Peace and peace to you that's a standard opening. We always thank God for all of you and continually mention you in our prayers. We remember before our God and Father your work produced by faith your labor prompted by love and your endurance inspired by hope in our Lord Jesus Christ. Now scholars who read these letters note that there's usually a structure to it that Paul takes in first a greeting and then something similar to this. We remember before our God and Father your work produced by faith your labor prompted by love and your endurance inspired by hope in our Lord Jesus Christ. For we know brothers and sisters loved by God that he has chosen you because our gospel came to you not simply with words but also with power with the Holy Spirit and deep conviction. We know how we lived among you for your sake. You became imitators of us and of the Lord for you welcomed the message in the midst of severe suffering with the joy given by the Holy Spirit and last week we read about the suffering and the persecution. And so you became a model to all the believers in Macedonia and Achaia and we noticed that stops and this is a major city and it's very clear that all of these cities and these peoples are connected and so the start of the church in Thessalonica became an impetus for more and more people learning about Jesus resurrection and wanting to gather together and pray in Jesus name and this is the seeding of the church. And so you became a model for all the believers in Macedonia and Achaia. The Lord's message rang out not only in Macedonia and Achaia your faith in God has become known everywhere. Therefore we do not need to say anything about it. In other words the work that God had done through Paul and Silas even for just a short time bore such fruit in Thessalonica that pretty soon people are starting to hear about it in all of the region. For they themselves report what kind of reception you gave us. They tell you how you turn to God from idols. What's he talking about? Remember last week when we talked about the cult to Caesar Augustus? They're turning away from the civic cult. Now this is going to be costly for them. They tell how you turn to God from idols to serve the living and true God and to wait for his son from heaven whom he raised from the dead. Jesus who rescues us from the coming wrath. Now this wrath is something we're going to continue to hear more and more about and we're probably going to have to take some time to look at it in detail more carefully. You know brothers and sisters that our visit to you was not without results. We had previously suffered and been treated outrageously in Philippi. Remember when he was in the prison after exercising the slave girl? He was in the stocks and then the earthquake and what he said to the town magistrates and then he was very politely invited to leave quickly. As you know but with the help of our God we dared to tell you his gospel in the face of strong opposition. In other words they were under no confusion about what might happen if he keeps going into synagogues and keeps giving this sermon that you can find in Acts 13. For the appeal we made does not spring from error or impure motives nor are we trying to trick you. In other words they're not in it for the money that should be obvious. On the contrary we speak as those approved by God to be entrusted with the gospel. We are not trying to please people but God who tests our hearts. You know we never used flattery nor did we put on a mask to cover up greed. God is our witness they weren't there for the money. We were not looking for praise from people not from you or anyone else even though as apostles of Christ we could have asserted our authority. Instead we were like young children among you. Just as nursing mothers care for her children so we cared for you. Because we loved you so much we were delighted to share with you not only the gospel of God but our lives as well. Now remember this word gospel is a lone word taken from what the Romans would use of good news shared of let's say the birth of Caesar Augustus. Surely you remember brothers and sisters our toil and hardship. We worked night and day in order to not be a burden to anyone while we preach the gospel to you. In other words unlike what happened in Philippi when they received the hospitality of Lydia it seems that well we don't know how long they stayed in Thessalonica but they stayed long enough to labor for their own daily sustenance there. In other words they didn't want anybody saying you're just here to pick up a free meal or some lucrative ties. They worked on their own to maintain themselves to demonstrate to the Thessalonians that they weren't in it for money they weren't in it for popularity that this was their generosity given to the people. You are witnesses so as is God of how holy righteous and blameless we were among you who believed for you know that we dealt with each other that we dealt with each of you as a father deals with his own children encouraging comforting and urging you to live lives worthy of God who calls you into his kingdom and glory. Now again it's important to remember that all of this is set up first by the synagogue by the God fears they had already been listening and understanding the God of the Hebrews and learning their ways and so Paul leverages that and says now with Jesus Christ we see the fulfillment of all of this and this is the way we worship him now we walk in the light and in the name of Jesus. But it's in continuity with what they had been doing in the synagogue. And because of this we also give thanks to God constantly that when you received God's word that you heard from us you accepted it not as the word of men but as it truly is the word of God which also is at work in you who believe for you became imitators brothers of the churches of God which are in Judea in Christ Jesus. Now this is important because of what he's about to say that this isn't just a Gentile thing that in fact this begins in Judea which is of course the heart of the community that has launched the synagogues all throughout. Now I changed the biblical translation here a little bit because I thought the wording was going to be a little bit closer to the Greek than the NIV which is usually a little bit more fluid a little bit easier to understand. For you became imitators brothers of the churches of God which are in Judea in Christ Jesus because you also suffered the same things at the hand of your own people. In other words churches in Judea have also been persecuted just as they themselves did also at the hands of the Jews. Ah see this is why I talked about it. Because the churches in Judea are also made up of Jews. This is not a thing between Jews and Gentiles because much of the church of Thessalonica is also made up of Jews and so we have to read this word very carefully and especially now as Paul is going to once again leverage a tradition of the Old Testament in terms of understanding. The hands of the Jews who killed both the Lord Jesus and the prophets and who persecuted us and who are not pleased to God and are opposed to all people hindering us from speaking to the Gentiles in order that they may be saved so that they always fill up their sins but wrath has come upon them to the end. What are we to make of this? Well first of all again in many respects Jesus is killed by Romans. Paul here emphasizes what he does is this long history within reading the Old Testament about certain elements of God's people that maintain their rebellion. You will find this consistently throughout the Hebrew prophets and so what Paul does basically is use this to say there's a people standing with God and a people standing against God. Now in light of the conversation that we've had about circumcision this is really important because whereas we think mostly in terms of a Jewish religion and a Christian religion Paul was not thinking that way. Paul was thinking about within the Jewish community people who were loyal to God and people who were not loyal to God all of whom were Jews. Now the Gentiles out there and we're going to deal with this when we get to the book of Romans the Gentiles were surely far from God. So now what Paul is saying is that Gentiles and some from the Jewish community have now made a new thing called the church and others are resisting it. But now this gets very complex because if we sort of switch lenses here and go back to Galatians and what I read from Acts 21 many of those who believe that Jesus is the Messiah believe in his crucifixion and resurrection were opposed to circumcision Paul might be lumping them in at this point. It's ambiguous but what he's trying to do is leverage this Old Testament tradition that within Israel there's a core of faithful and there's a lot of unfaithful and Paul is now using that to project onto the present situation. Now the wrath to come is rather curious because at this point we're not we're still a little ways away not very far away from the destruction of the second temple in 70 AD. Is that what Paul is talking about? Is he talking about ongoing persecution? It's not clear. But brothers and sisters when we were orphaned by being separated from you for a short time in person not in thought out of our intense longing we made every effort to see you for we wanted to come to you. Certainly I Paul did again and again but Satan blocked our way. What's Paul talking about? Well he's looking at the opposition in Thessalonica that had him kicked out of the city and now again because this was in the part of the synagogue that didn't form the church. Well who is Paul thinking about? Can we think about this ongoing continuity in the Old Testament between faithful Israel and rebellious Israel that the prophets talked about? Paul is looking through that frame. For what is our hope our joy or our crown in which we will glory in the presence of our Lord Jesus when he comes? Is it not you? Indeed you are our glory and joy. So when we could stand it no longer we thought it best to be left by ourselves in Athens. So here's the story. We sent Timothy who is our brother and co-worker in God's service in spreading the gospel of Christ to strengthen and encourage you in the faith so that no one would be unsettled by these trials for you know quite well that we are destined for them. In fact when we were with you we kept telling you that we would be persecuted and indeed they were as it turned out that way as you well know. For this reason when I could stand it no longer I sent to find out about your faith. In other words they're there for a little while the synagogue had blown up some people become interested and convicted about Jesus as Messiah and his resurrection but will they keep holding on to this or maybe when Paul and Silas and Timothy are forced out of the city they all just think gosh what was that that was a bad idea and they sort of go back and mend fences with the other people they were in the synagogue with and go about their business and so Paul wonders is that what's going to happen? Undoubtedly it had happened in the past. For this reason when I could stand it no longer I sent to find out about your faith. I was afraid that in some way the tempter had tempted you and that our labors might have been in vain. But Timothy has just now come to us from you. In other words Paul and Silas are staying doing the work someplace else they send Timothy Timothy goes and stays and teaches and encourages and then comes back because there's no email there's no telephone could have sent a letter but goes back to report these are the people in Thessalonica and they'll have names and he'll have stories and will remind them and say this is everything that has happened since you left. He has told us that you always have pleasant memories of us and that you long to see us just as we long to see you. You can really tell the familiar quality of this letter here. Okay this is chapters one through three. I know that in most sermons pastors just usually read a little bit and take it apart and of course I've done that too with different sermons. But I also know that many people don't read their Bibles and don't have any idea of what's in it. So I take the time to read it and I contextualize it all here so that hopefully through your imagination you can get a sense of well what's happening 2000 years ago. How is the gospel going out into the Roman Empire. What are the issues. What is it like between Paul and these new churches and this letter gives us a window into them. Now it's interesting that Paul again tall well Philip Yancey wrote a book the basically the Bible of the New Testament Church which is our Old Testament. This book is something to read to bring home and to sustain a people in exile and in many ways Paul himself feels in exile because he wants to be with the people in Thessalonians and Paul says this is the word of God. What is the word of God in this book. This is the word of God. This is the word that connects us to God. This is the word through which God works to feed us and the synagogue worship is now duplicated in some ways. They will continue to study the Bible now thinking about Jesus as the culmination of this Bible and with new teaching to fill up their faith as Paul said with the teaching from Timothy and Paul and through these letters. But there is a wrath to come. And what is that wrath. And again well maybe part of it is in 70 A.D. maybe some of it we see as the in Christ alone song says the wrath of God is satisfied on the cross in Thessalonica. In Thessalonica they had some of that wrath when Paul was there. Is that the wrath of God is that the wrath of man. They understood a wrath to come and Paul was basically saying well you will endure persecution. Can a community of love endure wrath. Can a wrath be endured by any other way and not have it birth bitterness. Now in the conversation on Discord today we talked about sort of clumping wrath together and I realize that I'm doing some of this here but for many people that's what it feels like and obviously for Christians when we endure suffering we might see it as God's purification of us rather than the wrath of God because Paul quite clearly sees the Christian life as a way of. As a way the sufferings of the Christian life as not being. Part of the wrath of I'm going to clean up this part of this sermon quite a bit. Because this transition isn't working very well. Something begins in the midst of conflict. This is this other part maybe I'll erase the first part to to clean this up hang on see it is a rough draft. There that'll be a little bit more helpful. Something begins in the midst of conflict that will be conflicts. Maybe this doesn't make any sense either. Something begins in the midst of conflict that will be conflicts victim first and then it's Victor but not in the way we imagine revenge. That sentence didn't really work out too well. All right let's try it now. Something begins in the midst of conflict. Church and Christ are parallel in this. First the conflicts victim. Christ on the cross. The church. The church being brutalized by those in power over them. Then the victim then the conflicts Victor. How does the church win. Not in the worldly way of revenge. And you get a sense of this in the letter. This letter is not somehow Paul calling them to arms to burn down the houses of those who have hit them. They are turning the other cheek. They are learning to love one another. They are growing in Christ even as they suffer in the world. This is the way of the cross and this way of the cross is promised resurrection. We begin to learn to practice this reconciliation. Now there'll be a lot of need of reconciliation between Paul and many of his countrymen as they try to figure out well what is the gospel. How do we understand Jesus. What does this mean. But it's quite clear that he sees his ministry of resurrection between God and those who are far off. And that's not unlike what we saw in the gospels with all of the criticism of Jesus for many who wanted to fight that first century culture war and have Jesus pitted against the Romans. Jesus very clearly says I'm not looking to kill the Romans. I'm looking to capture the Romans through love. And that will clearly say didn't really say it just that way. But this then becomes the manifestation of what we see in Paul. Now we begin to learn the practice of reconciliation that buffers us from wrath that helps us hear God's word that teaches us to respond in obedience not out of fear but out of gratitude and helps us to bear witness to the one who saved us. I don't know how long the sermon is going to be part of the difficulty of reading so much scripture and short sermons is getting it all in there hopefully within 30 minutes and 30 is a whole nother conversation length in terms of sermon in terms of sermon length. But you know sometimes you'd have someone who would read and go back and forth and with something like this I often think about this in a sermon like this anyway this is more than you've asked for in a rough draft so it's a very rough draft and we'll see how it shakes out by Sunday anyway. Thanks for listening.