https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=cOF-h4XHVtM

 Hi, this is Paul. As I mentioned in my rough draft for Sunday, I took a couple of days off this week, which sort of compresses a normally busy week into even more busyness, but that's just kind of the way it has to go for me during these weeks. And one of the stories that I've been following is this Andrew Huberman story, which has just been fascinating to watch on a whole bunch of different levels. I first got in touch with this story when I saw Mary Harrington had written a piece on it, is Andrew Huberman, the new Jordan Peterson. And she, that's where I got tipped off to the New York Magazine expose. And she talks about this. She talks about what she sees it as sort of a statue toppling incident. It's common when discussing the so-called crisis of masculinity to blame it on the loss of economic opportunity, the changing educational landscape or other structural factors. A more uncomfortable possibility though, is that at least part of the crisis is attributable less to structural shortcomings and even the failures of individual men than something more insidious. That is kind of a baseline cultural hostility to the idea of prominent men entirely, particularly those who offer themselves as role models. Heroes have often had feet of clay, even Achilles had one weak spot. This isn't news, but today for some reason it's becoming a sackable offense and perhaps less troubled than some by Huberman's very ordinary philandering. But the point is that he wasn't in the stock, he wasn't in the stocks for infidelity. The Greek chorus of cultural levelers would have found something else to attack. And she kind of makes the point that, well, they pretty much went after Jordan Peterson. They couldn't go after Jordan Peterson in terms of marital infidelity and so they found other things and so off it went. I thought Brett Cooper actually had one of the better videos. I thought she covered it quite well. And she's, I think in a lot of ways the most charming of the Daily Wire cast. She is a lot of fun to listen to and she speaks quickly. I had a number of thoughts on this, including how this plays in the religious imaginary. A few years ago when Marianne Williamson, the first time she was running for president back in the election of 2016 when Donald Trump was running, Ross Douthat made the comment that she hasn't founded a new church. The churches are in many ways the podcast and the media empires. And we've been sort of playing in these waters and playing with these ideas for a while now. And what's interesting about the insinuation of going after Huberman is well, he should be a moral exemplar with respect to what? Because he's a very, very moral person with respect to his science. Of course, he's been plenty of criticism, but there always is that. But even the fact that there's criticism undermines the church of science in a similar way that let's say the Protestant Reformation undermined the church. Now, The Rest is History is doing a significant series on the Protestant Reformation and it's fun to listen to for a whole number of reasons. One of the points that I think that they made early on in the podcast is that you didn't have the Roman Catholic Church, it was just the church. The church was just what there was for most people living in the West. Of course, there was the division between the Eastern Church and the Western Church, but it was just the church. And now with the loss of clergy, you would expect an attack like this, let's say, on a philandering minister. But Andrew Huberman is living the new lifestyle. He's a generation younger than Jordan Peterson. Jordan Peterson in his generation still got married, had children, was faithful to his wife. Now Andrew, I say Alexander, Andrew Huberman is living the life, the archetypal life of the new man. He's unmarried. He has a succession of girlfriends. He's almost a monastic in terms of what he's doing. And he doesn't have a church around him. He has a podcast and it isn't his attention to certain holy texts that gives him authority, it's attention to science that gives him authority. Now part of the messiness of the recession of modernity is the complexity of watching all of these things happen at once. Because it's almost as if people are, at least people who wish to attack Huberman, is it Huberman or Uberman? I don't know. I'll use Huberman, go with the H. Those who wish to attack Huberman obviously are doing it for a whole variety of possible reasons. It could be the dying gasps of mass media. It could be New York magazine realizing that a hit piece on this guy will result in clicks. I'm sure there are analytics for that clicks and the advertising for those clicks are through the roof. So whether or not it's true, it gets the clicks. If it bleeds, it leads and we're leading in a market economy. But of course, a priest, a monastic, a monk in the temple of science well then there's all this overlap because, well, so evolutionary psychology is sort of the material out of which the scientist derives the certain information and of course there's all of this morality that sort of assumes in it, well what should someone do? Well according to evolutionary biology again, Genghis Khan is the real winner in history because he had many many genetic descendants and Jesus had so few. But then of course Jesus had so many in a different way and so I've often contrasted Jesus and Genghis Khan. So what kind of archetypal leader is Huberman? Now again there's a video going around that he's a little interested in Christianity but of course he's also interested in women and whether or not these stories are true, again as many people have noted this is sort of New York magazine operating in tattletale journalism for the clicks. Again you see the fall of mass media in this thing. It doesn't really matter because all that matters is here you have a popular guy and you should kneecap him and take him under whether for culture war type reasons or just for the clicks or for whatever and he's going to be the victim in this and of course there's plenty of YouTubes about it. Now I thought as I was listening to this and I was listening to the rest is history, the interesting contrast between the times. Now with the recession of modernity we have these new gurus, these new monastics and especially since the institutions which used to hold science now have been deteriorated in our eyes especially through COVID, now in some ways you have the monastics. It's sort of an early institutional formation. Now of course the Protestant Reformation was the decline of much of this so I thought I would take Huberman and contrast him a little bit with Luther here. Miners and he wants to do this I think because he wants Martin to grow up and become a lawyer. Tom Holland is talking about Martin Luther's father who wants Luther to become a lawyer to help with the family business. Yeah and as a lawyer he will then be able to help hands with his contracts with his business and so on. Yeah makes total sense. So the young Luther is sent to a school in a place called Eisenach in Thuringia and one of the reasons that he sent there is that this is where his mother comes from and Eisenach is a place that is dominated by a huge castle on a great precipice called the Votburg and again this will feature strongly in Luther's story and it is famous when Luther arrives there as the home of a Franciscan monk called Johann Hilton who will die at the end of the century so kind of the turn from the 1400s to the 1500s confined to a cell in the monastery and supposedly writing in his own blood before he dies and the thing that's exciting about him is that he is an apocalyptic prophet and he is foretelling the ruin of the papacy Dominic and the ruin of monasticism and the coming of a great reformer. No way. Now it's interesting the apocalypticism and this comes out quite strongly in the rest of history. Dominic Sandberg sort of brings it out and Tom Holling there's a sense in the air, Cale Zeldin and I in our last conversation were talking about this, there's a sense in the air of both an end of one world and a beginning of a new world and we certainly have that today and someone like a podcast celebrity like Andrew Huberman sort of typifies that. He's sort of both sciencey but also against the conventional science and so all of the theories about why this attack on Huberman for his sexual exploits as we are of course to be fully liberated with respect to what consenting adults may do. Here we are at this fold in history and one age is giving way to another. We'll change the world in the year 1516. Oh it's just a year out. Well I mean the coming in the year 1516, I mean Luther must be gearing up to it in 1516. So just on the apocalyptic thing I think that's really interesting that he's there and this guy is there because Luther must have known about him. He must have been a well known figure in the town. Yes I'm sure. I mean if you're writing things in blood. Yes. So Luther is now, this is the late 1490s, so Luther is in his mid to late teens, very formative time and actually if we zoom out as it were, pull the camera back, you can see why apocalyptic prophets are very very much in vogue in the 1490s and so on aren't they because there's a sort of apocalyptic tone to European life more generally because you know we think the headlines are terrible now but they're pretty dreadful at the end of the 15th century. So the huge thing that has happened is that the French have launched this massive invasion of Italy in 1494 which ends up kicking off half a century of sort of chaos and carnage. Syphilis is spreading through the French troops, first time it's been known in Europe and this is all going to culminate in the sack of Rome in 1527 which is this absolutely dreadful moment but even more than that the whole business with the Ottomans is kicked off in their Balkans. So the Ottomans have expanded under Mehmet and Selim and then of course Suleiman the Magnificent and the most famous thing which would have happened you know it must be in Luther's mind as it's in the mind of every single person in Christendom is that Constantinople had fallen in 1453. Well and not just Constantinople Dominic because in 1480 actually an Italian city, Atranto, for a year has been seized and occupied by the Ottomans and so I think it's not surprising that Hilton in his prophecies says that the Turks are going to end up conquering Germany and Italy. But people genuinely think that though don't they? They do yeah. For the first time in centuries they genuinely think these are the end times you know Christendom is going to be rolled up yeah Islam is coming so in his book on the Reformation, Dierman McCulloch says you cannot understand the Reformation at all you cannot understand what's going on in Luther's mind or anybody's mind at the time without realizing that as they see it they are living in the end of days for Christian civilization in the world that sort of darkness is coming it's personified by the Ottoman Empire and that's why when you look across the scene in the end of the 15th century there are apocalyptic prophecies there's talk of kind of monstrous births there's all that kind of stuff and Luther must be absorbing that when he's in this town where this bloke is locked up. Of course and saying that there's going to be this reformer who's going to emerge in 1516 that the papacy is going to be destroyed that the Turks are going to conquer Germany and that the world is going to end in the 1650s. 1650s that's very precise. Very precise. Now again Cale and I were talking about this I've been on kind of a Carlos Erie kick lately and when you look at when you look at this this age of breakthroughs now it's interesting because the rest of history is sort of focusing on the calamities that have been happening and the world shaking calamities but Cale and I talked about the fact that you know almost all of the leaders of this movement are born within this tiny period and you also have then of course the discovery of the America so while the old world the old Christendom can you know seems to be just coming apart and imploding a whole new world and again it's it's sort of like Elon Musk and Eric Weinstein wanting to get us off this rock and on to another planet. Now it's also important to remember when you're talking about this that even though things for us seem a long time ago things have been changing you know one of the things that I was there was actually a first version of this video where I was mostly talking about Huberman I was thinking about Gary Hart in 1988. Gary Hart has an affair and this basically disqualifies him from president of the United States. John Edwards there's always of course scandals around Clinton in the 90s. The bimbo eruptions in 2008 I believe John Edwards is running for president and news came out that here he you know I think his wife was ill with something and news came out that he had had an affair and of course this was a scandal and it topples him. Donald Trump runs for president and of course the Access Hollywood he brags about what he's done there's there's stuff with porn stars and and and for the most part and nobody expects Donald Trump to be faithful to his wife because he never has been faithful to any of his wives it seems for for a very long time. Oh Stormy Daniels that's her name and and nobody seems to care and and so what you see is that through history you see these you see these these movements go and you just sort of see examples of them riding the spirits let's say and of course they're subject to interpretation etc etc but here we try to here we sort of say okay what's happening what's happening around us and contrast that with what's happening in you know at this pivot point between the between the 15th and the 16th centuries this tumultuous time in Europe when the Ottomans seem to be to be coming in the new world is discovered of course sailing is going around Africa the the Portuguese aren't that the Spanish are desperate enough to to back Columbus who makes this amazing discovery which will bring immense amounts of gold into Spain and turn it into a superpower and and on and on and on just just world-changing events going on. 16 that the papacy is going to be destroyed that the Turks are going to conquer Germany and that the world is going to end in the 1650s. 1650s that's very precise. Very precise so this is all the kind of the background for Luther's childhood but against that there is also this sense that the future is bright that the world is being reborn if you want that there is a renaissance okay because Luther will go on from Eisenach to go to University in Erfurt which is the capital of Thuringia it's the oldest university in Germany and although he seems to be quite an average student of his his marks are to be gauged he only kind of finishes about halfway but he will graduate in 1505 as a Master of Arts and the rest of his career will show that actually he is a brilliant scholar of Latin and particularly Greek so he will translate the Bible directly from Greek into German for the first time and it is in that sense that Luther as well as being a product of this kind of apocalyptic environment is also a product of the kind of the humanist renaissance which is very much happening at the same time. So this for people who don't know this is obviously not humanism in your kind of Protestantism without God sense of today like having a humanist wedding ceremony. No. So humanism is about the classical heritage and it's about a fascination I guess with books and words and stuff like that is it is that fair? Yeah and looking at texts kind of very closely. Right. So for instance throughout the Middle Ages the translation of the Bible the Vulgate had been in Latin but humanist scholars are kind of going to the Greek and indeed the Hebrew for the Old Testament they're looking at the original texts and sources and this is- Now I just finished a draft I don't know how we'll see we'll see how many drafts this the sermon goes through between the rough draft for Sunday and Sunday this week because that's just kind of weak it is but you so I've been in the Gospel of Mark and then you come to the long ending of the Gospel of Mark and that's a that's a fairly famous thing and that it's very few people deny very few people deny. There's a great deal of consensus about the fact that the original ending for the Gospel of Mark was lost because it ends in such an awkward place and people tried to fill it in and so the long ending for the Gospel of Mark seems to be sort of an accumulation of things from Acts and the other Gospels or maybe if it's early enough it's from other eyewitness sources and just stories that were around about Jesus and sort of fills it in to end the book and that felt fine when you look at for example the Volgate and what what Jerome does with his translation of the Bible into Latin it's fine to fill things out and and you get a sense of the differences in the use of language and and that that sort of gets highlighted and awaken when you see the here Renaissance humanism and years ago when I was using I don't remember his name Philip Carey I think that was his name he's a professor of something somewhere philosophy and religion when I was just started making my videos you had this turn towards the text and you see that where where suddenly everyone is very interested not just in sort of getting the story right as you might imagine it to be in terms of how the story was told to you but looking at the sources and and you can in some ways see this desire for sourcing this desire for sourcing for greater accuracy for greater truth in order to deal with corruption in order to deal with things that by by people's dead reckoning feel terribly wrong I mean part of the corruption that people saw in the in the 16th century and earlier in the 15th and 14th century with respect to the church was that they would they would you know through the liturgy or maybe one way or another they would sort of have a sense of the teaching of Jesus and then they look at how the church what the church is doing and this sort of sniff test the sort of dead reckoning is is the way by which many people operate and this is this is by all means operating and now that texts are increasingly available because of the printing press people more and more people now are literate and more and more people can begin to read text for themselves more and more people know Latin and then of course if you do just a little bit of digging you'll begin to realize that well the Bible wasn't originally in Latin someone must have changed it and who knows whether or not the person that changed that text was true maybe if I look at the Greek and this is with us today when you talk about the Bible well what does it say in the Greek well this is what the NIV says or this is what the King James says but I want to know what it says in the Greek and of course once you get to the Greek you begin a whole new Odyssey because well how does this you know it's got a whole row of books behind me about arguing about this Greek or that Greek and so in other words the Greek doesn't necessarily resolve this and so that will lead beyond the Reformation period beyond Renaissance humanism into the the scientific revolution where people will either look to imperial empiricism or rationality in order to gain certainty and truth but you see the beginnings of it here and what's so interesting is we're just sort of seeing the endings of it here and you sort of see the the flailing about it's a project that you know Luther will definitely buy into yeah so this also is a kind of an influence on him but when he graduates in 1505 it would look as though this isn't his future he's not going to be focusing say on biblical scholarship because you know he's going to become a lawyer this is what it's all about so at this point now we're not going to you'll get more of the story as you go into it but of course Luther will be traveling through the woods he'll call out to Saint Anne he'll decide to become a monk because well the apocalypse is nigh the end is nigh he wants salvation for his soul now oh I want to make two little things then now Jordan blesses us all with a little off-handed remark that you know in the corner we've been for a long time I've been complaining about the use of this word literal and what we're really getting at is how we should and shouldn't be using this word it's like an artificial closure then you talked about like a syllabic and corriptus between the the fictional and uh was it the literal at the top yes yes yes which is like like the arbit the skill and crib dis of the arbitrary and the algorithmic yes the skill and still encrypt is arbitrary and algorithmic and the you know the notion of the literal if we really think about it's etymology is that which is written down so the ability to point to what is in the literature as being the final word in this closed it's done it's not alive so with this turn to the text what we see here is the literal is that which is written down that's what this looks to and with renaissance humanism you have this turn to the text you have this well the priests have been saying these things they've been saying these things when I came to this church 27 years ago I got here and I discovered a whole bunch of little rules and when I would ask about these little rules where did these little rules come from people would say well they're in the church order and I would tell them I've read the church order and they're not in the church order and I could see basically that something in the christian reform church order had sort of been moved so that there was a rule to probably address someone then it became an oral tradition and here were these rules and so um that rule literally was not in the church order mean it was not written in the church order but you see all the way back to renaissance humanism this turn that is happening where well without the printing press for years the priests have been talking and the and the us the the rulers in the institutions have been talking and talking and talking and then someone finally says now where is that written down well we're the ones who can read we're the ones who know latin we're the ones who know where everything's right now but show me and and you can see again this movement today where well public scientific medical dogmas as these things but well we don't ask to be shown in a book because we're not going to necessarily believe something that's been written in the book because books are just proliferated anyway we want to see the experiment done and so then with someone like andrew huberman well he works at stanford and so he still has the air of that authority and what'll be interesting to see in all of this drama about his personal life would be if stanford lets him go but just like new york magazine has interest in poking at the guy stanford has interest in keeping the guy for a similar reason that luther wasn't executed like yan hus luther was kept alive because well his patron knew that he had something with luther but but my point here is this is this idea of what literal is um and we were becoming a journey becoming becoming one who was more capable of participating the fictional and uh was it the literal at the top yes yes yes which is like like the arbit the skill encryptus of the arbitrary and the algorithmic yes the skill and still encourage the arbitrary algorithmic and the you know the notion of the literal if we really think about it's etymology is that which is written down so the ability to point to what is in the literature as what is written down to point to what's in the literature now today we don't necessarily trust what's in the literature we want to go and again and this is you know comes after the reformation we want to sort of get beneath and say well it's in the science well the science isn't necessarily always helping us and so again andrew huberman is someone that says well it's the science and of course he's the monk because well he's 48 years old he can juggle six women he's he doesn't have a lot of fat on his body he looks fit and healthy and so he then becomes the ideal that whole groups of people look to especially men and say i'd like to be like him and so then when it's discovered he's trying to juggle six women a bunch of men say well that doesn't sound so bad i frankly i wouldn't recommend it one one one woman is usually more than enough but this is you know we're dealing with sort of a hinge in history here it's not going to be focusing say on biblical scholarship because you know he's going to become a lawyer this is what it's all about so at this point when he graduates yeah there is nothing really about him to suggest the detonation that he's going to end up setting off yes tom let's just take a break and we'll be back after the break for more martin luther all these kinds of things well actually you say he's obsessed with sexuality i'm not sure he is obsessed with sexuality actually that's people who think luther is a bit dry he's absolutely not he's very disputatious hot-tempered he's obsessed with the body impulsive yeah he's obsessed with sexuality all these kinds of things well actually you say now this is funny because tom's going to correct him but it's such an interesting thing that of course we are supposed to be beyond the obsession with sexuality here i would argue that our age is far more obsessed with sexuality than the middle ages was you know the the governor of new york state you know major state now gone new york has gone from first to third in terms of probably states of significance california and texas are sort of vying for supremacy and new york is poor new york is sort of in the third but governor cuomo was unseated because he made passes at women something that in much of the ancient world nothing would have nobody would have looked at now again i'm i'm not saying this is i am saying this is progress but it's funny how when you have the loss of an institution where let's say in a church society in a protestant church society you had a fair amount of policing of male sexuality you have a fair amount of policing of the leaders values and teachings so what an institution does now well that's all sort of collapsed but we're still doing the policing it's fascinating looking at the compare and contrast here he's obsessed with sexuality i'm not sure he is obsessed with sexuality actually that's one of the things that doesn't obsess him but he does have lots of other obsessions you're right scatological obsessions i guess certainly scatological obsession will come to them no i don't think there's anything particularly at this point that would mark him anything exceptional okay and again what makes it all the more improbable is that i think that there is a sense particularly if you grow up i think in a kind of culturally protestant country like britain you assume that it's just waiting for someone like luther to come along and poke at the rotten oak yeah of the medieval church and it will all just collapse fat monks watch that dynamic on youtube around andrew huberman around just about everything else i think tom holland nicely phrases it poke at the rotten oak of course that's sort of the mystique behind trump he's poking at the rotten oak of u.s government um i mean all of these the internet has sort of unleashed all of this suspicion and we're just poking at all of these oaks to try to find the rotten one to have it peel over and of course they're attacking andrew huberman because he's poking at the rotten oak and all the termites are coming out to to defend their home fat monks corruption you know people having feasts while the peasants are starving yeah fake relics so i hate to tell you but i think for about the first 30 years of my life that's pretty much what i thought i mean i kind of still deep down i think was the story with the catholic church but you are now going to tell me that's not right at all okay now what's coming up here is super interesting i've been listening to the show for years and i've listened to the vast majority of the episodes i followed it right from day one of course i've been following tom holland i know i haven't treated the justin briarley tom holland conversation or the marian vision or any of those things i'm sure i will get to it at some point but justin briarley's point is that the times are changing and they are changing you can hear them change by listening to the people and dominic sandbrook in earlier episodes was just completely dismissive and tom holland could himself be skeptical but now pay attention to the changing of their attitudes and pay attention to the use of the word literal and again we find again and again it is poorly used physical would be better but but again even whether you're using the word literal as sort of a substitution for physical authority which is sort of how it wound up but even physical points to the world view after the turn to the text the world view that says well if we want to know the truth we have to look at the physical layer and we're in fact even renegotiating that well so i think that assumption is hardwired into the very phrase of the reformation with a capital r because of course that's a very very protestant perspective and in fact right the way up until the end of the 19th century it's only protestants who ever use it because i think catholics would point out that reformation which comes from the latin word reformatio remaking is actually it's not specific to protestantism it is something that has been continuous throughout the entire history of the church and the truth okay now a little bit of poke at sam's conversation with um with trent horn because one of sam's hobby horses is this question of a continuing evolving and so part of what happens let's say in the in the in these continual protestant reformations that happen is everybody's trying to get back to the source and so would you look at let's say the the burned over district that produced the lds church it produced the jehovah's witnesses it produced the seventh day adventist you see this this fever pitch in 19th century america of of grasping at certainty there's so many different versions of christianity around we need to have the true one and so we're going to go back to the we're going to go back to the text usually again to the bible itself and so the beginning of the jehovah's witnesses for example where they i'm i'm not going to read the bible listening to all of these experts on the bible we're talking the 19th century here this sounds very contemporary i'm not going to listen to any of these experts on the bible i'm going to read it with my own two eyes and i'm going to interpret it under the plain meaning of the text and you you have this just this launch at the end in the 19th century of all of these different little denominations especially in america that are doing this and again they're trying to get down to the roots they're trying to get to the source one way or another and you see this dynamic it is that the medieval church that the protestant reformation overthrows is itself the product of a reformatio is itself a kind of revolutionary institution because the first reformation and this is important background to understand what luther is about because the first reformation happens not in the 16th century but in the 11th century and it matters because the second reformation is you know it's a reaction to it but it's also bread of it so i think we should just give a portrait of this reformation because it is what luther is going and i like that turn of phrase tom just used it's a reaction to it what we see right now is a reaction to modernity but it's also bread of it and i think that's that's a very common dynamic as you see these transitions so he's going to be reacting against so the key features of this so so someone like andrew huberman is both a reaction to the institutions of science but it's bread of it he's a modern monk evolutionary institution that is the medieval church it divides the world into two in a way that had never happened before in any kind of culture in the world you have a dimension of the cyclum which is the kind of the earthly mortal dimension and will give us the word secular and then you have the dimension of the church which is radiant and pure and constitutes the link or the religio in latin to heaven so there you have kind of what will become the key dividing line in which we still have to this day between the secular and the religious and the clergy who are called the religiosi these are the people who guard the dimension of the religio the bond joining okay so now what you see with the church of podcast is that someone like a podcast star like andrew huberman well he is the he is the religio he connects heaven and earth well what what on earth do you mean by that he's not claiming anything heaven no but what is it what is the ideal well he's embodying the ideal he's embodying the ideal with having a certain resting heart rate with having a certain low body fat with being able to do physical strength at at age 46 but and for some being able to juggle six women jordan peterson again a decade earlier being able to have a marriage with one wife and then he goes on bill maher and bill maher basically says yeah marriage is all about settling and jordan peterson brags how when he and tammy get in the room they can't they can barely keep themselves from pulling each other's clothes off he says that on bill maher but but it's a it's a it's a practice of again the ideal so basically jordan peterson is trying to continue to defend monogamy and that ideal whereas huberman is is sort of defending the let's say the evolutionary biological practice of the ideal not necessarily spreading seed except who knows what are those going on with the in vitro fertilization process with these older women that he is dating but anyway it's i mean it's all insane but if you'll look at it you can see the contours of the waves it's reacting to it but it's bread of it joining humans to heaven so these are dare i say professional christians which is quite unusual anywhere in the world to have a class who take up in some places and so you can see huberman as in some ways become a professional man he's become a professional man he's become the ideal man he's a man of science he's you know he's an archetype he's he's successful with women he's successful with science he's successful he's the kind of men that that a certain kind of other men look up to and now women have them too you can look at taylor swift you could look at uh people look up to you could look at kim kardashian people look to all kinds of men there's also a deep generational divide here and and whereas the generation that wouldn't vote for gary hart or see again it plays both sides of the aisles gary hart or bill clinton i mean it used to be imagined that it would it would be the democrats who would be the ones who would have uh would have zipper zipper control problems because of course the democrats were supposed to be kind of the progressives they'd be the ones on the side of the sexual sexual revolution etc etc but of course if you compare obama and his marriage to trump and his marriages the whole thing just sort of falls apart it's a 10 of the population their job is just to be christians yes and they are marked by chastity which again is very distinctive and which really only is introduced in the 11th century and by their use of latin which is again a kind of marker of the fact that they they belong to a universal timeless church they have a very complex hierarchy obviously with the pope at the head of it and beneath him there are all kinds of different clergy so there are what are called secular clergy clergy who are operating out in the dimension of the cyclone with the laity these are that your friars and whatnot so these are the archbishops the bishops right right the way down to the parish priests the friars the monks the nuns these are called regular clergy so these are people who are taking the kind of the narrow path to heaven but the surest path to heaven and they in a way are kind of storing up kind of uh benefits for the vast mass of the christian people because like all revolutionary institutions the church gets its validity from offering people the promise of a better life so you have justice on this world in the okay so andrew huberman what does this what is the main thing he's offering he's offering a better life he's offering better longevity a big thing about huberman is longevity uh better health better strength and now and this is why many on twitter are like oh sign me up for what he's got if he can if he can and and the the new york magazine piece keeps lauding the um these are beautiful women these are brilliant women these are amazing women he has six of them so men are on twitter just saying okay well he he's offering a better life he can have six women this world in the mortal world and this justice is provided for people as a result of a kind of entire framework of law that derives from the church fathers from church councils from decrees of the popes and these are collectively known as canons so the framework of church law is called the canon law and this is seen as expressive of god's justice and there's always a tension isn't there between that the canon law and the separate hierarchy that the church has and its own practices its institutions and all that stuff yeah there's always a tension between that and like the local king henry the second henry the eighth whoever who thinks they're kind of invading my privileges and you know that doesn't start with henry the eighth wanting a son no no it doesn't that's been there dread christian nationalism goes all the way back to the beginning boys and girls it always does and of course you have you know those tensions are very much in constant in constantine because he is well why does he want a religion that works because the religion that works works and and so again in many ways sort of this hinge we are at is is draws on ancient pagan ideas in some ways huberman's huberman's philosophy points to you know something more greek or roman let's say it's certainly of the secular it's not of the heavenly so you again you just watch these tensions they don't go away sure as canon law begins to be constructed in the 12th century and by the 16th century by by the time of luther it's this vast edifice as also is the edifice of the spiritual economy that the church is presiding over because of course what it ultimately is promising is the promise of heaven of salvation but what will prevent you from getting to heaven is sin and sin you know if you're not going to go to hell you have to pay it down you have to get rid of it and this is where indulgences come in so indulgences now tom does get this right here but of course there's no paying your way out of hell there's paying down your purgatory debt in order to get into heaven they can wipe your sin completely clean but tom you're not going to hell straight away are you well so effectively if you were sinless in this life which is almost impossible so even saints yeah you might go straight to heaven but the vast mass of people are going to have to to work off their debt of sin in a place called purgatory so that's like a waiting room is that right you're not it's not hell a waiting room with fire so it's like a lesser hell yes it's like hell with a time limit so you've been you know a terrible man you're himla you're going to hell you're just a common or god an offender like you and i you know we're ordinary sinful people we might go to purgatory for a thousand years you know who knows i think in your case dominic slightly longer thanks it could very moving himla but you could work this down yeah so you could make prayers to the saints and the virgin who will intervene with god yeah or you could you know charitable donations good works you could go on a pilgrimage and above all there are there are masses and the mass it's the celebration of the sacrifice of christ on the cross and it's made vivid and real in the bread and wine christ is literally present there and this is a way literally present there what says so in the writings how is he present well literally no that doesn't that doesn't answer the question of course calvin says spiritually which i think is a better answer is he physically no for the christian people to kind of experience a sense of common identity and commune with the mystery of their faith so this is why churches are set aside as sacred places so you have images you have icons you have incense you have all the kind of stuff that i'm sure would rouse your protestant suspicions i actually like icons i love an icon good good i love the kind of the orthodox church big fan of the orthodox church but the role that masses play oh no they're getting another one in the spiritual economy is that they are kind of believed to transcend place and time yeah and to link all christians to you know the sacrifice of christ on the cross and therefore they have an incredible efficacy in burning away the sins of the dead in purgatory and so by the 15th century the idea of wealthy people paying monks or whoever to perform masses for the dead has become a crucial part of christian piety so okay and so now of course jesus who says it's easier it's easier for a camel to go through the eye of a needle than a rich man to get into the kingdom of heaven this seems to invert that it seems like it's far easier for a rich man to get into the kingdom of heaven than a poor man because he can pay the indulgences and get out of purgatory quicker now this this gets way more complex when you think about if you sort of follow what i've been doing in my sermons for a little while because in the ancient world of course where it's you don't have this heavier division between the eternal and the secular where just the the physical is an expression of what's coming down from heaven and abraham job and wealthy people are in fact by definition blessed by god and you can see it because they're wealthy and this of course sets up the whole premise of the book of job and two points about masses so one is in a weird way actually i never thought i'd say this to you on this of all subjects i think you're almost slightly underselling what a massive deal literally a massive deal the mass is because most people would only go and take communion once a year is that right and they would get the bread but not the wine the wine is reserved for the priest but this is a moment of extraordinary power in your life right yeah it's almost as though you were approaching the heart of a nuclear reactor or something the mass is the reactor that is powering everything right and it's so potent that only priests can approach it and even then only with extreme care yeah and for the laity you know it's too dangerous to approach right it's the bit the raids of the lost ark when they take the lid off the ark of the covenant and all the stuff is flying out just watch how these two are processing this and a little bit more now yes that's the moment in your life isn't it where i mean god is literally there yeah literally there literally in the bread and wine literally literally now earlier when he said mass and literally that was the proper use but literally in the bread and the wine okay literally because it's written there it's written in the bible there but now they're going to get into a little bit deeper yes the bread and the wine are the body and blood i mean god is literally present but also the other thing i was going to say that thing about saying mass is for the dead to get you out of purgatory but am i not right in saying that that industry because it is an industry is more developed in germany than in any other part of christendom so somebody like luther growing up it looms again massively large in a way that it wouldn't if he was in italy or spain or somewhere where the mass industry is not quite as developed so that explains why he ends up kicking against it and why it becomes so incredibly controversial in germany and switzerland and the kind of baltic and scandinavia and so on but again i mean it takes some time to take the dramatic step of kicking against it because i think to begin with that you know he's a schoolboy or he's a student he's not really thinking about it because for most people who are not kind of professional christians in mcculloch's formulation this is it's not something you necessarily believe in in the way that we believe or don't believe in things because this is part of the course of modernity that luther is going to set europe on right so i think for most people it's just kind of part of yeah the air that they breathe in and i think it's one of the aspects of the pre-reformation culture that is hardest for us to get our heads around because i think that the way that the reformation changes our relationship to belief is one of the profoundest aspects of what makes it revolutionary so for us what do you believe in or what don't you believe in it's it's a crucial marker of our identity but it's really i think different say in 15th century latin christendom so say when christians call jews or muslims unbelievers they're not really defining them in terms of the fact that what jews or muslims believe is wrong it's just that they don't they don't believe in the stuff that everyone in latin europe is taking for granted so tom i loved this section in your notes because it really i mean sometimes i'm very hard of on you and the rest is history but i think here i just thought wow this is so interesting because like many people you know i i'd often thought did people really believe this did they really believe that the body and blood turned into all that stuff you know relics indulgences how could they believe it but i think what you're bringing out here is that in a way they don't really think about it no because why would you yeah it's like you and i know for example that you know human beings need oxygen to survive or that the universe was born in the big bang but we only know that because everyone we know thinks it we've been told it and we take it on trust and we just take it completely for granted and that's how they thought about the devil indulgences purgatory all that stuff they didn't sit up at late at night debating whether or not it was true no because it obviously was true to them well i think a kind of a really fascinating parallel would be with say people's attitudes to epidemiology during the covid lockdowns that most people accepted what they were told by the epidemiologists because why wouldn't they it's the epidemiologists who know and so the theologians are the kind of the medieval equivalent of epidemiologists and you may wonder well you know how do they know how do they get their certainty and they get it because they have revelation in the form of scripture but also they have what is called by intellectuals in the university's skientia so science but it's not science in our sense it's it's the knowledge that can be deduced from revelation via kind of deduction via rigorous study and so this is how purgatory comes to be right deduced purgatory is not mentioned in scripture but you can deduce it from kind of various conclusions that can be drawn from scripture and so the whole edifice of you know this kind of framework of belief is like a kind of enormous cathedral that you don't have to go into the cathedral to be aware of it it is looming up over you you know because they're the experts exactly and only a madman you know in 2024 somebody who said well i don't believe the world is round actually you know you would be like it's just eccentric for the sake of it what's the point going against what everybody knows to be true well let's pursue that coveted analogy of course during coveted there are skeptics i mean there are people who kick back against what the medical establishment are telling them and so likewise in the middle ages of course you do have people who are kicking back against what the church authorities are telling them and these are people who of course are called heretics right and if they're in veteran as heretics and they refuse to recant then they're burned and in the 15th century there is quite a vivid consciousness of this tradition because there have been lots of heretics haven't there's been a guy called peter valdo in france so then they'll go through that and then those of you who are familiar with the reformation will be used to these names but just watch how you know what i try to think of mental images to to conceptualize what's happening now with the recession of modernity and and i don't know if i don't know if nathan jacob said it i think he said it it's like we've seen the edges of modernity and and once we see the edges of it now we know that it's a thing and once you see the edges you can get a sense of it's you're going to go beyond it okay what is beyond it well it sort of means you're no longer captive to it and it just listening to these two talk about believe i mean this is what jordan peterson was talking about six years ago when he goes do you believe in god i don't i don't know i don't know if i'm going to use that word that way everybody's like what do you what do you mean you're you what do you why are you why are you playing around with language like this and well tom holland's been playing around with it now it's it's gone to dominic sandbrook and you can just feel it continue to go and so we're at these moments when something happens new york magazines decide we're going to an expose on andrew huberman is sleeping with more than one woman and he has it fully disclosed to all of them oh is that the crime okay okay you can just see how many different issues in our culture just get triggered and you know tides are changing now just like in the the turning from the 15th to the 16th century it gets apocalyptic it gets scary on one hand what we've known is passing away and something else is coming will it be good will it be bad fascinating to watch all right if this made any sense to you let me know