https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=bFfV0VLnBkQ

 Hi, this is Paul and this is part of my Rough Draft for Sunday series where I walk through my Sunday sermon. It's a practice session and sometimes I stop and edit. In fact, I just got interrupted by a bunch of people coming in, but that's the way it goes. Now, I've been doing a series during Lent. Lent is a Christian season, a Christian liturgical season where we prepare for the story of the death and resurrection of Jesus. And I've been doing this series on covenant and been through some of the Genesis passages and through some of the other significant stories where this word covenant appears in the Bible. And the word covenant isn't unknown to us. We understand it. It's in legal terms and in social terms. Part of the things that we sometimes have difficulty understanding is how on earth a the likes of which could be responsible for the creation of the universe would relate to us. And the word covenant is important in the development of the story of the Bible as the Bible tries to flesh out our relationship with God, God's expectations for our behavior in the world and what that means. And so we began by talking about Noah and the flood and how the in Genesis five, God regrets having made humanity. And in a sense, he uncreates the world by bringing a universal flood that in a sense, the cosmic waters come back into the earth and flush it clean. But God spares the best man in the world and his family and a selection of all of the animals. And this is both our salvation, but also the flaw in God's plan, because after Noah, the world returns to as it was. But in the in the God creates a covenant with Noah and he basically tells Noah that if you Noah should agree to honor the image of God by preserving human life, to honor the animals after Noah, people may again, people may then eat the animals, but they must honor in a sense, they honor God's ownership over the animals by treating the blood as sacred and not eating the blood. And humanity, of course, goes back to its violent ways. And then in Genesis 11 and Genesis 12, God turns to Abraham and through Abraham establishes a new covenant and essentially gives Abraham a gift. And then the story of Abraham is the story of whether Abraham will trust God. So in a sense, in the Noah covenant, God asks humanity, can you stop killing each other? Can you respect the animals? And at the end of that covenant, we have to basically say we can't do it. And then God begins to say to Abraham, can you trust me? And the whole Abraham story is about Abraham trying to learn to trust God. And in fact, Abraham does go on to learn to trust God. And that reaches its climax with the story of of God's call to Abraham to sacrifice Isaac. And then we got into the the the covenant with Israel and Moses and Israel was to embody the will of God on Earth. I talked to my new friend, Alexander Kamlin, and we talked about his his journey to to sobriety and sanity and the way that that our need to live embedded in a far larger story is is integral to our being able to live out what it means to be human in this world. And so we looked at the we looked at the covenant with Noah or Moses and the giving of the law. And we talked about how the law has is often seen as having these two tables, love the Lord your God, have no other gods, no graven images, and love your neighbor as yourself, honor honor your parents, you shall not kill, you shall not commit adultery, you shall not steal, so on and so forth. And the difficulty we face again here is that we are unable to keep the law. And even the best of us fails to love God properly. And if you're perhaps skeptical about God, we have to admit that even the best of us fails to love our neighbors properly. And so what we find, however, in the Mosaic law is this this accommodation. God gives a law that is different enough than we see this, especially in the segment of the law where it's love the Lord your God, where it's different distinct enough so that we understand the direction of moving from heaven to earth, but it's common enough so that it can be intelligible. And this is where we get into this question of how can, again, a God that the type of being that would be responsible for the creation of this universe, how could such a being relate to us? And so you see in the Moses covenant, this relationship of carrots and sticks where God is asking Israel to move into relationship with him, to embody thy kingdom come, thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven, which is in Jesus Lord's prayer. And Israel starts in this journey and the start is bad right from the start. Moses doesn't even get down the mountain with the tablets and they've already set up a golden calf. And Aaron, Moses' brother, the one who will be high priest, is the one who does this. And then you get into the story of Israel and Israel is just seems to be a catastrophe right from the start. And the story is told this way, not to pick on the Israelites, but to, the Israelites are typical. They embody what's true about our hearts. And just as in the Noah story, even the best of us, or in the Abraham story, even the best of us struggle to obey God and to trust God, even within the kinds of ways that we are self assume we should obey and trust God. One of my favorite pictures of the relationship between God and Israel and his mission is found in Isaiah 5. I will sing for the one I love a song about his vineyard. My loved one had a vineyard on a fertile hillside. He dug it up, cleared it of stones and planted it with choicest vines. He built a watchtower in it and cut out winepresses as well. And he looked for a crop of good grapes, but it yielded only bad fruit. And in this little story in Isaiah, you get the picture of God's mission through Israel. And what he's looking for from Israel is to display his glory, which is why he created the world in the first place, so that he could be enjoyed. He gives Israel everything she needs, but she bears bad fruit. And so the story goes, now dwellers in Jerusalem and people of Judah, judge between me and my vineyard. What more could I have done for my vineyard than what I have done for it when I looked for good grapes, but why did it yield only bad? And this now will become the context for this story of the Old Testament, which is obviously foundational to the story of what Christians call the New Testament, where Israel is given every chance to obey and succeed, and at every turn she rebels and fails. And in that sense, the story of the early stories of Genesis, they seem to repeat. And we get the sense that humanity is, and this is told in many, many different ways throughout the Bible, that we are barren. We are unable to give birth to our future. We paint ourselves into a corner. We are a people who have been made for glory and made to express glory, but what we do ourselves with this glory is that we turn it and we use it against each other and against ourselves, and we have no way of getting ourselves out of this. And I hear this in these two complaints I often hear from people. One is, I can't believe in a God because there's so much suffering in the world. And in the next phrase, they'll say something like, I can't believe in a God who would punish people for violating his laws. And here's the funny thing. You can't have it both ways. Either God just simply lets the world go and lets people do as they do, or God holds people to account in one way or another. And again, you might ask, well, what if God gave the rules in a very clear way, and what if God, you know, enforced the rules in a very clear way? Well, in some ways, that's the story of Israel, where God gives them the law. And you find that they simply can't abide by the law or obey the law. They stumble and fall. Even the best of them, Moses, isn't allowed in the promised land. David, all the heroes of the Old Testament are these fallible creatures who so often mess up in the most dramatic ways. Now, on one hand, you can look at this and say, this is a story of humanity. But on the other hand, we have to look at this and say, what on earth could God do? Now, this then leads into the fattest part of the Christian Bible, and the fattest part of the Hebrew scriptures as well, that very, very few people tend to read today, because it's some of the hardest parts of the Bible to read, where this relationship between God and Israel is worked out in the, or really the catastrophe is lamented in the context of the destruction of the northern and southern kingdoms by Assyria and Babylon. And so the first question is, how can God let Assyria and Babylon, these pagan, ruthless empires, destroy his chosen people? Doesn't this simply mean that their gods are better than Israel's gods? And in fact, these were the common assumptions of the day, that if one nation, let's say Babylon had its god Marduk versus Israel with his god, you know, with his god Yahweh, well, if these two meet and Babylon beats Israel, then that just shows that Marduk is a better god. But the Hebrew prophets kind of flip the tables on this and say, no, God delivers Israel into the hands of Marduk. Well, that's an interesting idea, and who's going to believe that? Well, the irony, of course, is that the Hebrew prophets continue to persist today, and where are the prophets of Marduk? And so the prophets of Israel flip the script on this whole thing, and Israel begins to believe that her own god led them into exile, that the god of Israel caused the destruction of his own temple and the suffering of his own people. And so the people would rightly say, well, why would god let this happen? And how could god have allowed this to happen? That leads to the second article about this, that this god cares more about covenant fulfillment than ritual fulfillment. And in fact, you'll find this phrase repeated a number of times in the Old Testament prophets, that obedience is greater than sacrifice. And this actually becomes the second distinctive of Israelite prophecy versus, say, the rest of ancient Near East prophecy. The ancient Near East prophets tended to decry the lapses in ritual fulfillment that they offered to the gods, whereas the Israelite prophets lamented the lapses in covenant fulfillment. And what that meant was that it was the moral and ethical failures of the people to keep the law. It was their treatment of their neighbor, and their treatment of the stranger, and their treatment of their wives and their children, as well as their treatment of god. It was failure to love god and failure to love their neighbor that leads to this catastrophe. And so the calamity of the destruction of the northern kingdom by Assyria and the southern kingdom by Babylon leads into this period where Israel has to look at herself and ask herself, either we have to give up on our belief in our god, or we have to think the unthinkable about our god, that our god led us down this path, and why on earth would our god lead us down this path? Now this idea isn't alien to most of us. As a parent of five children, I recognized in all of my children the moment that happened when the child was one and a half or two, when you say no to your child, and there's like a moment when your child begins to realize what no means, and that you as the parent are looking down at this child, you with all of this power, almost this divine figure before your child, and mom and dad would say no to me. And I can remember just the look on my children's face of just absolute horror, fear, and betrayal that I would say no, and what would that mean for their little lives? But at the same time, I'm going to switch some slides here actually I think. This is part of the fun of what I've discovered doing these little videos in anticipation of my sermon that I get a chance to edit things. I used to kind of write this out, but now I talk it out in the context of a video, and I'm finding some good things about that. So you know what happens when calamity strikes, we usually go in one of two ways, and the first way is it isn't my fault that I'm the victim, and so then we surmise that God is evil. And that seems like a nice way to go because I preserve my ego, and I preserve my self-righteousness, and I preserve myself at the center of the universe, but if you give that idea a little bit more thought, you begin to see what's problematic about it. So okay, so God is evil. Well, where does that leave you? Are you really going to march up to heaven and unseat him from his throne? Are you really capable of that? You see, if someone more powerful than you does wrong to you, what will you do? To whom will you appeal? Well, you appeal to the person on top of that, but the definition of God is that God is on top of all hierarchies, and God is on top of all ladders, and so if God himself is evil, well, you've got a bigger problem than the wrongs that have been done to you, and I think so, in a sense, the Israelite prophets, the Hebrew prophets worked this out, and so then you come to the second position, which is did I do something wrong? And in a sense, what the prophets say is that yes, Israel, you did do something wrong. God gave you this covenant, and God gave you tremendous promises, and what he asked from you is obedience, and you utterly failed, and you not only utterly failed once, you utterly failed repeatedly, and you did so to such a degree that God decided to destroy you. Now, that does sound like horrible bad news, and you certainly can blame God, but it's not going to get you very far, because the truth is, if you're the one that's actually responsible in some way for your calamity, then perhaps you can do something about your calamity, and that's actually a very optimistic and positive thing to think about, and so maybe we can do something to help, and so the Hebrew prophets work through these questions, and they argue about them, and they lament, and God is angry, and God is angry about this, and God is angry about that, and in exhausting detail, the prophets go through this, and you can see with the Hebrew prophets, they're working out all of these ideas throughout these long books, and part of this is part of the reason why so many of us today don't even bother with them, we don't understand them, but when calamity strikes, if we begin to ask the question, in what ways did I contribute to this calamity, there's actually a remnant of hope in there, but in this we also begin to see God's dilemma, you know, the brayer fox, brayer rabbit stories that actually do originate in Africa, one of the most famous ones is brayer fox, who's always trying to trap brayer rabbit, makes a tar baby, and every time brayer rabbit tries to, you know, gets angry with the tar baby, and it hits, and every time he tries to detach himself from the tar baby, he just gets more and more stuck, kind of like a fly in fly paper, or a mouse in a glue trap, and the difficulty is this seems to be God's dilemma with us, that every time God gets involved with us, calamity strikes, we have so much drama that, you know, and I'm sure some of you have friends like this, you hardly want to call them, or they might even be family members, you hardly want to call them, you hardly want to deal with them, because it's just always more drama, and to go near them, or to get involved with them, just means that you're going to just get yourself dirty, and you're going to make your own life a mess, and you're going to bring all this drama on yourself, and so again, what you'd probably be tempted to do is to walk away and leave it alone and not go anywhere near it. And then, Jeremiah 31 happens, and God changes his tune. This is what the Lord says, A voice is heard in Ramah, weeping, and great mourning, and great weeping, Rachel weeping for her children. Rachel is of course one of the matriarchs of Israel. Rachel weeping for her children, and refusing to be comforted, because they are no more, and this actually gets quoted in the Gospel of Matthew, and becomes an important part of the Christmas story, but Israelites at this time would hear this and completely understand the cry of the matriarch as she sees her children being corralled into captivity and led off to Babylon, to their exile, and their death, and to their misery. This is what the Lord says, Restrain your voice from weeping, and your eyes from tears, for your work will be rewarded. My work? What work is that? declares the Lord. They will return from the land of the enemy. So there is hope for your descendants declares the Lord, your children will return to the land. Now what this does is implicitly change the suffering that they are about to do, and he calls it work. Right here we begin to see the beginnings of redemptive suffering, that what seems to be pointless to Israel, the destruction of her land, the destruction of her temple, the destruction of her culture, the destruction of her people, these invasions were horribly violent, rape, murder, theft, everything, and God changes his tune and says, I will bring you back. Will we believe him? We are kind of back there with Abraham's dilemma. I have surely heard Ephraim's moaning, you disciplined me like an unruly calf, and I have been disciplined. Restore me and I will return because you are the Lord my God. After I strayed I repented, after I came to understand, I beat my breast. I was ashamed and humiliated because I bore the disgrace of my youth. In other words, this gets personified as Israel having been disciplined and learned, and the discipline was costly. And now of course you should notice that this is the personification of Israel. This transcends each individual person and deals with Israel as a group of people, and in a sense you can see this discipline because when we pick up the story again in the New Testament period with Jesus in the Galilee and then in Judea, some of the sins of ancient Israel, they in fact have given up. After the exiles, the Israelites are ardent monotheists. They are not, they don't seem anywhere near as tempted to chase after the other gods as they were before. Now it might be just a remnant of Israel that it's this because in the New Testament period they have this very hot culture war going on between them. Is not Ephraim my dear son, the child in whom I delight? Though I often speak against him, I still remember him. Therefore my heart yearns for him. I have great compassion for him declares the Lord. And here God is saying to Israel, yes, I have disciplined you. Yes, I have sent you into exile. Yes, I have done all of this, but it's the old cliche what the parent says before he gives the child a spanking. This will hurt me more than it hurts you and of course no child believes it. But in a sense God is saying, I have disciplined you, but I have done it for your good and I will restore you. Set up road signs, put up guideposts, take note of the highway, the road that you take. Return virgin Israel, return to your towns. Now calling her virgin Israel in the context of the prophets is tremendously important because throughout the prophets Israel is an unfaithful wife. Israel is a whore of a daughter. Israel will sleep with any foreign god or any foreign empire and now it seems after her punishment she is a virgin again. This is in fact kind of a leaning towards resurrection. This is a leaning towards purification. This is a leaning towards she now is renewed and young again and holy and pure. How long will you wander unfaithful daughter Israel? And you notice how the prophets weave in and out of these metaphors quite seamlessly. How long will you wander unfaithful daughter Israel? The Lord will create a new thing on earth. The woman will return to the man. And so these fathers and daughters and husbands and wives, the prophets love to mix these metaphors together. This is what the Lord Almighty, the God of Israel says, when I bring them back from captivity the people in the land of Judah and its towns will once again use these words, the Lord bless you, you prosperous city, you sacred mountain. In other words it won't be woe is me our destruction and our destruction has come and all we do is live in ruins and scrape by life. No, we'll bless each other because prosperity will be everyone, everywhere. People will live together in Judah and all of its towns, farmers and those who move about with their flocks. I will refresh the weary and satisfy the faint. The days are coming declares the Lord when I will plant the kingdoms of Israel and Judah with the offspring of peoples and animals. You almost have a Noah type image here of the flood has taken but now I will replant with this remnant. Just as I watched over them to uproot and tear down and to overthrow, destroy and bring disaster, so I will watch over them to build and to plant declares the Lord. In those days the people will no longer say the parents have eaten sour grapes and the children's teeth are set on edge. In the prophet Ezekiel this is the same the same proverb is spoken and the proverb essentially means that that God punishes the children for the sins of the parents and here God says I'm not going to do that anymore. Instead everyone will die for their own sin. Whoever eats sour grapes their own teeth will be set on edge. In other words God is saying you know I will not hold the entire nation accountable. I will not hold past generations accountable. If you do wrong I will punish the one who does wrong and not everyone else will suffer because of the few who do wrong. Again this is a picture of restoration and shalom and fullness and life as it's supposed to be. Not fully but again this is the accommodation and contextualization that we see so often in the Bible. The days are coming declares the Lord when I will make a new covenant with the people of Israel and the people of Judah. It will not be like the covenant I made with their ancestors when I took them by the hand to lead them out of Egypt, Moses covenant, because they broke my covenant. Though I was a husband to them declares the Lord and again you have the masculine and the feminine and God saying I was your husband and again within that cultural frame that means that I provided for you I sacrificed for you. You know what the good husband does as is talked about in Ephesians 5 as he lays down his life for his wife and his children. This is the image of what a good man should do. This is the covenant I will make with the people of Israel after that time declares the Lord. I will put my law in their minds and write it on their hearts. I will be their God and they will be my people. No longer will they teach their neighbors or say to one another know the Lord because they will all know me. From the least to the greatest declares the Lord I will forgive their wickedness and I will remember their sins no more. This is one of the most beautiful passages in the Old Testament where God and his glory and his goodness are so completely present to the people and our sins are behind us and now we can live on earth as God intended us to live. Now the people come back from the exile and it doesn't work out as they imagined when the builders laid the foundation of the temple of the Lord the priests and their vestments and the trumpets and the Levi's the sons of Asaph with symbols they took their places to praise the Lord as described by David king of Israel with the praise and thanksgiving they sang to the Lord and they thought now the kingdom is coming. He is good his love towards Israel endures forever they are excited they are waiting for these prophecies to be fulfilled and all the people gave a great shout of praise to the Lord because the foundation of the house the Lord has made was laid. Many of the older priests and Levi's and family heads who had seen the former temple wept aloud when they saw the foundations of this temple being laid while many others shouted for joy no one could distinguish the sound of the shouts of joy from the sound of weeping because the people made so much noise and the sound was heard far away and I think that's just a that's an image of our lives that the sound of weeping and the sound of joy are intermingled and we can't distinguish it and it's that image that pictures how we live in this world where as the angels declared in Isaiah chapter 6 holy holy holy is the Lord God Almighty the whole earth is full of his glory yet we have violated the God's law and we have broken the covenant and the earth is full of this suffering and so it's all here intermingled and at this moment when the foundation of the temple was being laid and Israel is again celebrating when they've come back from when they've come back from exile the the words of the prophets that were that imagined this glorious new age that was about to arise lay unfulfilled and this in fact is is what Israel languishes in through the intertestamental period there's they're under the Persians and then they're under the Greeks and then they're under the Romans and then Jesus comes and he is on one hand a prophet yet he's a different kind of prophet you see and our end of our secular individualism strains here because this this prophetic imagination that the Hebrew prophets worked you know we were such individualists and we think you know the the promise should be for us and and God should intervene in my life and and this should all be immediately to me and the prophet said no this is a generational thing this is a long-term thing this is a family thing but but how on earth can we live and die happily if we know that we ourselves will never see it you know what if what if whatever you are offering to God doesn't pan out for you thinking about Brer Rabbit is if you know the story Wiley Brer Rabbit says to Brer Fox he's he's all he's all taken by the tarball in a sense so what Brer Rabbit says to Brer Fox is throw me in the thicket and that is in a sense I think the the ancient Christian fathers saw the Christus Victor theme in there where where the devil grabs hold of Jesus and the in the crucifixion and Jesus is thrown into the thicket and the Fox thinks that will be the you know that will be the death of the rabbit his his mortal enemy but that's not what happens you see this this Jeremiah passage talks about what the old covenant was never able to fulfill which is the transformation of our hearts because our hearts have to change we need to want to live with God and and in fact when it when it comes to to heaven and hell this is this is part of it we we tend to like to imagine heaven as you know a nice place but a place like earth where God is somehow divorced and and then hell is a is an awful place and there are certainly images in the New Testament about that but but Dallas Willard who was a who was a teacher of philosophy at USC once was asked you know who goes to heaven he said anyone who can stand it what do you mean by that well well the presence of the Lord will be every there everywhere and so if in fact you want him that is where you go and if you don't want him heaven itself would would actually be like hell and so here in this story this catastrophe of the cross we we see this deliverance but but how can we be delivered from our sin how can we be delivered not just from you know stopping to do these external acts but have our hearts be the kind of hearts that the prophet Jeremiah describes this new covenant that Jeremiah imagines and and the way we see this is by seeing the love of our God the rare rabbit and the tar baby thrown into the thicket and imagining that rare rabbit doesn't do this just as a trick to get away from rare fox but Jesus does this as a way to show his love for us and when we begin to see that something in our hearts changes and we know this because when when someone gives us a gift just today I was someone has offered me a gift and it's a and it's a wonderful gift and I'm not going to say what it is now and you know if it comes to pass early in April some of you who watch my Jordan Peterson videos will know what does this lead in my heart this this you know gratitude comes out of my heart for this this gift that someone has given me and and this is in fact that the heart change that we look to if you if you watch any of Tim Keller's sermons one of the things that you notice is that his sermons are all the same and and every one of his sermons concludes with with the idea of trying to have his audience see the gift that Jesus gives on the cross because if we can understand the riches of his grace then suddenly we can begin to want to do good to begin to want to fulfill the law to begin to want to obey God and it will have to be radically and undeniably for us because we are so self-centered but it will also have to smite us with a strange kind of beauty and it's and it's right there that we begin to see the strangeness of why we call it Good Friday because what is good about this this this awful execution of an innocent man you can only call it good if you see that it's it's good for me it's it's my well-being at his expense and so then when you see that how will you live because true obedience must be free not out of compulsion not out of fear and and we must want to be like him for our own reasons and I think about I think about the lame as a rob and Jean Valjean where Jean Valjean is taken into the Monseigneur's house and you'd think that taking him in would would be enough for Jean Valjean not to rob from him but it isn't this is how we are and so and so Jean Valjean robs some of the tableware because it's silver and then the police catch him and they bring them back to the Monseigneur and the Monseigneur and this is beautifully illustrated and not the most recent movie but the movie before where he brings it in and the Monseigneur and the Monseigneur says Jean Valjean you forgot the candlesticks it's terribly angry with you why did you forget the candlesticks and then when he gives him the candlesticks he says with these I have bought your soul and so then the story of lame as a rob is the story of Jean Valjean who now is a different man he's a different person than this than this victim who stole bread and was just scrapping to survive whose whose thefts we might judge as understandable although ungrateful now he becomes the kind of person who will lay down his life for people who who he is not indebted to at all people who perhaps are are not even deserving in human standards but that is the gospel where God out of his wealth out of under no obligation of his own comes down and suffers on our behalf and when we see this we are changed and Jeremiah's vision of this new covenant not not a covenant of carrots and sticks not a covenant of do this and you'll get that not a covenant of fear where we oh I've got to be good otherwise God is going to get me not a covenant of those things but a covenant where we see and understand what God has done for us and we turn and do it for him and in fact we see this kind of covenant throughout the world every every good child feels the gratitude of what his good parents sacrificially have given him and so if you see this then you have the question how will you live your life will you be kind to the person who has been unkind to you will you be generous to the person who has been stingy towards you will you in fact not take upon yourself the mantle of always trying to write the wrongs of everyone else but but in fact in fact sometimes take on the suffering yourself which is in fact the definition of what forgiveness is and and in that way carry on and show and bear witness to this great love and to see this change us one by one and to see it change the world as we anticipate the final changing of the world that is the covenant of the book of Jeremiah chapter 31