https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=d1V4Q6yBc8E

 Hi, this is Paul and it's Friday, so it's time for a rough draft for Sunday where I walk through the current status of my Sunday sermon. I'm continuing to mull over the Sam Harris, Jordan Peterson debates and it's always a bit of a mystery to me why human sacrifice comes up on these debates. Basically, the assertion is that Christians believe in a primitive ancient God that demands human sacrifice. And I wonder about this because I don't see anybody promoting that we start doing this again. This doesn't seem to be a real threat in terms of churches are just about to break out in animal sacrifice, never mind human sacrifice. Recently, however, Science website, journal, whatever it was, posted a very interesting on the discovery of the scale of human sacrifice that the Aztecs had committed basically. There was a lot of skepticism about the Spanish accounts. There was a lot of speculation that these accounts were biased and therefore exaggerated the scale of human death of the Aztec ritual human sacrificial system. Recent archaeological evidence has demonstrated that they weren't exaggerating at all. It was on a massive scale and they lined up the heads as trophies in towers and they recently dug up some of these towers. Now the conquistadors were hardly innocent themselves in their capacity for violence and colonization, but they felt themselves morally superior to the Aztecs because they at least didn't put heads on a pole. And now the atheists come along and they'll tell us, but isn't this at the center of your religion, the sacrifice of a father's son? And they have a point because I was just in preparation for this. I decided to search the Heideberg catechism, probably the most beloved of the Christian reform churches, reformational doctrinal statements. And if you do a search, how many times sacrifice comes up in the document, it's again and again and again and it's the sacrifice of Jesus Christ. And that's exactly the language. But are both the word and the sacraments intended to focus our faith on the sacrifice of Jesus Christ on the cross as the only ground of our salvation? Answer, and this is the way the Heideberg catechism talks often, right. In the gospel, the Holy Spirit teaches us and through the Holy Sacraments, he assures us that our entire salvation rests on Christ's one sacrifice for us on the cross. This feels at least to some like a devastating point by the atheists against Christianity. This is barbarism. This is immoral and it ought to be buried along with all of the Aztec skulls. Now they rightly point out that the ubiquity of human sacrifice around the world for a very long time, animal sacrifice is really a substitution for human sacrifice. Synagogue Torah observance is actually a substitution for authorized sacrifice. We're in the book of Kings and there's all of this complaining about the high places and the complaining about the high places is that there's all this unauthorized sacrifice going up on the high places, people kind of freelancing their religious needs and the author of the book of Kings keeps wanting, keeps basically admonishing the kings for not shutting down the high places and centralizing sacrifice in Jerusalem where it belongs. Now actually, Christian churches, when the temple is destroyed in 586 BC by the Babylonian armies, the Jews don't know what to do now that they can't fulfill Torah obligation of sacrifice and so what instead develops is Torah observance in the synagogues and this begins in this period and this will continue to spread, to spread and spread and spread. This in fact, Torah observation dislocates animal sacrifice which again is a substitute for human sacrifice and again for those of you watching this on video, I did an entire video on the symbolism behind sacrifice and human sacrifice is very much rooted when you put that animal on the altar, the person putting the animal on the altar expresses the idea that the animal is taking the hit instead of the human being and this idea has been passed along all the way through Christian history from the cult of the Israelites, when I say cult I mean that in more of a technical sense, from the ritual of the Israelites that then gets transmitted into Torah observance and synagogue that then gets passed along into the practice of the early church that you can read about in the book of Acts and Christians took this and they institute this communion, this Eucharist, this Lord's Supper which memorializes the sacrifice of Jesus and I'm not going to get into the big reformational battle over that but this stands at the center of Christian worship. The critics of Christianity make a strong point when they say you continue to memorialize human sacrifice in your worship today, this is barbarism, this ought to be put away, we shouldn't even talk about things like this. Well I suppose we would have to get rid of Indiana Jones movies and lots of other movies that talk about it too. Now in our journey through the Old Testament we are in the middle of the book of Second Kings and as we've seen on many occasions Samuel and Kings, these books work together to talk about the rise and fall of the messianic king of David and Solomon who reached the high point and then it's corruption on from there and those of you who are watching with Jordan Peterson in mind might know that we're talking about the corruption of a hierarchy and in fact a hierarchy develops with the king at the top and even at the beginning, at the end of the book of Samuel and the beginning of the book of Kings you see this long slow development of corruption and part of the point is that corruption takes a long time. We tend to focus because we're short lived creatures, we tend to focus within our own little lifetimes but the story is tracking corruption over many lifetimes and looking at the broad strokes and decline of the kingdom of Israel and their relationship with God. So we pick up the story and Israel has in a sense, Israel has increased again in size as has Judah and they're back on a decline. In the 17th year of Pecca son of Remaliah, Ahaz son of Jotham king of Judah began to reign. Ahaz was 20 years old when he became king and he reigned in Jerusalem 16 years. Unlike David his father, now again pay attention, these ancient people have very long memories and David was not his, those of us would say well father is, you know, Stan was my father, David was his ancestor and Ahaz was his descendant. There are a number of generations between them. Ahaz was 20 years old. Unlike David his father, he did not do what was right in the eyes of the Lord his God. This the book of Kings likes giving us a very binary take on each of the kings but then is going to expand that binary take. He followed the ways of the kings of Israel and even sacrificed his son in the fire. So Ahaz is practicing sacrifice of his son and this is being condemned here in the book of Kings. Engaging in the detestable practices of the nations the Lord had driven out before the Israelites and so this then ties us into the story that has been happening since the Exodus all the way on through. All these stories are tied together. He offered sacrifices and burned incense at the high places on the hilltops and under every spreading tree and this is kind of a phrase that is intended for the authors to appreciate the fact that Ahaz is very transactional in his religious practice. He's very mercenary in his transitional practice. He's very spiritual but not terribly organized. Not terribly disciplined. Then Rezin king of Aram and Pekah son of Remaliah king of Israel marched up to fight against Jerusalem and besiege Ahaz but they could not overpower him. At that time Rezin king of Aram recovered Elath for Aram by driving out the people of So Aram and Israel, two stronger kingdoms to the north, have now combined forces, this is Israel combining with another element to come down and attack Israel's brother Judah. Edomites then moved into Elah and they have lived there to this day. When the book of Kings was written this gives some orientation about that. One of these nice little tidbits in history where scholars try to date these books and figure out when they were written. And so what has happened here basically is that Judah is scared and the big dog now, the imperial dog on the scene is Assyria and Aram and Israel have been nervous about Assyria which is to their north and east and so now the king of Judah pays the king of Assyria to come down and attack his enemies and Tiglath-Pelisar is more than happy to comply. When Ahaz went to Damascus to meet Tiglath-Pelisar king of Assyria he saw an altar in Damascus and sent to Uriah the priest a sketch of the altar with detailed plans for its construction. So Uriah the priest built an altar in accordance with all the plans that king Ahaz had sent from Damascus and finished it before Ahaz returned. Now pay attention here. If you've read the Bible you know that the book of Exodus has these detailed descriptions of how the tabernacle should be and the book of Kings has these detailed descriptions of how the temple was supposed to be in Jerusalem. Now where is king Ahaz getting his cues from? He's getting it from the Assyrian Empire. The Assyrian Empire is now his lord and the gods of Assyria will now be his gods. This is how the world works. In my other, again I probably won't say this on Sunday, but in my other Jordan Peterson videos I've walked through the ways in which polytheism and henotheism and monotheism tend to play between each other. And so here basically Ahaz is making a religious slash political calculation. If he wants to please the god of Assyria he needs to emulate the main servant of Assyria, the lord of the Assyrian Empire, Tiglath-Pelisir. And so he copies the altar from Damascus that was likely a copy of the altar in Nineveh and he is going to now place this in the temple in Jerusalem and whether this is an example of syncretism of Ahaz trying to kind of merge Hadad and the lord into one god or if he's subsuming the lord under Hadad, the god of the Assyrians, it doesn't matter. You can pretty well guess what the authors of the book of kings are going to think about this. When the king came back from Damascus and saw the altar he approached it and presented offerings on it. He offered up his burnt offerings and grain offerings, poured out his drink offerings and splashed the blood of his fellowship offerings against the altar. As for the bronze altar that stood before the lord, he brought it from in front of the temple, from between the new altar and the temple of the lord and put it on the north side of the new altar. In other words, the lord is now second fiddle to Hadad, god of Assyria. Now this is the way of the world. We kiss up and we kick down. This is how you survive. This is how you get ahead. Hierarchies develop and corrupt. And we're always working within these hierarchies. So you put Hadad over the lord and you put Tiglath-Pelisar over Ahaz and we're just always working these hierarchies. Well, what are we working them towards? We're trying to work them towards our benefit. The strong take the weak, the wealthy and the powerful take advantage. It's my well-being at your expense. Now it's interesting because all this stuff trickles down into culture and it gets into things that we hardly imagine where we'd find it. Just recently I saw an article written in 2012. This economist was looking at this women and children first myth. And it's very interesting. The title of the article was Sinking the Titanic Women and Children Myth. Well, so supposedly this myth should be sank, supposedly along with the sentiment behind it that in, well, let's read the story. Where does the notion arise? When a ship sinks, women and children come first. It appears to have started when the HMS Birkenhead ran aground off South Africa in 1852. But the notion became widespread after the sinking of the Titanic in 1912. The captain explicitly ordered for women and children to be saved first. As a result, the survival rate of women was three times higher than men. Now you can judge for yourself whether this is a good thing or a bad thing and what criteria you use to judge it with. This idea of chivalry, now that's a very interesting word that would bear some attention in terms of drawing it back into the Middle Ages where this word came from. This idea of chivalry at sea has gained mythical status. But you're the first person to examine if it's true for many other maritime disasters. What did you find? We went through a list of over 100 major maritime disasters spanning three centuries to see if we could find data on the survival rates of men and women. We ended up with data on 18 shipwrecks including 15,000 passengers. In contrast to the Titanic, we found that the survival rate of men was basically double that of women. Now why would that be? Well, shortage of space in lifeboats, scuffle on the deck, who's going to win and who's going to lose? Well, are we looking for equality? Should we line up and have equal numbers of men, women and children? But in a moment like that, folks are probably going to default to whatever's deepest in terms of their moral hierarchy, whatever's been built in low, whatever's most important. One of the things that we've been talking about when we're talking about corruption in the Book of Kings are in fact these hierarchies. Because if Baal is a mercenary god that lives kiss up and kick down, then the king under Baal will live kiss up and kick down. Now if Hadad is a similar god with kiss up and kick down, the people hate that Tiglath-Peleser will live according to the values of Hadad and he'll transmit those values to the values of the people beneath. So it's actually very important who's at the top of your hierarchy because again, what's at the top will go down and become practiced and be acted out in what's happening below. Now I want to contrast Edward Smith, the captain of the Titanic, who very famously gave the order women and children first, which arrived at saving women and children on a large scale. In fact on an unusually large scale, we should also probably add that the captain himself was not filling all the lifeboats. The crew was acting in obedience to the captain and there's also this other saying, the captain goes down with the ship. Now where do we get these sayings from and why when we listen to them do we imagine that these are right sayings and these sayings should be emulated and this is the way the world should work. Does this just come out of nowhere? Does this come out of rational thought? We sit down and we think, yeah, well, women and children should be saved first because, well because why? Well what's your rational hierarchy in this? If we really wanted to establish an objective, supposedly rational standard, well there's a lot of different options. Women and children are weaker so they might not survive the rough waters of the North Atlantic in the freezing cold. So maybe age, maybe 18 to 35 year olds should be your priority because they're the ones most likely to survive if you want to maximize, if you want to minimize loss of life. What about fitness? You should see how many jumping jacks or see who's really overweight and maybe if you have skinny people that can fit in the boat. What about intelligence? Well maybe we should only save the really smart ones. Well how are we going to figure that out on the spot? Well what about wealth or potential? There are a lot of wealthy people who went down with the Titanic. Maybe those wealthy people if they had been shaved in the lifeboat would do better things with their money having had the experience of being out in the Titanic. Are women and children a good criteria? Why this one? Many of you when you hear women and children first will say, yeah that's good. That feels right. That somehow feels like the way it should be. It's not equality. But why do we think it's good and why do we think it's right? Well these two things play out and we could compare Edward Smith of the Titanic with the captain of the Costa Concordia who quite famously not too long ago got off the ship. He and his crew very early and left a lot of people just to die. And he eventually was charged and I think convicted in an Italian court. But why do we value the captain that goes down with his ship? Surely a captain has all kinds of valuable information that we wouldn't want lost. The captain of the Titanic had reached the top of his hierarchy. Surely he is more valuable than how many women and children that were prioritized. Yet something grabs us in these stories and we say yes the captain goes down with his ship if or the captain is the last one off the ship. And if you don't believe me watch how many movies whether they're spaceships or ocean vessels or army soldiers off the battlefield how many times the person on the top of the hierarchy is the last one to leave. Why? We're saying something about leadership. We're saying something about morality. We're saying something that our hearts long for the world to express. So, what you're saying is Captain Smith was just trying to score political points. What? So let's read more of the article. So what about the noble idea that the captain and the crew put the passengers first and go down with the ship? What we can see is that the crew were more likely to survive than the passengers with 61% surviving. This isn't the Titanic these are other shipwrecks. And around 37% of male passengers. So on average the captain was more likely to survive than passengers. So in other words Captain Smith is an example or Captain Smith is an unusual case. So this notion of chivalry at sea is a myth? Yes it really is every man for himself. Are you happy about that? What do you think we brought into the women and children first belief? This must be a bad thing. So someone will tell us. The Titanic has been so extensively studied and it has confirmed the myth. There's little empirical evidence against it. Lucy de Lapp of Cambridge University argues that this myth was spread by the British elite to prevent women from obtaining suffrage. They said look at the Titanic there's no reason to give women the vote because men even when facing death will put the interests of women first. Oh but what we're seeing is that men won't put the interest of women first generally unless there is a hierarchy that is enforcing this idea. Well that's interesting. In fact you found that in general women fare worse on British ships. Yes uh oh. It's been claimed that women and children first is just a British phenomenon but we found a lower survival rate for women on British ships than ships of other nations. Be curious to see that other data. You're an economist why are you studying this? Well you was curious about it. Other investigations of the Titanic disaster found that even when incentives to pursue your own interests were really high that you may die if you don't people can cooperate and act at the expense of their own survival. Now right here he is endorsing this value. This value this very unnatural value. Well where do we get this very unnatural value? This isn't a Darwinian value is it? It doesn't seem to be a rational value. And then the myth of the Titanic continues to get perpetuated. In James Cameron movie you know we have here we have Jack and Rose and Jack is going to freeze to death and fans look at this and say he could have survived but that's not the point of the movie is it? Why is it the dude in the water? Why is it his beloved that is on that is on the door and is going to survive? And why does she say he saved me in every way a woman could be saved? What are we doing with these stories? Why does the Bible retain stories of human sacrifice? Well partly because it's how we naturally behave because we do practice. It is really every man for himself often and women and children get the short end of the stick. We kiss up and we kick down and we live my being at your especially those who are below us expense. Now what's interesting is that the story in second Kings has a story that is connected to it in the book of Isaiah where Isaiah the prophet who had a long career as a prophet comes to Ahaz this king who sacrificed his own children. He comes to Ahaz and the Lord invites him to trust in the word of the Lord in a prophecy that Israel and Aram won't take the city. He even offers him a sign that a virgin will conceive and give birth to a son and by that and before that time Aram and Israel will no longer be a threat and Ahaz gives a sanctimonious rejection of the author. He's too spiritual for that. But here's the question. Why would God be so generous with someone who kills his own son to try to better his career? You know we might not like the Aztecs and we may not like the Aztecs but like the conquistadors we feel pretty self-righteous about the Aztecs. How however do we sacrifice the needs of the young the old and the weak to our own convenience? How do we dispense of them for the advancement and improvement of our interests and status? It's really remarkable because this business of what King Ahaz participated in gets practiced in the Valley of Henan which in the New Testament period gets called Gehenna which is actually the word that Jesus uses which gets translated as hell in the New Testament. Now there's a second word Hades which is the realm of the dead but again and again and Jesus parables that we translate into hell Jesus refers to this place Gehenna which links us back to the sacrifice of sons of the sons of kings and of the children of high status people who are trying to gain the favor of the gods for their own advancement. What is Jesus saying about the systems of this world and where they lead and where they go and what that creates right here and right now not even to speak of what happens in the afterlife that this practice is deeply linked to what hell is. But what does the father get out of his son's death? This isn't Agamemnon getting fair wins and so sacrificing his daughter. What does the son get out of his voluntary sacrifice? Now if you notice how the gospels talk about the sacrifice of Jesus it's always voluntary and Jesus is not a child Jesus is a grown man who has enormous power and if he has enormous power to still a storm he could create a storm and how many times in the ancient wind in the ancient world don't we find vast navies of empires being destroyed by a storm and Jesus who could raise the dead of course could make people could raise the dead with a word could make people dead with a word and I'll ask you which is easier to take life or to give it we still can't give life. Jesus with all of this power goes into the kangaroo court and when Pilate says I'm trying to help you out here man Jesus says you don't know the kind of power you're talking to. Jesus does this for whom? A third party humanity that receives the benefit and the third party that doesn't deserve the benefit the third party the likes of Ahaz who God approaches and says even after you are sacrificing your own children and marking a place that for generations to come will be synonymous with hell because of what you're doing I will come to you someone who is this corrupt and this evil and this self-interested and I will continue to come to you and offer you an opportunity to change and Ahaz says not interested I don't trust you I can't trust you I'd rather have the lords and the gods of Assyria. And so what does God do? He sends his son and what does his son do? He offers himself. Ahaz was happy to offer solace to the Lord and he offered him a place to live and he offered his soldiers. Ahaz was happy to offer involuntarily the life of his son. Jesus comes and voluntarily becomes the sacrifice. Now is that powerful? In your relationships with one another have the same mindset as Christ Jesus. Should we forget this story? No we shouldn't forget this story. Who being in very nature God did not consider equality with God something to be used to his own advantage. Rather he made himself nothing by taking the very nature of a servant being made in human likeness and being found in appearance as a man. He humbled himself by becoming obedient to death even death on a cross. Therefore God exalted him to the highest place. Well I thought God was the perpetrator here but what's he doing with the voluntary gift of his son? Look at how the Bible continues to talk about this and it doesn't want to shush this away into some forgotten corner of history but says right here is the very center of humanity. This is the very center of our hearts. This is the very center of what it means to be moral. Do you want a story that says it all? Here it is. And our hearts long for it. At the name of Jesus every knee should bow in heaven and on earth and under the earth even the dead and every tongue acknowledge that Jesus Christ is Lord to the glory of God the Father. God who is at the top of the hierarchy puts Jesus there. And so what you see in later books is that there's this constant dance between the Trinity. Now you say equality? Sort of. They keep submitting to each other. You say hierarchy? Sort of. They keep using it. But how do they keep using, how can you have equality and hierarchy at the same time? Well you modulate it in time and you do it through submission. One serves the next. One serves the next. One serves the next. But only those who are deserving. No. Even those who are not. What about Ahaz? He opts out. He opts for Gehenna. That's where he finally chooses to go. That's his God. So what should we do? Therefore if you have any encouragement from being united with Christ, if any comfort from his love, if any common sharing in the spirit, if any tenderness and compassion, then make my joy complete by being like-minded, having the same love, being one in spirit and of mind. Do nothing out of selfish ambition or vain conceit, rather in humility, value, others above yourself. Not looking to your own interests, but each of you to the interests of others. Now isn't this the world you want to live in? Isn't this the kingdom you would like to reign in? You say well reign in a kingdom, that sounds very hierarchical. Yes, but in this kingdom what does the king do? He rules over the kingdom. He rules over the kingdom. He becomes the servant of all. Well isn't that exactly what all of our talk and all of our language and all of our imaginations of what the good leader or the good king or the good president or the good captain does? Why is this so firmly in our head and why when we hear that the captain gets off the boat first do we have no esteem for him and why do we exalt the captain who goes down with the ship, who sacrifices his life so that others, the weakest, the women and children can live? Well you say well you're just jumbling my ideas of justice and of hierarchy and of equality. I'm not jumbling them. I'm encouraging you to read the text and understand how you can have hierarchy and how you can have equality both in the same system. Well how? Well it takes the right kind of king. Now if you find a king like this what should you do? What do you want to do? You say that king is beautiful that king attracts me. I not only desire to be a subject of that king I desire to be like the king. Well now you get it.