https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=lcG1w2FdCYc

 Hi, this is Paul. I want to make a video and I want to talk about the relationship between the Christian Reformed Church and Evangelicalism. For a number of years I listened quite regularly pretty much every week to, it wasn't called the Holy Post podcast back then, it was the Phil Vischer podcast, and I listened to it every week. And I was a big fan and I participated actively in the Facebook page and listened to it, listened to it a lot. My interest at some point fell off, of course I hit the Jordan Peterson rabbit trail and started Estuary. Kristen De May is on their new series, Why I'm Still a Christian. Lecrae was on the first week, I listened to that with Phil Visser and Sky Giotani talked to Kristen De May and maybe we'll talk about that at some point. She wrote a sub stack about it. But it, the Christian Reformed Church and myself growing up, when I listened to Kristen De May talk, in many ways I hear myself maybe 10 years ago. And I think about why I've changed and what has changed. And maybe that's a good place to start. There's a post on CRC Voices of someone making the observation that they had visited Classist Grand Rapids East's fall meeting. The way the Christian Reformed Church works is that in the fall there are all these classist meetings, some classes, classes are sort of the regional judiciary for the Christian Reformed Church. I've got a busy week this week because I'm a synodical deputy so I'm going down to California and dealing with some class school issues in Southern California and then I have my own classes next week. But this person had written to CRC Voices that they were a little disappointed by the meeting in Classist Grand Rapids East because it seemed to be business as usual. Now he also said that 40% of the meeting was in executive session, it must have been strict executive session because he wasn't allowed to be in it. It's probably in that area that they talked about all of the issues that are swirling around Synod 2022 and Synod 2023. What he wrote really didn't surprise me but it sort of initiated myself doing some writing and thinking about what's going on in the CRC and I thought I'd share some of that. In the CRC the fight is based on the slimmest of confessional real estate while I suspect the differences are further down below the surface. If the differences between the main line and the diversity of non-affirming Christian churches around the culture were limited to how they regard marriage it would be an entirely different debate. What's interesting is that the main line is united in a sense and that they mostly look alike in terms of their concern and their ideals. Whether they are Presbyterian, Unitarian, Methodist, Episcopalian, they all seem to be sort of heading in the same direction. It's a unity of sorts but it's a telling one. I don't expect the sort of heat between any of these churches because for the most part they focus on their focus of urgent concerns seem to align. Climate change, sexual liberations, government action, etc. It's like government action in terms of equity. Those are their agendas. That unanimity is very interesting to me. The non-affirming churches by contrast look startlingly diverse. Nearly every other approach to Christianity, Orthodox, Roman Catholic, Baptist, Reformed, Pentecostal, etc. don't affirm but are startlingly different in how many different ways. They might agree on being non-affirming but their eschatological, missional, liturgical agendas are startlingly diverse and you can generate a heated doctrinal debate very easily and we see this on YouTube. It's sort of like the main line is over here and even if they've got striking differences such as Presbyterians and Unitarians and Methodists and Episcopalians, their social agenda seems to all sort of be in lockstep whereas the rest of the churches are all over the map on all sorts of things and there can be all sorts of fights about doctrine and behavior, believing, behaving, belonging, all of those sorts of issues. There's all sorts of fights between them. All this is evidence that Grand Rapids East, like all our regions and churches, have a combination of causes which vie in its consciousness hierarchy. The CRC has a variety of such causes always churning about at any different time. Many churches and even many individuals maintain multiple agendas within themselves vying for supremacy and attention. What I carved out was sort of three different approaches and these are true of the CRC. I think in various permutations they're also true just sort of generally in the culture in terms of large ideologies or large religious differences and I didn't want to have the list be too long because of course consciousness is sort of monofocal and then two we sort of compare and contrast, three is about what we can handle. The first is liberation as social justice, climate change, gender equality, gender binary destruction, government regulated equity, etc. We all know the list. It's one of the most powerful coalitions in our culture today and a variety of mainline churches have made it their primary or at least their most visible cause. Number two, conservative social justice, stopping liberation of social justice. They're the opposition party. Restrictive abortion, selective liberty, return to a more overtly visible religious symbolism in politics. That's sort of the Dread Christian nationalism debate. That list is around too. And the third one, evangelical salvationism. Now I don't by saying evangelical I don't mean to exclude the orthodox or the catholics. It's sort of the European broadly evangelical concern that individual souls not passed into a Christless eternity of various temperatures and sufferings. Now I know already a bunch of you universalists and there's all sorts of things in here that are going to be different. Again this third group is tremendously diverse. Well just let me read the rest and maybe you'll understand. This was first written mainly with respect to the Christian Reformed Church. Evangelical salvationism, concern that individual souls not pass into a Christless eternity of various temperatures and sufferings. Most of this focus is next worldly. Some are broad to include a mere Christianity, Bible believing ecumenicity. That's really what evangelicalism tried to do as opposed to let's say stricter fundamentalism. Evangelicalism tried to be much more of a serious Christianity that could work in mainstream suburban American cities. If you look at neo-evangelicalism, Molly Worthen's book, The Disciples of Reason, that's really sort of who they are and that's really in many ways part of what the Christian Reformed Church tried to emulate and that's where there's sort of a huge overlap between the Christian Reformed Church sort of has some very tiny sliver that's really mainline-ish and as a part that's sort of much more young, reformed, conservative of a part that's really confessionalist, a part that's sort of reformed Catholic which is you know neo-sacramentalist but then a good size of the Christian Reformed Church is sort of right there in the holy post direction. Some are broad to include a mere Christianity, Bible believing ecumenicity that now in the 21st century unlike previous centuries, Orthodox, Catholic, Protestant, Pentecostal, etc. In other words, people aren't real... I picked up the George Marsden's Jonathan Edwards biography again and again just remembering just how fervent anti-Catholicism was and especially in the colonial period of course the Spanish and the French were Catholic and so the English who were non-conformists saw Catholics as the big enemy because they could come rolling in with French and Spanish armies and lay waste to the English sort of what the English did to the Dutch in terms of taking them over. Most of the concerns are an overt embrace of supernaturalism. Notice the modernist anti-modernist concerns and a focus on the Bible with varying amounts of tradition either overtly or implicitly embraced. Their political concern is for the ongoing freedom of their institutions which allies them regularly with conservative social justice against more overt activists from government equity from government enforced equity. Now this is part of what's changed I think in the last few decades that a lot of these sort of evangelical, some of these evangelical salvationists were more aligned with the liberationist, the older liberationist and now increasingly they tend to be better aligned with the conservative social justice concerns. Beneath this cause there are a variety of confessional conflicts but they're mostly kept from getting too out of hand out of fear that larger societal freedoms might be jeopardized. What missional means will vary dependent on the blend both between and within the different causes. There is an urban rural divide in the U.S. between the liberationist social justice and the conservative social justice. Evangelical salvationism tends to be more broadly spread. Some liberationists share evangelical salvationism on some levels, others are skeptical. There are of course also conservative social justice promoters who are also skeptical about evangelical salvationists but many of them tend to see organized religion as a helpful therapeutic civilizing factor and they don't oppose it. And again you'll often see this sort of in the divide you'll find people who like Jordan Peterson and they think well he's good and they think churches are good but not for them. Some liberationist social justice activists have been openly hostile to evangelical salvationists seeing many of their traditional practices and beliefs as anti-therapeutic and regressive wanting to even employ government power to reduce its influence and this is often sort of the big fear of both sides. Someone had sent me a piece out of the CBC in Canada which sort of pointed a finger at theonomists, Doug Wilson, these reformed theonomists and generally every every five or ten years I'd say liberationist social justice tribes sort of trot out the theonomists and say see, see we're on the verge of a theocracy. That was the big scare during the George W. Bush presidency. That wasn't really such a big scare during the Trump presidency because Donald Trump didn't walk down the beach with Billy Graham like George W. Bush did. This is of course has set up the alliance between the conservative social justice tribe with evangelicals. So a lot depends on what your mission is. There's room for nuance beneath these dominant tribes and my guess is that there are many in Grand Rapids East that want to pursue some blend of all three. This of course is tried with some version of evangelical salvationism is raised and liberationism tends to fit in, tries to fit in within. That's the experiment of evangelical moderates affirming churches. They're an outlier. Others who want to affirm out of concern for losing their children to the CRC, out of the CRC are also trying to hold things together. You can be CRC and liberationist too tends to be the move. That's increasingly challenging to do in many ways where the challenge, in many ways where the challenge lies. Each large tribe numbered above has many different ways of pursuing its agenda and nuances beneath. The difficulty in messaging is that nuance takes time and in-depth attention and our short attention span glandular world is easy to sell, especially when we are in an environment of very powerful spirits and agents who sell their version of their tribe into every household and platform. I don't remember who sent me this YouTube. It was from, oh it was actually Aaron Wren who sent me this YouTube. It was a video by, let me pull it up, this was a conversation about the basically what's going on in the United Methodist Church. And for those of you who haven't followed this, there's a lot of back and forth in the United Methodist Church with respect to same-sex marriage. Basically there were a number of bishops and areas of the North American Church that were in defiance of the stated position of the United Methodist Church and there was no discipline happening with respect to these positions. And some of those bishops had power and they're really turning the heat up on conservative churches. And basically over the last couple of years the church was sort of voting together and African churches are within their structure. When during COVID, the African things sort of got segmented and a number of things were made. Basically conservatives figured out that they didn't want to have anything to do with this anymore so they were going to leave. So you had a significant exodus from the United Methodist Church. And this individual, Lonnie Brooks, who is same-sex marriage affirming but considers him a moderate in the United Methodist, wrote a piece about the Center Progressive Coalition could soon unravel in the United Methodist Church. And it was really a rather interesting piece. Another crisis is the likelihood that the coalition between the United Methodist Centrists and the Progressive, so they both agreed, at least in North America, the centrists were affirming but just sort of moderate affirming saying we don't want to fight about this, we want to stay as one church, we think we can just make this little change and everything will be okay. And they and the Progressives could agree on this so they basically had a coalition and they were sort of offset by the conservatives but now with the conservatives leaving the balance in the denomination is going to be different. The coalition between these interest groups is based on a common commitment to full inclusion of LT, LGBTQIA, and LGBTQI. And so they were able to plus persons in the Life and Ministry of the United Methodist Church. And the presenting problem goes forward is that this commitment is the only thing that the two groups have in common. And as in analyzing what happened before us it's important to remember that up to the end of the special session of the General Conference of 2019 the balance of power in the church was maintained between the traditionalists on one side and the progressives on the other who literally fought between themselves for dominance in church decision making with centrists having making occasional but often feudal forays into the fray in their attempt to maintain peace and unity. The centrist did that by supporting the view of the church as an example of big tent polity with room for those who espouse many viewpoints on various division issues, most prominently human sexuality. These proposals included such offerings as, and it goes through a third way and you know it's very interesting when you read this you see sort of what happened in the Christian-informed church there's a fair amount of sort of the way these things fall out. In 2019 the General Council which looked so much like a defeat the defeat of the progressives was in reality the end of the road for the centrists. At that point we had no choice but to become allies with the progressives and deny the apparent victory of the traditionalists which in effect left the traditionalists with no real option other than separation. So a provisional a provision championed by traditionalists as a pathway for exit of the progressives became an exit pass mostly for traditionalists. What the what the compromise was was that they allowed certain circumstances where churches could leave the denomination with their property. Now the Christian-informed church is a little different from many of these mainline denominations and many mainline denominations even though often local people build their buildings the buildings are owned by the denomination and so in these mainline denominations if a conservative church wants to leave often they'll have to pay a settlement which is millions of dollars to the denomination just to have the right to leave with their building. So the traditionalists won in 2019 and they basically said here's a path whereby the progressives can leave but what happened was when they saw that discipline wasn't happening the traditionalists basically said we're going to take this option and we're going to leave. Now that leaving hasn't really happened very smoothly there's tons of things on the internet about that I'm not going to go into it it's sort of an interesting story. To understand what that means we have to take a look at the what the difference is between Christian who is a centrist and one who is a progressive. Now again in this case a centrist may be in favor of same-sex marriage but the the overall priority for the centrist is keep the family together. So let's just hold the two sides together let's just keep the family together let's not fight over this it's not that big of a deal it can all be okay. A centrist is suspicious of social goals that can only be achieved through coercive power of the state and further believes that the separation of church and state embraced in the United States self-understanding means forays of church into the affairs of government ought to be rare and limited as well as that the state has no right to interfere in the affairs of the church. Now if you go back to my little schema in this case the progressives would be the liberation of social justice and the centrist are probably sort of evangelical salvationists. A corollary to the foregoing is that centrist hears the gospel call that they are among Christians and a preferential option for the poor to be a call to the church to orient its mission and ministries to support policies and programs that protect and serve the poor in the church and in society. A progressive hears the gospel call for a preferential option for the poor as a call for preferential option for the state. A centrist is committed to the mission of the church making disciples of Jesus Christ who are called by the gospel to transform the world. See their centrist would sort of be progressives in the Christian-formed church in many ways. A progressive is committed to the transformation of the world and seeks disciples making as important only in so far as it leads to the desired world transformation. In the inevitable tension between the social values of personal freedom and equality the centrist always tends to lead more heavily towards preserving freedom and the progressive always tends to lean more heavily towards equality. A centrist sees inequality of outcome as a complex origins and inequality of opportunity, ability, entrepreneurial initiative, accidents of location. A progressive sees inequality of outcome as a proof of inequality of opportunity. Again a lot of this stuff you can hear in many of the stuff that we've covered over the last five years. A centrist sees the merits of any proposal as determinative of whether the proposal is good or bad. A progressive sees the process followed as well as the identity of the composers and the promoters as determinative. In other words, identity politics. Now where he goes basically, where did the rest of this thing go? Did I jump too far in it? Basically his argument is that what's going to happen is that with the traditionalists gone the progressives are going to rule the roost and basically are going to completely steamroll the centrists. In other words, centrists may themselves have to leave or are just going to have to be at the mercy of a liberationist agenda. Here's the paragraph, should have read a little bit more. Whatever else it means for progressives to stage General Conference 2020 to be held in 2024 as a triumph for the progressive movement it will most likely mean the end of any dream of big tent church with room for dissent on the agenda of progressives, which means for all practical purposes turning the agenda of the Methodist Federation for Social Action into the law of the United Methodist Church. Basically he saw, he being a centrist, saw centrists as being flexible and reasonable with respect to being able to debate these issues. Now he basically says that the tyrannical totalitarian progressives are going to run the rule the roost in the Methodist Church and that's basically going to mean game over for the church. Now when I look at let's say Phil Visser and Skye Getani and the Holy Post podcast, I basically see sort of centrism at work probably a little bit more to the right than what we see here. He was on Ed Stetzer's podcast. It's a two-part podcast. Actually Bethel McGrew sent me the link. I listened to it. It was an interesting podcast and the further it got to the end the more clear it got and well maybe I'll play a little bit of that for you. I think my team who's listening is very much enjoying this but here's my question for you. Okay, okay. This is your last chance to ask me that hard-hitting question that I promise I'll answer. If we listen to you what's evangelicalism going to look like? Oh that's a good one. John Stott on a bicycle. In other words, in other words, someone's going to make a mid-journey, someone's going to use AI and create John Stott on a bicycle. We'll make that the image for this episode. The classic strains of British Northern America, Northern evangelicalism but not taking itself seriously. Quite so seriously, hence the bicycle. So that's going to be conversionist? Now this is classic Phil Vischer. Before it became the Holy Post podcast, basically the podcast was Phil would pull articles out of the news. He'd bounce them off Sky. He'd bounce them off Christian Taylor and they'd have some fun with it and they'd talk about some serious issues. The podcast has developed quite a bit since then. I think part of it, they have sponsors and I actually noticed today that the sponsor was the same one that Joe Rogan had and I thought, oh that's interesting. Not too long ago I made a video that I entitled, The Church Has to Be Strange Enough to Be Holy for a Skeptical Secular World and I often talk about steep slope, gentle slope. Phil Vischer, the Holy Post, Sky Giotani, very much gentle slope approach to missions, not steep slope. Part of the difficulty in our secular world, part of the reason the strange gets traction is because again, the strange has impact and a lot of people look at it and say, if you're not distinct enough from the culture, you're not serious and I think there's something deep in the human imagination about holiness, that holiness is other. So the other may be strange and the other may not be terribly godly, but otherness has a power in the culture that just a little bit different doesn't. And what, again, sort of what evangelicalism tried to do, really it's rise in the middle of the 20th century, was say we're not as other as fundamentalists, we're not handling snakes, we're not, you know, not going to movies, although some of them did not go to movies, we're not doing these, we can participate in culture like everyone else, we'll watch TV, we'll listen to the Beatles, we'll do all of these things, we'll participate in culture, but we'll also be Christian. And again, that's sort of gentle slope, this is, you can keep your respectability, you can be just like your suburban neighbors and everything will be fine. Now again, I think Aaron Ren's positive, neutral, negative world has something to teach us here, because increasingly what we've seen is that certain, we see some of our more prominent, we see some of our more prominent conversion happening to stranger, more outlier religious groups, for example, like the Orthodox. And so there's something going on here in terms of the time changing, and as we sort of went from a positive world, let's say before the 80s and 90s and then into a neutral world in the 90s and aughts, and then really into a negative world in the in the 20 teens, the ability to attract credibility has everything to do with the cost of discipleship. So back to John Stott on a bicycle. That's going to be biblical teaching on issues of gender and sexuality, so I was very clear on that. That's going to mean, you know, social concern. You know, I mean, Stott writes about this on more than one occasion about caring for the least of these, the poor, those without. So a Stottian evangelicalism would be something that you would say that's a win. Absolutely, absolutely. You know, we'll have a few exceptions I could get on board with that. Yeah, and I don't honestly, I'm not a Stott scholar, so I've just, I've read summaries, you know, and that's why I'm often reticent to make bold declarative statements because Enneagram, okay, if it's not satanic, then I can use it. So I'm right now assuming it's not satanic. I'm a five. Fives love to learn. They love to acquire knowledge, but the biggest fear of a five is revealing himself to be ignorant. I think that's partly being a man. I've never gotten into the Enneagram thing. Sometimes people tell me their number and I'm like, I have no idea what you're saying because he hasn't learned enough and he spoke. That's interesting, which doesn't, and I wish people would like, again, partly like people will talk to me and they're mad about you saying something or doing something and I'm like, you know, I don't always agree with you. Obviously we've had some pretty robust discussions, private discussions, and now we're having a good robust one here. But I think understanding your framing as an Enneagram five, I have learned things from you. You have helped me grasp things better and at the same time, you drive me crazy with your lack of clarity. I just want clarity as kindness. Just be clear on these issues and then say, I think this, but here's where I have questions, but you don't, you say you focus on the questions because somebody's still trying to learn. Yeah, and I definitely, I intentionally avoid highly declarative statements on Twitter, on Twitter, if people are trying to pin you down and demanding you make a highly declarative statement. You like literally, because I watch it. And again, this gets into this issue of strangeness because basically, and people knock me for this too, I'm plenty winsome. You know, unless you're going to stand on something, you don't stand for anything and why bother listening to you? They may hate you for what you stand for, but at least they respect you because you take a stand. I drive people insane. I text you and say, stop this because I know what you believe. We've had conversations about this and you won't just say it. So why will you not just say it? Well, a couple of reasons. Number one, someone is using it as a litmus test for, you know, for in-group out-group politics. There are theological litmus tests. And I resent that. Yeah, I resent that, especially when in a performative setting. Okay, now it's helpful to remember that Phil Vischer is a very creative guy. So if we're going to use the Big Five personality profile, he's probably very high in openness. And that can very much account for a lot of these sort of temperamental postures. And so I'm also very high in openness. And so, you know, again, that sort of accounts for it, but that also accounts for some of the reaction he gets. So I've got you cornered on Twitter. It's like someone coming to your door, knocking on the door, demanding you come out on your front porch and yell loudly your position on Proposition 28 that's coming before the, you know, whatever, the Planning Commission. It's like, I resent you demanding that I do that for your purposes. So I'm just going to have a little fun with you. And I'm going to see if I can get you chasing your tail in a circle. I just want to say clarity is kindness, brother. So basically what he just said is, he's got a little bit of troll in him and he does. He likes having fun. He doesn't like being put in a corner. And so he will play the troll, which I don't have a problem with. I like playing the troll sometimes too. Tell be clear. What you believe we don't have to agree. We don't have to agree. But also there are also subjects where if in a public context, you, you say something pithy and it's a subject that deeply is deeply personal to people, you know, particularly people that, that, that are in an outcast community. I just, I'd rather not say anything than say something that could wound someone where I'll never know it and never have a chance to explain what I meant. So So again, if we're profiling him, he's, he's got some politeness. Zist publicly declarative statements that are demanded and will often have fun with the, the demander. Yes. It's fun for you. When Lisa and I are texting, it's not as fun for us. Lisa is Phil Vischer's wife. Ed, Ed, Ed, you're not making him stop. It doesn't affect you. Oh, I don't, I don't, I don't jump into those kinds of Twitter things. Twitter is not a great place for thoughtful conversation. And I'm trying to do, I'm trying to do less of that because I noticed, I noticed. It's not great for my question. I think the last question, but pastors and church leaders who listen to your podcast, and there's a lot of them, they do, they do. Many have said is that they, they kept them tethered to their faith that somebody is asking these questions, somebody, there is a safe place to have some of these conversations. Okay. Right there. All right. So this is, okay. I need processing space. Of course, anybody of you know me, estuary, I'm all about processing space. But when you have a need for processing space, it means again, to pick up Charles Taylor's language, there's cross pressure going on in the culture. And in a way, that's the big story with sort of centrists. There's cross pressure. Centrists want to keep the family together. Centrists want to reduce destructive conflict. Centrists want to, you know, see if everybody, see if we can have as many win-wins as possible. But the fact that pastors are feeling cross pressured, and again, they're feeling cross pressured probably by, if we go back to our little schema, the liberation of social justice element and the conservative social justice element. For others, you know, they probably don't like necessarily some of the ways those conversations flow. People have different opinions. For pastors and church leaders, they have a lot of people in their church who maybe are like that kid who listened to Veggie Tales. It's at the back door trying to figure it out. You can have a list of the podcasts. But what advice, this is really the last question. We went much longer than we should have, and I thank you for your graciousness. But what advice would you give to that pastor to help minister to that person with questions? I'd be willing to say I'm not sure. I'm not sure. Let's study that issue together. You know, it's... Okay, now let's go back in time a little bit. Let's mention Rachel Held Evans, and let's mention the emergent movement. So sort of the way things went in the 20th century after the war, you had this surge in evangelicalism after the war. I was talking to Cale Zeldin. He said there's a surge in Catholicism. Makes perfect sense that after this, you have the Great Depression, then you have the Second World War. You have these horrendous losses overseas. You have basically almost, you know, the 30s and the 40s. I mean, you've got 10, 15 years of tremendous stress and difficulty, and those of us who had parents or grandparents that lived through that period know that that really shaped them, and they were savers. They were cautious conservative people because they knew that the bottom could fall out. You get this surge in religiosity in American culture, especially joined up with the Cold War, which, you know, marshalled God against godless communists, and you could sort of pull Protestant Catholic Jew together into a coalition and stand against the godless Soviet Union, fight the Cold War. You have all of this going on, and that leads to sort of the peak in American church attendance throughout its history, and we've talked about that in the last few videos. Rodney Stark's book, The Churching of America, De-churching. You have the peak of American evangelicalism, and then you have the counterculture, and the counterculture begins to erode and eat at all of these things. So you have the baby boomers that then there's another sort of rise in bringing people back into church with the seeker movement. Bill Hybels, again, another Chicago-based thing. Bill Hybels grew up in the Christian Forum Church. Rick Warren. The seeker movement's happening in the 80s and 90s, and sort of an echo of the baby boomer to try and bring people back into church. It was an updating of church. You're going to have drums and guitars, and you're going to take all of the symbolism off, and it's going to look like a plain theater. And, you know, Bill Hybels' statement, a safe space to hear a dangerous message, but when you listen to the evangelical message on a stage from someone like Bill Hybels and Rick Warren, it was basically 20th century American evangelical salvationism. Okay, you had the four spiritual laws, you had the Roman road, and all of these different groups within evangelicalism with their own peculiar confessional ways could sort of take these. Bill Hybels had seven steps, Rick Warren had running around the bases. You could take these and sort of apply them with your own little confessional quirks and features and make it work. And that was the last gasp of the big baby boom evangelical movement. And it was followed by the emergent movement. And I remember Willow Creek, of course, they believed they had cracked the code for the baby boomers and knew how to get unchurched Harry and Sally into church. And so then they saw Gen X coming and thought, oh, we have to crack the code for Gen X. And basically what they did is they changed the music a little bit. They tried to make things a little bit more edgy. Again, the seeker ethos was predominantly, we're going to preach wisdom in church. And once they are, once that they see that our biblical wisdom works, then they will embrace the gospel. Then we can make them behave like Christians. But the emergent movement, Willow Creek and the seeker movement basically ended with the emergent movement. Again, there aren't sort of like endings for this. There's elements of seekerism that continue to go through the American church. But the emergent movement was very interesting because it's sort of split. And if you go back a ways in my videos, you can see a video which I compare Mark Driscoll and Nadia Bolz Weber and say they're sort of like opposites in the emergent movement. They were very much against the big sound evangelical, spiritual seeker approach. Mark Driscoll, of course, would yell. Nadia Bolz Weber would, of course, make jokes and be totally inclusive and affirming. She made news by being, you know, having tattoos and cussing, but being radically open and affirming. Mark Driscoll, you could drink beer, you could cuss, you could yell, and you'd be radically exclusive. And again, it was sort of the edges, the fringes, the fringes, the edges, the fringes that gave people a sense of the holiness, not sort of the gentle slope, which is what seekerism is. But it was the extremes. And so, of course, Mark Driscoll builds a large church in Seattle. And you can listen to the podcast, The Rise and Fall of Mars Hill, to hear about more of what happened there. But The Rise and Fall of Mars Hill is a podcast done by sort of evangelical centrists again. And these centrists are increasingly finding themselves sort of in the same place as the United Methodist centrists, but just again, just a little bit behind because we don't want to really take a stand on LGBT stuff. We want to sort of be in the middle on that. And it doesn't really matter. The difficulty is that you've got hard edges on both sides. And what's happening with social media is that there's a polarizing process. And so the middle is increasingly harder and harder to somehow hold. And so, you know, we want to be a safe space. We want to be sort of the mushy middle. And that's what we want to be. It's feeling the need to always have the answer to everything. Okay, I forgot where I was going with Rachel Held Evans. So then in the 90s and in the early aughts, you had Rachel Held Evans. You had John Sook. John Sook again had been a missionary with the Christian Reformed Church. He had gotten a PhD. He had been banner editor. And of course, for the Christian Reformed Church, traditionally banner editor is one of the marquee key places in the Christian Reformed Church. And he writes a book, Not Sure. And he basically goes into the main line. And everybody in the Christian Reformed Church sort of watches. This is a guy that should have been one of our leaders. And he goes into the main line. And so this attitude, Rachel Held Evans would do this Not Sure stuff, but this Not Sure stuff always send it to sort of drift left. It was almost like if you didn't have moorings, you're just going to go there. Now Phil Vischer, as he said before, he hit some of his John Stott on a bicycle moorings, but he's also trying to keep the Not Sure. And again, anybody who's listened to my channel, you know, I'm too winsome. You know, I leave plenty of space for people as they work through their things. Anybody who has any understanding of what I'm doing in estuary knows that but you got to pay attention to these dynamics. To kind of to justify the position that you've been put in. It was so helpful. I mentioned this somewhere. I remember going to my mother when I was in high school and I was in a unit on evolution. And I just went to my mother who, you know, who grew up when she was eight years old, she was sitting on a couch in her grandfather's living room with Bob Jones, Jr. on one side of her on the couch and Bob Jones, Sr. on the other side of her in the couch. And she was in between the two of them. So that's her upbringing. I went to her and said, Do we believe in evolution? And there was long pause. And she looked at me and she said, I don't really know. And what that did for me was it gave me permission to study the issue and draw my own conclusion. You know, I am going to go dive in and study this issue. And then as opposed to handing your kid, you know, a whole list, the 40 page voters guide. This is who you're going to vote for. Okay. And now, again, if I look at these, you've got a liberation of social justice, you've got a conservative social justice, Phil Vischer, very much evangelical salvationism. And this is sort of classic neo-evangelicalism that we don't want to be like the fundamentalists. We don't want to sort of lose everything like the main line. We want to hold the tension here in the middle. And again, I've got a lot of, I've got a lot of sympathy for that. I mean, in many ways, that's sort of where I am. And it certainly was where I was. I just noticed in the little thing, the podcast started in 2012. And I think I was just, I was an early podcast adopter. I mean, I think I found unbelievable in some of the first podcasts. I was listening to, you know, Leo Laporte, and I was listening to all kinds of tech podcasts. So when I could find a Christian podcast, I'd listen to it. So I'm sure I was very early in on the Phil Visser podcast and I was very much there. Now, of course, things have just gotten way, way more complex for me. Well, let's keep going. In every race. Hey, let's talk about issues. Let's talk about issues and let's look for how biblical truth, how the great commandment, how the sermon on the mount applies to these issues. And we may come to different conclusions then. We might decide to have different border policy. We might decide to have different attitudes towards women or towards the LGBTQ community. We might decide to have different, but we're both starting with the sermon on the mount. We're both starting with the great commandment. We're both starting with a commitment to following Jesus. And then we hold each other with enough love to say, all right, you know, you've decided that you're inviting these people into this situation. I disagree with you, but that's okay. Cause I know that you're also following Jesus and trying to do, you know, your best. So, and so there's sort of the tension, which is, okay, so this is your posture towards others. What are you going to do with it? And this has long been one of the tensions in evangelicalism because it, it attempts to bring a, a unity now and then for something, but it's always difficult to know for what. Now this has gotten probably even more interesting since again, the, one of the groups with it's with it, with the largest rise is non-denominational. And there's always a question of wine skins with respect to them. So they're Catholic. You sort of know where they're at. They're Orthodox. None of us sort of know where they're at. They're evangelical. What does that mean? Well, they're fundamentalist. And again, so we sort of look at these three, these three schema, liberationist and sort of conservative social justice, evangelical salvationist. And a lot of these have to do with, okay, where exactly is the locus of your salvation? Now, of course, evangelical salvationists will tend to either be predominantly next life or at least include next life. Um, some conservative social justice, the social justice factions will tend to be more this life, this world, um, this space now. I'm just, I'm really just going for the humility to say I have full confidence in scripture and much lower confidence in my inerrancy as an interpreter thereof. Ladies and gentlemen, Phil Vischer. Thanks for taking the time to talk with us. You're welcome, Ed. Okay. So there's the interview. So, so the first of the why I'm still a Christian with Lecrae. I didn't know him at all. Um, now it's helpful to remember that demographically the African American, I've said this many times on my channel, African Americans demographically per capita are the most Christian group in America today. Um, the, the connection to the black church is deep in black communities. Um, and you can look at the deconstruct, I found the deconstructed chapter on, uh, BIPOC, black, indigenous people of color deconstructed to be super interesting. I won't go into it now, but this was, I listened to Phil with Lecrae, found it interesting, you know, heard sort of how he sort of came to prominence, his backstory, um, a bunch of the, a bunch of the stuff that happened with Michael Brown, um, a lot of these high profile, um, legal incidences with respect to African Americans and how they shook out sort of really shook him up, especially in terms of a lot of the framing that had been done and continued to be done with respect to white evangelicals. And so a lot of that went on and I know I just triggered a whole bunch of you in a bunch of different ways. You can watch this and, and decide. And so, you know, then, then a nice conversation on, okay, well, well, where's your faith now? Um, deconstruction, so on and so forth. And, and again, the, the holy post is basically about, well, you can, you can, you can sort of, it's exactly what Phil says, you know, you can still, you can still be a Christian. Now you still go to church. Well, I don't know, I have trouble finding a church, but you still consider, I still consider myself a Christian. Yeah. Okay. Okay. Okay. The great, the great de-churching, um, number on black, indigenous and people of color, a number of super interesting tidbits in it. Um, they are by far the highest level of education of any of the other five subgroups and they are tied with cultural Christians for the highest income. We were struck by how the group was overwhelmingly black and male. Over half of those survived in this group were black men. Extrapolated, there could be a million affluent and upwardly mobile black men out there who like Jeremiah have left evangelical churches, which is super interesting because I mean, the, the dynamics in the black church are super interesting with respect to, to women and men. They really are. These men are by far the most educated affluence of any of the de-churched categories, not just evangelicals, but any religious tradition. This group is disproportionately located in the Southeast as our survey with 38% living in the region. Um, perhaps most surprising is the fact that half of the members of the de-churched BIPOC group feel that racial problems in the U S are rare isolated situations. This unexpected consensus puts de-churched evangelical people of color in second place out of the five groups and having a relatively positive view of racial tensions in our country. You would never get that from reading a lot of evangelical literature. There's, there's just sort of this, there's one message that goes out. The only group with more optimistic response to this particular question was the cultural Christians with 54% of our survey expressing the belief that U S racial conflicts are uncommon rather than widespread. Reasons for leaving the church. I struggled to fit in our belonging church. My life got 19%. Now there's another piece that someone wrote recently in, in response to this book. This guy basically looks at all these surveys and says, surveys, really do people, you know, do the, are those questions really that good? Do people really answer them? Do people even know themselves? And the main point that he said, what's really behind this, it's not politics or attitudes towards sexuality, but a failure to offer a sense of belonging. And I thought that was a strong point. And it actually is, was the largest group of black men in terms of they don't feel like they fit in. I had bad experience with evangelicals second to last. I wanted to explore my sexuality. All of many of the reasons that tend to be forefronted often by mainline and let's call sort of the moderate evangelical establishment and evangelical centrists. They don't tend to be the reasons in this book. A lot of the reasons tend to be very surprising. I found the book quite interesting. It's a very surprising book. Now, before I get into Kristen De May's episode of Why I'm Still a Christian, she wrote a, I think in some ways the sub stack is a lot better than the video. She wrote a really, a kind of a nice piece that was out today. A couple of months back, Holy Post asked me if I'd be willing to participate in a little series they planned Why I'm Still a Christian. I love Holy Post, but this just gave me pause for several reasons. Nothing in this, nothing in this thing surprised me. Although I'm very open about talking about my personal faith and face-to-face settings when asked and although I talk about all sorts of topics related in my faith with great candor with students, friends, and fellow Christians, it's not usually something I lead with. And by usually I mean never. That's very Christian reformed. Christian reformed people don't tend to be door-to-door people. They tend to be people that say, I will show you my faith by my actions. I am not going to talk about it. And a part of that is just sort of a Dutch thing. The whole reason, the whole reason I'm any sort of a public figure is because of my historical scholarship. I continue to insist that while my personal convictions may be interesting to readers, my scholarship stands regardless of one's agreement or disagreement with my faith. It's a fairly modernist posture. That said, I study evangelicals, so it didn't surprise me when I started getting questions about my faith after the book came out. When the series was announced a couple of weeks ago, one announcer posted something to the effect of, when I heard about the book, I just assumed the author wasn't a Christian. Later she read it and saw otherwise and there was a lot of unpacking there. First there's the possible conflation of white evangelical and Christian. Many white evangelicals have grown up conflating their particular cultural religious values to timeless essential Christianity. If you identify as a Christian, you are going to conflate your ideas with Christianity. That's what an identity is. It just is. Now you might say other Christians may vary and you might basically say what Phil Vischer just said, but that's just sort of what people do. My book contests the assumptions, but it makes sense that many mistakenly conclude that any book critical of aspects of white evangelical must be anti-Christian. They're not unrelated to the fact that evangelicals have largely succeeded in controlling their own narratives. That's a big statement. A little critique around the edges is okay, but there are limits to what's deemed acceptable. More substantive critiques are more commonly ignored or on occasion denounced as bias or not demonstrated sufficient understanding of religion or the like. She talks about Jesus and John Wayne. As a Reformed scholar, now this again is very much where the Christian Reformed church has been at in terms of let's say the Reformed journal segment of the church. We're not evangelical and am I evangelical? I don't know how I couldn't be, but generally a lot of Christian Reformed people, especially more in the progressive ed, sort of want to resist that because they sort of do to evangelicals what evangelicals do to fundamentalists. Some of these definitions of evangelicals, besides the Bebington Quadrilateral, some of these definitions sort of mean I want to differentiate myself from Christians just to the right of me. I want to differentiate myself from Christians who are a little bit stranger than I am. She fits very much with Phil Vischer and his podcast. Now it's obvious both from the podcast and from this that she talks about being tough skinned, but some of these critiques have stung. Now three years out of my book's publication, I know what I'm getting myself into. I have no doubt that anything I say on the topic of my faith can and will be used against me. This interview will be clipped and spliced and carried into toxic spaces. Is this a toxic space? I used to bolster claims that I am a wolf, a false teacher, a child of the devil, or other such things. I will make no such claim under any of those things. A couple of reasons. First off, I try not to make decisions based on what critics will say. That's good. I'm not working for them. This just came in a conversation about my next book. In fact, a couple of weeks back I was drafting an early version of the introduction and mentioned to my husband that there's a lot of my personal story in it. The book after all is a cultural Christianity of white Christian womanhood. Are you sure you want to do this? He asked. You know it will be used against you, especially as a woman. The critics will write off the whole book as biased from a personal agenda or emotion or harm. I have no idea if the material will make it into the final version, but if it doesn't, it won't because of potential critics. Although I'm aware of them, I'm not writing for them. It helps the book that I am. Now, what's interesting to me is how this space that was sort of in the 90s and early aughts, that's kind of where these groups still are. It's sort of pre-joining the Episcopal Church, Rachel Held Evans. And so when I listen to a lot of this stuff, I just sort of feel a little bit of a time dislocation. Maybe that's a California versus Midwest thing. I don't know. I have a lot of people live in the Midwest. The main reason I agreed to do this, however, is because I get that Holy Post is trying to do and support that effort. I know that millions of Christians are experiencing some form of deconstruction. Again, that's the whole cross pressure thing. Well, what exactly is with that cross pressure? I think it's in many ways because my basic critique of her book is that she wrote about the most obvious, honest, interesting aspect of what's happened over the last 70 years with respect to evangelicals. It's not that conservative social justice people have their religion and their politics mixed together. Everybody has their religion and their politics mixed together to one degree or another. What's interesting to me is how mainline Christianity lost its over connection or identification with Christianity. And what's interesting to me is sort of the transition from a positive neutral to a negative world. That's of more interest to me. And that's what's made this transition difficult. So if you go back and you say look at the United Methodist Church and you look at this centrist who's LGBTQ affirming, but basically is looking at the difference between, let's say, an affirming evangelical salvationist versus a liberationist social justice person, he's saying, you know, I'm going to be a Christian, I'm going to be a Christian. You just lose it. You just get lost. The tension can't be held. Now, I don't know where to go with that. I'm not sure the tension. I certainly try to hold the tension, but it's that many, it's that the idea is that, well, if we can just keep trying to keep them in church and maybe by having sort of an accommodationist posture, we can keep them in church. The difficulty is there's very little evidence for that in terms of what's happened over the last 20 years. That's part of the reason that I've basically moved on from that position. I don't see it happening. I don't see it happening at all. In a place like Central California, the churches that were the most accommodationist have done the poorest. And this goes back to what Lyle Schaller said in the 70s and 80s that basically the dynamics of a congregation is that congregations are strengthened by counter-culturalism. And so if you're just sort of a little less edgy like the people on TV, like the cool kids, but you're trying to be nice with Jesus too, people won't be bothered by you. They won't pick on you. They won't yell at you, but they're probably not coming to your church either because they don't really have the sense that you have anything to offer. And it's for that reason that now there can be, you can be different in a lot of different ways, but it's the churches increasingly that are markedly different. They tend to be the ones that in fact are either holding their own or growing. Pentecostalism is in many ways counter-modernity. I got plenty of their own other issues too. This is sort of what the lesson was from the emergent movement, but in some ways this whole tribe hasn't moved on from the emergent movement because generally speaking if the culture listens to you and you say, you know, I can do this and be a Christian too, the culture kind of says, well, I don't understand the value add of the Christian thing. Well, that means I have some comfort when it comes to where I go after I die. And a lot of the rest of the culture either says has sort of vaguely universalistic impulses with after you die. That's been around for a long time. Well, the only people who suffer hell are genocidal dictators and my political opponents and the people who annoy me in my neighborhood. Those are the people in danger of hell, but good people, they're okay. That's kind of where everybody's at. And so the reason for your church, the truth is that most people start coming to church because something has broken in their life and they're going to look for, they're going to make a change and it's probably going to be disciplined and dramatic. As you can tell from the interview, opening up in the way doesn't come naturally to me as a reformed Christian who grew up in a Dutch immigrant community. She and I had a long conversation on my channel, which mostly we didn't get into her book hardly at all, mostly dealt with her upbringing. That's what was interested to me. That's usually what to do with a lot of my interviews. I want to know their story. I wanted to know her story. And so you can find it on my channel. We're a bit more taciturn. That's true. It's also frankly, a bit bewildering to find myself as a scholar in this public role. Yeah, but you really, did you not know that Jesus and John Wayne was going to be red meat in this culture war? And you know, maybe I'll read a little bit of what I wrote. So we had some back and forth on CRC Voices. The realm of Christian Cobes de May's local church and her academic environment is one thing. And she, I know the church she goes to. I've visited that church. I've worshiped in that church. I've seen her in this church. She's an absolutely faithful church member in a Christian Reformed church in Grand Rapids. I'm not critiquing or criticizing her at all. In many ways, she's very, very much Christian Reformed of that certain genre. Her academic environment is one thing, but Jesus and John Wayne was a piece of significant culture war interest, which arose even before Christian nationalism, the Christian nationalism weaponized language was delivered onto us. Phil and Sky very much want to appeal to evangelicals that are looking for an alternative to the conservative social justice evangelical nexus. Their audience wants to be moderate or indifferent to same sex marriage, believe in evolution, or not believe in evolution, etc. etc. In other words, they're really sort of want to be mainstream American people and still love Jesus and believe he has a wonderful plan for their life. This is very much in keeping with a lot of the Christian Reformed church, especially among whites and women in suburban areas. This is part of the CRC that has been leaking left for a long time. At two minutes and 50 seconds, her off the cuff responses, why am I a Christian? You know, I don't even know. And she sort of giggles. And I thought this, she is probably right now the most well known, highest profile member of the Christian Reformed church in North America today. She is in the New York Times, she is on the Atlantic, she's on stage at both academic, mainline, evangelical conferences. She in many ways, if someone says who is the most prominent member of the Christian Reformed church today, it's her. And when she started out the podcast like that, I thought, in many ways, I heard many young people in the Christian Reformed church when I listened to her. Many cross pressured young people in the Christian Reformed church that are feeling their way wondering, I don't know if I want to be a Christian. Because for the most part, if you're listening to a lot of mass media, well, Christians are, you know, those people over there doing those kinds of things that are mean to people. And I don't want to do that. Do you want to go to church? Yeah, I think if it works. Sometimes, again, they're looking for space to work it out. And I just don't know if this moderate evangelical space is actually going to lead to something enduring. I think for many my generation or maybe her generation, she's probably, I don't know how old she is, she's probably 10 or 15 years younger than I am. She looks younger than I do, that's for sure. But I've seen a lot of efforts this way for that group basically go nowhere. And I don't know. I don't know. So I'm not going to play the interview. You can play the interview. I don't, you know, I know a lot of people have really wanted me to go after this thing, which I won't do. Yeah, I think it's unseemly. I am not going to go after someone in my own denomination. And you can make up your own mind what you think of this about this approach. And again, part of why this is so salient to me is because this has been my approach. I don't think I ever answered that first question the way she did. I don't want to make too much of it because it's a podcast interview. That's a fairly low thing. And she builds as the conversation goes, and you get a better sense of where she's at. And again, listening to her, I totally get this. And this is very much what I expect from someone in her station in the Christian Reformed Church. I've heard many, many people sound like this. But like it or not, she's a role model. And this sort of ambivalence with respect to the faith, I don't think this approach, I don't think this approach is going to lead anywhere. Now, I'm not saying, you know, we should, you know, hold people's feet to the fire, say turn or burn. You all know my approach to this. I am in some ways very much of this camp because I think out loud and I think about these issues. I think I'm in the middle of all sorts of issues and plenty flexible about a whole bunch of things, way too flexible for a lot of, for many of your tastes. I know that. I read the comments every day. But I don't think I, I, I, I, I, I, I, I think it's going to take a lot more and better work at a lot deeper issues than just sort of being nice in the middle. And I just, I just think it is, I don't think the center holds in this. I think we have to go a lot deeper into many of the issues than just sort of trying to be a centrist and keep the family together. I do. I do. So yeah, these videos are my own therapy often. And I, you know, I've got a weird therapy relationship with you that, you know, I talk to a crowd instead of a therapist in a room with respect to some of these things. But let me know what you think. Now, again, part of my consciousness Congress, I hear bunches of you and how you're coming off with this and I know what, I know what some of you are going to write me emails the day after this or minutes after this posts. But there's a reason I'm both pursuing estuary the way I am and continuing to ask deeper, harder questions in the ways that I have with respect to this little corner, because I don't know that what, when I, when I look, how can I say this? When I look at the conversations going on in that space, sort of 2020s Midwest, moderate neo-evangelicalism, I don't think they're going anywhere. Now, maybe they're still working in the Midwest to a degree. I don't know. I don't know. But here on the coast, much deeper questions have to be wrestled with. And that's been my desire in the Christian Reformed Church, because you do it where you're at. It's been my desire with these videos. And it's part of the reason that I, you know, when I look at Jordan Peterson's work, John Vervecky's work, Jonathan Peugeot's work, many of the other people that we've looked at, you know, Richard Beck's work, I think, is the reason why I'm doing this. You know, part of the reason I so enjoyed talking to Richard Beck was, I think we've just sort of been on a, been on a, on the same track. We sort of followed that deconstructionist path and said, this, this sort of twilight of the mushy middle, you can't live here. You're going to have to find a way in, ask better questions, ask harder questions. John Stott on a bicycle is not enough and nothing against John Stott. John Stott was a very helpful scholar, but in many ways, yeah. So I didn't give you an answer. So maybe I'm just like the rest of them. I didn't give you a conclusion. I just have who I am and that's what I offer to you. So I'll brace myself for the comments for this one, because everybody's going to have an idea. One more thing. Where's the book? Probably the easiest way to see where I differ is the video I made a little while when I looked at Skye Gittani's conversation with Justin Briarley. I think there is value, Tim Keller did this too, there is value in keeping an eye on the UK, because in some ways, things hit the UK before they hit us. And this is why, again, I think if you want to, when I look at who the Holy Post has on, I think, I don't think any of these people are helping your audience. I think you'd be better having the kind of people that I have on mind. Of course, we all believe of course we all believe that. But again, I think the kinds of people that this little corner have really dug into are in many ways the kinds of leaders and thinkers that are going to be more helpful in finding a path forward. I really do. And most of the people that I see just evangelicalism trot out, I think. That's like figuring out what's going to happen in 2025 by looking at 2015. You're probably better off looking at 1915. Yeah. Yeah, messy video, messy video. There it is.