https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=AQcCiMUXYOg

 Hi, this is Paul and almost since the beginning when I started this project a number of people have asked how they could support me making my videos. There are of course some expenses in terms of equipment and it clearly takes time to make and some of this I do at church and I see it as part of my ministry. Some of this I do as a hobby and it's kind of outside my ministry. I've debated starting a Patreon. I listened to Jordan Peterson when you know his rationale for starting his and I thought that sounded good. Give away the stuff for free. I don't monetize my videos on YouTube and those of you who like what I'm doing and want to support this can now through Patreon support me. I have some ideas of some other things I'd like to continue to do. I'd like to do some question and answer things and so Patreon might be a good venue for some of that. What I'm trying to figure out how not to do is to really have a pay for play type operation. Part of that is because of my ministry outlook and yeah I don't want money getting in the way of good conversation. The difficulty is obviously that the bigger the channel grows the more difficult it is to have conversations with people. So I've started a Patreon account and those of you who would like to support me can support me. I'm working with the deacons of the church to start online giving for Living Stones. A number of you have sent in checks to the church and I appreciate that and the church appreciates that. It's you know the church has been very supportive of these videos so far and I can do nothing but praise this church for the kind of freedom and support that they've given me and the kinds of ministries that I've done over the last 20 years. We continue to host our meetups here at church and the people at Living Stones are lovely wonderful people. So this is the announcement. I'll put the link down in the notes and the link is up on the YouTube page. If you'd like to support this work you can support me via Patreon and when we get church online giving set up I'll put a link there too. So thanks for watching and thanks for your support.