https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=4y7uKqTyTtc

 A question for you guys. I've listened to a lot of PBK's podcast and learned a lot about this little corner. But where is this little corner? Where is the kingdom of God? Is it between you? Yes. Is it among you? Yes. Is it right here right now? Yes. But that's sort of like sit down with an old married couple who they've been through it with each other. They've maybe even have divorced and gotten back together and know couples like that. They've had children. They've had grief. They've had joy. They've run the gamut of what a marriage can offer and can cost. Where's that relationship? That's sort of like Sam Harris and Jordan Peterson with Elvis's guitar. Where's the Elvis's guitar thing in that guitar? If you take the guitar apart, you can't find any Elvis. It can't find any Elvis in the guitar. Or maybe you can find some dead skin cells from his fingers on the strings or or maybe a little bit of hair or dead skin fell into the into the guitar or something like that. If you did an autopsy of Elvis, can you find Elvis? You can't find Elvis. You can't find Elvis. You can't find Elvis. You can't find Elvis. You can't find Elvis. You can't find Elvis. You can't find Elvis. You can't find Elvis. You can't find Elvis. You can't find Elvis. You can't find Elvis. You can't find Elvis. You can't find Elvis. You can't find Elvis. You can't find Elvis. You can't find Elvis. You can't find Elvis. You can't find Elvis. You can't find Elvis. You can't find Elvis. You can't find Elvis. You can't find Elvis. You can't find Elvis. You can't find Elvis. You can't find Elvis. You can't find Elvis. You can't find Elvis. You can't find Elvis. You can't find Elvis. You can't find Elvis. You can't find Elvis. You can't find Elvis. You can't find Elvis. You can't find Elvis. You can't find Elvis. You can't find Elvis. You can't find Elvis Why materialism is breaking down because you know you might you could own a guitar that you picked up at a garage sale and think oh that's a pretty cool guitar it works pretty well I didn't pay too much money for it I like it maybe it was Elvis's guitar but as long as you don't know that it was Elvis's guitar. It's only worth a few hundred bucks or maybe you don't even care about Elvis maybe it was Elvis's guitar but you don't give a crap so that's why it's the whole business about this movement. That's far larger than Jordan Peterson. This recession of modernity in a certain way of looking at the world that has everything to do with this and so there's that's why there should be no question that figuring out where this little corner is is no easy thing. Where this little corner is is in some ways in different estuary groups and it's on videos and it's it's it's it's in Chad's denim dinner. So if you go to Chad's denim dinner you participate in this little corner.