https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=NArkSPgAhRk

 Hi, this is Paul. Charles Taylor is a Canadian philosopher. You've heard me reference his book, A Secular Age. Two other books to reference. This one has a little different title. I think I bought it used. Short, easy to read book, Charles Taylor, The Ethics of Authenticity, and a much larger, harder to read book, Charles Taylor, The Sources of the Self. And even the little book, Charles Taylor makes the point that the transition from traditional to modern, the dismantling of hierarchy, liberation from birth and hierarchy, one of the important transitions that happens in this is the burden of self or self-creation. Because at least what a traditional, a traditional hierarchical society offered you, you were certainly imprisoned in that sense in the place of your birth. And now I would argue that Christianity dislocates this. And I would argue that it is in fact Christianity and Jesus the... It's so hard to talk about this stuff because on one hand Jesus very much did bring an egalitarian spirit to it. Jesus tells his disciples that you are not to have masters among you, but you are all brothers and you have one master. But Jesus plays with this hierarchy constantly. And at the same time he tells them that, but then he says the greatest among you is the servant of all. And so he keeps inverting the hierarchies and he keeps playing with these ideas. And this takes hundreds and hundreds of years to sort of work its way through in the West. And so you can even mark it when I hear people talk about culture in the UK. You still have in a sense that the vestiges of aristocracy or nobility in more traditional cultures and far more ancient cultures like India, even despite the attempt to make the caste system illegal. If you read something like a biography of Gandhi, you'll notice how the caste system was tremendously powerful even into the 20th century in India and it may continue to be powerful today. I don't know. I'm by no means an expert on India. But so in almost every traditional society you have a hierarchy and you have people who are born to different stations and you're locked into that station. And what happens in the secular West in modernity is that system is fractured. But what has happened is that, and this is what Charles Taylor, you know, is really helpful with, that now you have the burden of identity, where you have to create an identity and achieve an identity. And the thing about a traditional system is that you are born into a place in society, but at least you know what your place is. And what happens if your identity is achieved, that you don't know who you are because the world around you is not reinforcing, projecting, validating, telling you who you are. And what that has led to is in our contemporary society, especially with the, you know, the LGBT identity politics, not only in terms of sexual identity but racial identity, you have this demand for affirmation, this demand for symbols of equality, this demand that society now reflect this egalitarian flatness. But of course that's when you start talking about equal with respect to people, it's equal with respect to what? Because I'm taller than average and I'm heavier than average and, you know, we all have all these different attributes. And again, part of what's been so helpful about John Vervecky's project is that he's just illuminated so much of this. And so a human being has all of these aspects. And so you might say, well, what is the essence of Paul van der Kley? Well, that's very, very different because I have all of these different aspects. And so then when it comes to the question of identity, how do we manage this if we're not born into something, if society doesn't locate us into something? I caught this article about Cyrus Dunham, and of course I recognized the last name Dunham from Lena Dunham, who had been the producer and star of Girls on HBO, which I've never seen, but it was quite talked about a number of years ago, and her younger sister that she wrote about in the memoir, and this incident that happened between them, and all of the chat about that. And then this pops up, Cyrus Dunham, and looked at the picture and thought, something going on with that person. And then a little bit a little bit more digging and just the title, Let's Everyone Name Themselves. And that has become such a common thing today. You don't receive even your name or your identity from your parents, but now not only do you have the choice to self, to create your own identity, but now the burden to do so. And when it comes to, and all of this is in search of this new value we have of authenticity, but how is authenticity to be achieved? It seems to be achieved basically by self-assertion, but that self-assertion, which is a choice and perhaps one might think an opportunity in the same moment becomes a burden. And if authenticity is a function of choice, you need to change from a received identity in order to achieve authenticity. I love the videos that distribute us, this little series of four about the political YouTube. And in the second episode was looking at Jordan Peterson. The third episode was looking at, I just had her name in my... Anyway, one of the things that he noted in that third episode was how so many of the progressive YouTubers were themselves transitioning. And again, this would be far beyond any imagined statistical sample. I mean, before 10, 15, 20 years ago, the number of people who would be having gender dysphoria and transitioning would have been a tiny, tiny group of society. But now we find so, so many people in this process. And then the question is why? Well, I think part of it has to do with the fact that, well, their identity has to be achieved. And since authenticity is a function of choice, you need to exhibit choice and change in order to achieve an authentic identity. So if you were assigned at birth one sex, then you need to transition, otherwise you won't be authentic. If you stay with whatever identity you are given by society, that just screams inauthenticity. And so authenticity must therefore be achieved. And once you assert it, your demand on everything and everyone around you is that they validate and affirm. And so what you, in a sense, do with this little dance... Now you have celebrities with tremendous power and tremendous fame and visibility and money and all of those things. I mean, they're, in a sense, superheroes that can do this. But for regular people like you and like me, you know, how are you going to get to? And so then we get to moments where we demand we have the state then and the institutions, we have the medical establishment perform affirming surgery upon us and we have the state mandate pronouns and some of these things. And even the entire state, the role of the state is to affirm me. But that gets seriously problematic when we consider the other functions that the state must fulfill. And I think this actually intensifies into what I call tribal Othello. Now Othello was this little game that I'd play as a kid where you had these little markers, little pancake markers that were white on one side and black on the other. You can find it on computers sometimes called reverse on old versions of Windows. And of course the game is if you can frame a different colored piece and you frame it, you flip it, and that's how the game is played. Well, once, if we have the need to have our society and everyone around us affirm and validate our identity, well, suddenly this individual game then becomes a communal game and we have these communities that are at war. I just watched the Dave Chappelle special on Netflix last night. He used an image of this people in the car, the L and the G and the B and the T, all in the car and then the Q comes in the car. And so you can watch Dave Chappelle on Netflix. And Dave Chappelle on Netflix, I think, tries to offend just about everybody he can in that little show. But, you know, Dave Chappelle is just so charming and has so much status that he could say the most outrageously offensive things and kind of smile and take a step back and you know, kind of take a step back on the stage and it's this whole drama where it affords us this other space where we can deal with these issues that are too hot to talk about in polite company. But this all then gets tribal. And so this hyper individualization ironically leaves to an obsessive tribalism and border protection because my very identity is now, me and my tribe must survive and we must flourish and the way we survive and flourish is, thank goodness, not yet to kill people of the other tribes because actually team boy and team girl need each other if there's ever gonna be team baby. And so we're locked in this tribal combat and influence is the name of the game and so what we're looking to do is flip the others continually and that then becomes the game we watch with internet debates and we're trying to flip each other in terms of their positions and we flip them by outflanking. And that's now the central game of tribal warfare and, you know, it's basically frame combat by flipping and we have this we have this tribal Othello that plays out between atheists and Christians and Democrats and Republicans and progressives and conservatives and just about any tribe that you can mention that we need in order to establish our authentic identity we have to play this flipping game so that we can come out on top. Now this makes high status liminal figures really important. Now there's a reason that these people in Hollywood that are beings of light that we see on our screens we call them stars because we navigate our lives by them because what is happening up in the heavenlies of Hollywood and on our screens is what slowly filters down into the into the days of our lives into what happens on the ground. It's contemporary astrology but we're not looking at the physical stars in the heavens we're looking at the stars on the screens and when those stars do things they happen down here on earth. Whenever I try to explain astrology to people in terms of the ancient world I always note that if you look at a weather map of California we're always looking out over the ocean because we know what the weather will be over California by what is out over the Pacific Ocean and they will know what the weather over the middle part of the United States will be because it's the weather over California first and so in a sense in the ancient world because life came from heaven down heaven was the control room of earth everyone looked up at the stars and the ways that the stars moved predicted the ways that things would move on earth. Well this is now happening and continuing to happen in Hollywood because the stars are the ones who are who are telling us what our lives will be and so we what happens in the stars will play out in our lives but these liminal figures in the constellation the ones who are on the borders and very much Jordan Peterson was was a liminal figure because he was a professor at the University of Toronto and he started complaining about pronouns in C16 that's what caught my attention about him because I thought well that's that's strange that star is that star is is realigning and then all the drama around Jordan Peterson and his his personal faith you believe in God in all of this interest and attention surrounding that had everything to do because he was a liminal figure and I act as if God is real and so Sam Harris wants to talk to him to maybe getting to stop talking about this God stuff and Sam is able in their comments to back him on stage and to well do you believe that Jesus rose from the dead dead and well we can't say for sure and even Sam would say that but Sam would say almost certainly not Jordan won't you share with me and saying almost certainly not and so this whole game then is created around Jordan of of you know can we get Jordan out of this liminal space can we flip him and and have him join team Christian and once he gets on team Christian can we flip them and have him by on team Roman Catholic or team Orthodox or team Protestant or team Christian Reformed or or or or because we want to get the stars in our camp because if the stars are in our camp then they will affirm our identity and we will not only have our authenticity but we'll have some permanence and and the same stuff is happening right now with Kanye and the the Kanye stuff happening right now is super interesting to me for a lot of reasons and I want to make a video about it but my I'm not just even though my videos are rough draft my thinking is still too rough and I don't know enough about them and and so I'm trying to get up to speed on this but but so these individual stars we're looking to flip so that we can have our identities affirmed now one of the things that that's that happens in this game is that you know what we want to do is is flip them on camera because what does that do to my status if if I'm the pastor that talks to Jordan Peterson and Jordan Peterson says oh yeah you know Paul I'm gonna I'm gonna start going to church I'm gonna start going to your brand of church I'm gonna enjoy your brand of religion and you know then we go from one game into the next but that's the big game we want to flip them on camera and you know I think John Vervecki again he's been such a such a wonderful source of language and observation he notes that you know in a dialogue there's this mutuality that goes goes forward but this kind of internet debate is all about winning and and there's something we feel that there's something wrong about that there we feel that something is is threatening to be violated in terms of an arena of mutual respect and conversation and so my team's victory is at the expense of the other tribe and so if I can flip this liminal figure if I can flip this other figure you know Sam Harris talks to pick some pastor Sam Harris talks to William Lane Craig and decides up okay I'm a Christian now and then all the Christians rejoice because team Christian has now you know gotten a win and so we have this game that's good that's being played and and what we're looking for again partly is because we're so we're so weak and insecure we look for you know we want to see identity lost in real time and and so if we see that then maybe we'll be influenced by that and and we'll make that flip and I think Christians should know better because I think Christian conversion is finally a humiliation and I said that in the meetup on Sunday night and people kind of stopped and thought why why why what do you mean Christian conversion is a humiliation because in many ways right now Christian conversion is the most inauthentic thing you can do from the point of view of our culture of authenticity because you relinquish your claims on the self and you ask to receive another that's what Christian conversion is and it's it's you know the Oxford groups led to AA and you know in AA you have to get to the point of saying I am powerless over might be alcohol might be any of these I'm powerless over these things and I need a power greater than myself to come and transform me in our culture of authenticity it's the ultimate humiliation because basically what you're saying is is what is said in the first question and answer of the Heidelberg catechism that I am not my own what is your only comfort in life and in death that's the question the answer is I am not my own but belong I am not my own but belong body and soul and in life and in death to my faithful Savior Jesus Christ I am a slave and that's and that's what what Christian conversion is it means you you no longer are yourself you no longer lay claims to your own self but you give yourself up to another and you say I am now owned by Jesus Christ I've been bought by a price I am no longer free I am in bondage now to this other master now as I said Christian language inverts all this stuff and that then becomes liberation and you know there's all this complexity in Christianity but you know Jesus says it and and one of the most important passages then he began to teach that the Son of Man now if you've been listening to my my Sunday school lessons I've you know last couple of weeks I've talked a lot about this Son of Man figure that comes out of Daniel 7 it's this it's this heavenly figure that descends from heaven with the clouds and is given an eternal kingdom in Daniel chapter 7 and this is the this is the name that Jesus uses for himself in the Gospels he when he talks about himself in the third person often it's with this and and it's so strange the way he uses it because he began to teach them that the Son of Man who was this this heavenly figure that descends with the clouds must undergo undergo great suffering and they might tap him on the shoulder and say now now Jesus haven't you read Daniel 7 the Ancient of Days puts down the Imperial beasts that come these sea monsters that come out of the sea and and hands the kingdom over to the Son of Man who descends from heaven and what do you mean the Son of Man will be will be killed by the beasts that's that's flipping the script that's not supposed to happen in Daniel 7 but Jesus says the Son of Man must undergo great suffering and be rejected by the elders and the chief priests and the scribes and be killed and after three days rise again and nobody hears that part he said this quite openly and Peter took him aside and began to rebuke him because Peter's like hey hey wait a minute I started following you and you're supposed to you're supposed to ascend and take a take a realm of power and I'm supposed to get my payday when when all of this comes about and you're supposed to be more like a Maccabee than one of these people that gets killed by the Romans and by the religious leaders Peter took him aside and began to rebuke him but turning and looking at his disciples in other words Peter takes him aside look look Jesus I'm not I don't want to humiliate you but you kind of got this wrong you can't talk this way because we're the winners we're the ones who flip over everyone else's tiles and Jesus busts out of that that says you know what he's about to say now is you know really at Peter's expense but he turned and looking at his disciples he rebuked Peter in front of the other disciples and said get behind me Satan for you are setting your mind not on divine things but on human things what is it isn't God about winning isn't just read the book of Job isn't it doesn't karma tell us what's on the mind of God that the wealthy and beautiful and powerful people they're the ones that are blessed by God and the and the poor people and the little people of the earth well they deserve to have their lesser station okay notice all the hierarchy and all the stations again and then he called to the crowd see first Peter tries to take him aside and rebuke him quietly and he turns to the disciples and rebukes Peter then he turns to the whole crowd and now all the disciples are gonna be humiliated he called the crowd with the disciples and said to them if you want to become my followers let them deny that if let them deny themselves take up their cross and follow me take up their cross read Dominion and look at those Tom Holland things on the internet about you know the Aziti and and the the Isis was crucifying the Aziti and how house Tom Holland had a very real sense of what crucifixion is crucifixion are weapons of state terror which are used to demonstrate the power of the state over regular people and anyone who would anyone who would resist their power and Jesus says take up the cross what take up take up my humiliation take up my public you know you're gonna strip me publicly and and lift me up on a tree and I'm supposed to embrace this if anyone wants to be my followers let them deny themselves and take up their cross and follow me for those who want to save their lives will lose it and those who lose their lives for my sake and for the sake of the gospel will save it Christian conversion is a humiliation and you know most of us if we get humiliated we'd rather not have it happen on YouTube and if it's gonna happen and if we're gonna make our peace with it it's probably gonna be sitting on the edge of Jordan Peterson's proverbial bed looking into the great maw the great darkness and recognizing her own sinfulness and asking God will you have me will you have me who has missed the mark has not lived up to my potential who has made a mess of my life will you have me that's what Christian conversion is it's a humiliation but there's surprising freedom in that humiliation I want to play a clip from from Andrew Claven I hesitate to use Andrew because you know in terms of his profession and what he's what he does on daily wire he's politically charged and again politics is about the now but religion is about the always and you know I really enjoyed his his his memoir the great good thing that tells the story of his conversion and there's there's an ironic there's an ironic comfort in the contemporary world with respect to this there's a surprising freedom because the the flip side of that choice that self-assertion is you always need to be doing it and you need to always be trying to convince other human beings which is the hardest thing in the world if you've ever met a human being trying to convince other human beings to affirm you and and what this this contemporary way of identity actually makes you is a slave to the crowd and you see Jesus here the ultimate non-slave to the crowd and everyone's trying to recruit Jesus and and trying to flip them and Jesus won't be recruited or flipped or flipped by anyone and for that reason they kill him but there's a surprising freedom when you give up this contemporary game and you're relieved from the burden of self-creation and you're relieved from the burden of communal validation and you're relieved from the burden of defending your authenticity or your pride and I think Claven really really speaks you know really articulates this well in terms of his own conversion I struggled with him constantly in my thought and in my work as a young man a modern man a sophisticated urban intellectual man I was schooled in moral relativism from University upward it was the intellectual seed in which I swam now Claven is going to frame this in terms of truth and relativism which which I don't think is the most helpful frame I understand the points that he's making with respect to this but but I want as you listen to his his story I think it's helpful to listen to it in terms of self and renunciation I was writing a novel called true crime when I experienced a breakthrough I was just turning 40 that it was beginning to meditate on mortality the novel is about a man on death row which is to say it uses a man on death row as a metaphor for the human condition in the opening scene the condemned man awakens from a dream of freedom to find himself inescapably in his cell undeniably awaiting execution he reflects that there can be no true confusion between dreams and reality death itself draws the dividing line death puts a limit on the subjectivity of perception and therefore on the relativity of truth that the wave Claven frames it here is so Petersonian in that you know Peterson keeps saying that he's not a Newton he's not a Newtonian he's a Darwinian and it's right here where where Claven figures out that death is is this ultimate this ultimate no in the world and you know whether it's the big picture or the small picture you can look at my Sunday sermon last week death is you don't get beyond it you don't get around it my turn toward God it had been a long long journey to reach that crossroad for most of my life I was an agnostic which means in practice I was an atheist I was born and raised a Jew it was important to my father that my brothers and I were taught the rituals and traditions of the Jewish people but neither of my parents had any active belief in God without God religious rituals and traditions wise and beautiful though they may be seemed nothing but an empty okay authenticity in authenticity it's all about choice and it's all about not only being affirmed but affirming with your life and not being a hypocrite I was reluctantly bar mitzvahed by my father's decree but in the aftermath I felt like a hypocrite I had declared myself a living member of a faith but I had no faith because I've been raised to have no faith one night when my family was asleep I crept out of my house carrying a box full of the jewelry and savings bonds I've received as bar mitzvah gifts I buried the box deep in the trash can outside so it would be carted off by the garbage man in the morning before anyone found it that was my declaration that I was done with the inauthenticity of godless religion there it is right there he had Claven had completely absorbed without knowing it you know exactly where society was and and he had enough integrity to not in a sense be bought by the bar mitzvah gifts and if you read his memoir it's a very it's a very powerful book it's a very beautiful book I went insane I became crippled by rage and hypochondria lost in self aggrandizing fantasies and bizarre mysticism I yearned for faith but refused to give in to my yearning I felt it would be weak and cowardly to use God as an imaginary lifesaver to keep me from drowning in my own misery he had to do it himself when I look back now it's painfully obvious to me that God was continually calling out to his tormented child but I absolutely refused to hear him I was a modern man a sophisticated man an urban intellectual man I mean I was submerged in a relativistic insanity of modern sophisticated urban intellectual life to acknowledge my supernatural creator would have betrayed my integrity as a thinker I was trapped inside a genuine paradox for me to accept the truth of God would have been dishonest I believe that God in his mercy solved this riddle for me he put aside his majesty for my sake he even put his name aside in order to speak to me in secular terms I could understand and accept once using this method he even pulled me back from the brink of suicide I was about 30 then I was in despair I was sitting alone in a dark room plotting my own death I was repeating over and over in my mind like a mantra the words I don't know how to live I don't know how to live a baseball game was playing on the radio in the background a hero of mine the catcher Gary Carter hit a ground ball single after the game an interviewer asked him how he had managed to beat the throw to first base when his knees had been ruined by squatting in the catcher's position for so many years Carter was a devout and outspoken Christian he was always talking to interviewers about Jesus Christ this or praise Jesus that I absolutely hated this about every time it he did it it made me shudder as if someone had dropped a worm down the back of my shirt if he had praised Jesus that day I would have ignored him but oddly he didn't mention Christ at all instead as I sat there reciting to myself I don't know how to live Carter said simply sometimes you just have to play in pain those words struck deep into my heart I seized on them instantly I thought I can do that and I made the decision to live like all good modern men of that time I was immersed in the atheistic ideas of Sigmund Freud so God sent me a psychiatrist of genius who healed my mind and saved my life it was only then then when I found mental health and happiness and professional success when I was no longer afraid that faith would merely be a crutch in troubled times it was only then I was able to trust myself and to ferret out the flaws in the world's philosophy it took me about ten years to work it out if there is no truth then it can't be true that there is no truth if death is real then life also must be real and if life is real then our healthy perceptions of reality our experience of love and the good must be at least a human version of the truth and therefore grounded in ultimate truth in mental health I could see what I could not see in misery and madness a logical steps that lead to God in the human experience of God who is that worm down the back of our shirts Jesus Christ this discovery filled me and continues to fill me to this day with so much serenity and joy that I have sometimes gone before God and complained to him if he allowed me to waste so much of my life before I found him I've said to him Lord Jew though I am why did you let me wander in the wilderness for 40 years before I came into your promise the answer I received was this God wanted me to make every intellectual error it is possible to make before I stumbled like a gormless idiot on the simple truth that way even in jubilant sanity I would have compassion on an intellectual world mired in so much unnecessary sorrow it's our humiliation and you know the paths are different for each person and and they're often they're not linear and that's that's sort of what I don't like about the about the Methodist tradition of you know writing down in your Bible the moment of your of your change I mean the change is a is a process through many toils and snares I have already come but it's surprising freedom to to not have to defend myself to not have to you know I I've been bought with a price I am not my own I am not smart enough to figure this stuff out I'm not good enough to save myself I I don't even know who or what I am well enough to present an authentic self I can instead rely on the other now this is where Kanye comes into the picture because you know what what I what have I've been I've been watching along with so many other people the Kanye show and I never followed him much before and I didn't know much about him and of course he had made Christian noises before and he had done this but lately he's sort of taking it to a whole new level and and one of the things that you notice right away is as the the unapologetic Christian tropes that that he's saying I mean all of if you're around the Christian community and yet you hear the stuff Kanye is saying it's like oh this is he's using all the cliches and and here you got have a guy who's just in so many ways astoundingly creative and he's using all the cliches and it's like what's what's what's going on with that and it makes it easy to dismiss him it makes it easy to sort of oh you know he wears the MAGA hats and he goes and he likes Trump and then he calls out George Bush and and so if you this is this little still is from an interview which which I found fascinating with big boy TV and Kanye and and and and you just listen to Kanye talk and you just think this guy is pure intuition and no filter and it's just it's just coming out there just just you know nobody's gonna nobody's gonna tell Kanye how to live and he's just gonna he's just gonna do it if it's if it's if it's like cliche Christian tropes there they are and if it's and if something that that Christians look at and say well that doesn't fit together it doesn't matter this is it's just he's just gonna do him he's just gonna do it and so then he tells you know I I caught this one you know he tells his wife what that she shouldn't be wearing this stuff on TV and it's like this woman has made it made a career out of doing what she does and Kanye comes I mean I'm a Christian and and you know I want our children to be Christian you shouldn't wear this and well she doesn't listen and but but he still goes to the event with her and it's like well this isn't some clean narrative that that we imagine is going to somehow be victorious and and full of something you can be proud of and and that is Sunday services which I've I've you know one of them was was posted and and I I'm just I'm just so again you know because of when I was raised and how I was raised in Patterson and and so we always had black choir directors at Northside and and they would teach us these these songs that are just the bread and butter of of every black church and it's it's always theme and variation in the black churches and and Kanye takes that I saw this one video where where they're noting what he's doing in the Sunday service and he's taking this other things in culture and he's adapting them and it's just that it's just the exact picture of why Christianity keeps leaping over cultural bounds again and again in history and every time every time someone imagines that they've got Christianity cornered it just leaps out and and colonizes a culture that you think is un-colonizable because it's too sinful or too wrong or too debase and and you just watch Kanye doing this with a Sunday service and you know then I saw an interview with Brad Pitt and poor Brad Pitt is getting interviewed about stuff he doesn't know about but but then but then I guess he got invited to one of these Sunday services and Brad Pitt makes all the the nice you know vague generic you know humanity affirming life affirming things about Kanye's service and it's like yeah how many times do they say Jesus in that service and and how many times don't they use these old Christian songs and these and these these things that are in you know that you can find in any black church and and and then Kim of course gets Kim Kardashian West gets asked about it on the view and she says well that's just Kanye sort of doing his thing and so it's with Kanye West we're seeing just this astounding amalgam of of that which should be offensive and derided and dismissed by the stars in our galaxy and well some of them are still doing that but it's it's it's just him being him and call him what you want he's gonna do it he's not gonna listen to you and if you ask him why you'll say well that's cuz you know that's cuz this is all about Jesus and you know people across the spectrum trust me people across the spectrum are gonna scratch their heads and then say oh okay this is just all about the tribal thing and so if we can get Kanye in our tribe and so hey gosh I so want to make a video about this but I really haven't figured out exactly had to so I saw you know an interview with with Kanye's pastor and he's he's one of these guys that goes to he went to Master Seminary and oh this is this is you know John MacArthur and that whole section of kind of this weird reformed oh wow you know I again and and so there's so much here I haven't I haven't been able to work it from from intuitive into something that that I can put an even the the raw rough drafts of these videos which is what they are but you know it's just all happening in Kanye right now and I'm just I'm just fascinated by the how you can't really box this thing in and to me every time I hear someone saying well Christianity has had its day I say you know look at Jordan Peterson and look at Kanye West and now a whole bunches of Christians and whole bunches of not Christians are gonna yeah but and and you know he's not a real Christian or he's doing this for money or he's doing this for attention or whatever you may be but it's it's it's it's way too wild it's way too untamed and and like I said every time people think Christianity is in some corner it leaps out and and and and this is exactly what Christ does with us as individuals and then he pounces on us and and again the story of of Jacob wrestling with God is just perfect in that and you know the angel of the Lord says let me go and Jacob says I won't let you go until you bless me and he reaches down and he and he lambs him now of course Jacob is running from Esau and he's running from Esau as he's running from Laban and he started this whole journey running from Esau at first because he stole his birthright and Jacob is who we are and so God lambs him and God says basically Jacob I'm going to lame you I'm gonna take away every refuge that you have and I'm going to show you that I'm going to bless you and this is not you blessing yourself this is me blessing you and in the end you will finally simply have to submit to me and you will call it perfect freedom and you will call it perfect joy that's the Christian life there's an old Walter Wang when Walter Wang are in story that that I'll play for you and I found it you know Mark Marin I saw as Mark Marin I listened to him years ago and I heard an interview with him and and he was talking about you know it's cuz he's you know he he talks to Hollywood stars who become Christians and and Marin made an observation he said you know it's usually that it's usually the Hollywood stars that can't seem to get sober or get their life straight in any other way and Christianity is like the strongest drug out there and they they tried this and they tried that they tried to fix their lives in all these ways and when everything is erect then they finally turn to Christianity and Marin who isn't a Christian said yeah that's just the you know that that's where the the absolute lowest class goes and I think that's exactly right that's that's why we shouldn't try to flip somebody on the internet in terms of let's let's make you a Christian and and let's have the world see that it's me making you a Christian anybody who loves somebody else won't do that because usually when we become a Christian it's it's in a it's in a it's in a river of tears and we finally give up and we say okay Lord and you know Kanye Kanye and that interview interview you know all the corny as cliches and he's just pulling him out and and so here's this uber cool crazy creative guy sporting these these Christian you know Jesus take the wheel and there he's doing it and I just think Wow strange sight I stumbled upon a story most strange like nothing my life my street sense my sly tongue had ever prepared me for hush child hush now and I will tell it to you even before the dawn one Friday morning I noticed a young man handsome and strong walking the alleys of our city he was pulling an old cart filled with clothes both bright and new and he was calling in a clear tenor voice rags ah the air was foul in the first light filthy to be crossed by such sweet music rags new rags for old I take your tired rags rags now this is a wonder I thought to myself for the man stood six feet four in his arms were like tree limbs hard and muscular and his eyes flashed intelligence could he find no better job than this to be a rag man in the city I followed him my curiosity drove me and I was not disappointed soon the rag man saw a woman sitting on her back porch she was sobbing into a handkerchief sign shedding a thousand tears her knees and elbows made a sad X her shoulders took her heart was breaking the rag man stopped his cart quietly he walked to the woman stepping around tin cans and dead toys and Pampers give me your rag he said to her gently so gently and I'll give you another he slipped the handkerchief from her eyes she looked up and he laid across her palm a linen cloth so clean and knew that it shined she blinked from the gift to the giver then as he began to pull his cart again the rag man did a strange thing he put it her stained handkerchief to his own face and then he began to weep to sob as grievously as she had done his shoulders shaking yet she was left without a tear this is a wonder I breathed to myself and I followed the sobbing rag man like a child who cannot turn away from a mystery rags rags new rags for old in a little while the sky showed gray behind the rooftops and I could see the shredded curtains hanging out black windows and the rag man came upon a little girl whose head was wrapped in a bandage her eyes were empty blood soaked her bandage in a single line of blood ran down her cheek now the tall rag man looked upon this child with pity and he drew a lovely yellow bonnet from his cart the child could only gaze at him while he loosened the bandage and removed it and tied it to his own head the bonnet he sat on hers and I gasped at what I saw for with the bandage went the wound against his brow it ran a darker more substantial blood it was his own rags rags I take old rags cried the sobbing bleeding strong intelligent rag man the Sun hurt both the sky now and my eyes the rag man seemed more and more to hurry are you going to work he said to a man who was leaning against a telephone pole man shook his head the rag man pressed him do you have a job are you crazy sneered the other he pulled away from the pole and revealing the right sleeve of his jacket was flat and the cuff stepped into the pocket he had no arm so said the rag man give me your jacket I'll give you mine such quiet authority in his voice the one-armed man took off his jacket so did the rag man and I trembled at what I saw for the rag man's arm stayed in its sleeve and when the other put it on he had two good arms thick as tree limbs the rag man had only one go to work he said after that he found a drunk lying unconscious beneath an army blanket an old man hunched wizened and sick he took that blanket and he wrapped it around himself but for the drunk he left new clothes and now I had to run to keep up with the rag man though he was weeping uncontrollably and bleeding freely from the forehead pulling his cart with one arm stumbling for drunkenness falling again and again exhausted old old and sick yet he went with terrible speed on spider's legs he skittered through the alleys of the city this mile in the next until he came to its limits and then he rushed beyond I wept to see the change in this man I hurt to see his sorrow and yet I had to see where he was going in such haste perhaps to know what it was that drove him so and the little old rag man he came to a landfill he came to the garbage pits and then I wanted to help him and what he did but I hung back hiding he climbed a hill with tormented labor he cleared a little space on that hill then he sighed he lay down he pillowed his head on a handkerchief and a jacket he covered his bones with an old smelly army blanket and he died oh how I cried I cried to witness that death I slumped into an old junk car and I wailed and mourned as one who has no hope because I had come to love that rag man every other face had faded in the wonder of this man and I cherished him but he died I sobbed myself to sleep I didn't know how could I know I slept through Friday night and Saturday and it's night too but then on Sunday morning I was awakened by violence light pure hard demanding light slammed against my sour face and I blinked and I looked and I saw and the last and the first wonder of all was before me there was the rag man folding the blanket most carefully a scar on his forehead but alive then besides that healthy no sign of sorrow nor of age and all of the rags that he had gathered shine for their cleanliness well then I lowered my head and trembling for all that I had seen I myself walked up to the rag man I told him my name with shame for I was a sorry sorry figure next to him then I took off all my clothes in that place and I said to him with dear yearning in my voice dress me and he dressed me my lord he put clean rags on me new rags and I I I am a wonder beside him the rag man the rag man the Christ that's Walter Wangrid story I think I'm gonna play a song for you I got permission to play this from Ken Mitema Ken Mitema is a is grew up in Western Michigan he played I think he played piano at my junior high graduation he's blind he's a musician and he's he's got a you can find him on the internet he's quite a talented guy but he's I his his manager used to be the art teacher at my high school and he and his wife I think managed Ken Mitema and so I got permission to use this song in my videos I've never managed to make a make a nice opening or closing out of my videos make a nice closing or opening or closing out of my videos and I I thought if I ever do an intro or an outro I want to use this song because I think this song is is for the Jordan Peterson moment I'm right on Jordan's head this time here it is this this fun little so so David David Fuller and and Ollie came out to Sacramento on one of their West Coast tours and and shocked my little church something horrible that people from the United Kingdom would come out and take video of their of their pastor and and in that interview that I did with with David this is very early on in the whole Jordan Peterson thing you know asked me about joy I said there's a certain stoicism in Jordan and you know he keeps talking about this hill and what's up this hill so um got a couple of minutes left so this might be quite a big question but just come back from the interview Paul Van der Kley Christian pastor who's been doing quite a lot of videos about your your thought he one of his questions was he says he he sees a real sort of stoicism in your thought but pick up your cross and drag it up the hill his question is what's at the top of the hill he doesn't hear that well that's because he hasn't listened to the times when I've been talking about it I guess because I've said it repeatedly you stumble uphill with your burden towards the city of God that's the that's the story what does that mean the city of God to you I would say that that's that's a place where everyone bears maximal responsibility and speaks the truth that's what it is and what's the responsibility you're responsible for the suffering in the world you're responsible for the malevolence in the world and you're responsible for the veracity of your utterances right and in the city of God you're maximally responsible for the suffering you're maximally responsible for the malevolence and you speak the truth that's what it is and I'd say that's a humiliation because if we figure out what we are maximally be maximally responsible for now we don't want that we don't want to face that the reason we can't see God is because or one of the reasons is that when when we see the rag man in all of his glory and we look at we're what we're wearing any sensible person would say clothe me now where does that leave us well here's this here's this Ken Meadema song which I think says it Trumpets sound a call to leave the night and step into the morning it's a call to joy and gladness in a world of war and pain and yet it sounds a note of danger and a warning it's a call to leave your treasures and your trinkets on the road it's a call to join the weeping and to bear the stuffers load it's a call to live like fools by another set of rules well it's a call to take your cross in hand and follow yes it's a call to take your cross in hand and follow it's a call to love the stranger and it's a call to live as friend in a world that says good fences make good neighbors and it's a call to make our destruction and our war and it's a call to plant the seeds of love by another set of rules yes it's a call to take your cross in hand and follow i hear the music and it's calling oh it's a must-name invitation to a life of sacrifice all to walk the road that leads from here to glory and it's a joyful expectation of the dawning of that day when god shall write the final chapter in the story and it's a call to be the least and it's a call that joined the fasting it's a lead to a final beat well it's a call to live like fools by another set of rules it's a call to take your cross in hand and follow yes it's a call to take your cross in hand and follow i hear that music and it's calling me so They will come and move me Take up your cross and Move on Take up your cross and Move on Take up your cross and Move on Take up your cross and Move on Move on Take up your cross and Move on Come walk with me in the darkness And as we walk along I'll tell you quite a story And I'll sing you quite a song I'll sing of light and darkness Of victory and defeat Corruption on high mountains And compassion in the street For it's a long night And weary go the feet That walk the long road But the morning will come sweet Yes, it's a long night And the prince is in the streets tonight We'll walk into the city And chaos is its name And in its streets and alleys Are the blind, the sick, the maimed And the children cry for water And relief seems out of sight And they dream about tomorrow In the darkness of the night For it's a long night And weary go the feet That walk the long road But the morning will come sweet Yes, it's a long night And the prince is in the streets tonight Well, just outside that city Far from the blight and pain Sits a holy mountain fortress Where life seems calm and sane And there's feasting there and singing By tranquil waterfalls And the street folks Don't ever come there Cause they dare not climb walls And the gangway up to the fortress The man of sorrows cries A prince in beggar's clothing With compassion in his eyes And the mountain folks, they won't hear him So we'll turn his feet around And the ruler of the mountains Becomes the servant in the town God, it's a long night And weary go the feet That walk the long road But the morning will come sweet Yes, it's a long night And the prince is in the streets tonight Well, I see the kingdom coming And I see the victory coming And there'll be no need of fortress walls For there is a better way And the prince will lift the load And the proud will taste defeat Don't look for the kingdom on the mountains For it's coming Coming in the streets For it's a long night And weary go the feet That walk the long road But the morning will come sweet Yes, it's a long night And the prince is in the streets tonight Thank you for watching!