https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=V3x3pScs7jY

 Hi, this is Paul and this is Rough Draft for Sunday and I don't need these things on. This is Rough Draft for Sunday where I run through the current version of my Sunday sermon. Understanding skeptics. A lot of researchers will make clear that over the last number of years there's been a significant decline in church participation in the United States. There's also been a significant decline in people expressing their profession of something like a traditional Christian religion in the United States. But that doesn't mean that people sort of give up on God. When people say they don't believe in God, it isn't that they no longer believe in immaterial realities like purpose and goodness and sometimes aliens and ghosts and everything happens for a reason and all sorts of things like that. Everything just sort of gets a little bit more fuzzy and a little bit more folksy. Now we're just on the heels of Easter and Easter of course provokes questions for people. Well did Jesus really rise from the dead? What do you mean by really? Did he physically leave the tomb? Did the disciples physically see him? If Jesus rose from the dead, why aren't things better? Why can't I touch him? I mentioned in my last week's sermon the pushback I get from my friend Jacob about the ascension. The ascension seems a sort of a cheat that well he rises from the dead but he's not available. So why can't you, why isn't he hanging out in Jerusalem somewhere where you can fly to Jerusalem and log online an appointment to at least cast your eyes on him and maybe poke at him and see if he says ouch or something like that. Because of course a 2000 year old man who raised from the dead and didn't die again would be quite a thing to go see and I'm sure everybody would go see it. But then the question is how much difference would that make? That's sort of a fun thing to think about. It's sort of a fun thing to think about in terms of all the superhero movies because then Jesus would sort of be like you know one of these superheroes but he would be in a particular time and place and doing things. Much more generally people ask questions like does Christianity work? And as a pastor people will say those kinds of things to me and I'll ask them well what do you mean work? Well and then things again get kind of squishy for people and well like why don't, why doesn't, why did God let this person die? Why does God let these people suffer? Why aren't my prayers answered in a straightforward way similar to if I ask someone in my family for something they give it to me or they don't give it to me and I either say thank you or I curse them depending on it. Why does Christianity work? Now before the run up to Easter we talked a lot about Peter and Judas and well you could ask the question well did Jesus work? Again if you read the Gospels things get more complex. Now he did miracles and people were healed and a lot of stuff happened and they liked to listen to him teach and a bunch of things happened but what exactly were they looking for? We've talked about the fact that Judas and Peter and a good many others were sort of looking for the deliverance of Israel and they had pictures in mind as to what would happen with respect to that. Maybe the Romans would go away and maybe the Judea and Galilee would be more organized and they could suppress the Samaritans and they could maybe begin to challenge Rome and maybe Egypt's grain and riches could flow into Israel and there's Old Testament prophecies about these kinds of things. That sort of is what working meant to them. But then even when they see big miracles like Lazarus coming out of the tomb at some point you can sit there and talk with your friends and neighbors about how astounding that was that Lazarus came out of the tomb but then yeah that's Lazarus he came out of the tomb but he lives down the street. What exactly are we looking for and wanting to have happen? And when you start pursuing that it's not at all quite so easy. So then we ask questions about what happens when things work and usually we imagine that with money and beauty and fame and power and drugs and youth and you know then everything would sort of work because well when we have trouble paying the bills well if I had more money or if we're having health problems well if I was younger and had the right drugs and if I feel bad maybe a pill could help me feel better. And this week you know some of us are watching the stars and we're going outside and looking at night no we're watching on YouTube the mess and misery of this marriage between Johnny Depp and Amber Heard. The accusations that that he was an abuser and now he's suing her for defamation and and so all the dirty laundry right there for us to see and Johnny Depp's use of drugs and alcohol and her anger and how she'd slap him and well well Christians certainly should do better but then what happens when they don't? You know the Ravi Zachariah case. Christianity wants to bear witness to the fullness of life but the inability to live its own sexual ethic and plunge of its other ethics up and down the hierarchy causes deep dissonance and provokes deconstruction in some people. So what in fact does working look like? And often I'll push back on people about salvation. What do you mean by that word salvation? You know Mr. Incredible gets frustrated at the beginning of the movie I just saved this place and you just made another mess. Now you can sort of imagine a soundtrack like you would hear in a movie and maybe you've had glimpses of it in your life when everything seemed to come true and everything was right and you know maybe it was you fell in love with the person you desired or you know getting up more towards my areas of life. All the kids came home for Christmas and we had a lovely time together and but then they go away and things revert back to normal and even if you know you had a health emergency and we all prayed and you were delivered the age of decay comes to steal again. So Jesus is risen. He's risen indeed. What's next? On the evening of that first day of the week when the disciples were together with the doors locked for fear of the Jewish leaders Jesus came and stood among them and said peace be with you. After he had said this he showed them his hands and his side. The disciples were overjoyed. When they saw the Lord again Jesus said peace be with you. As the Father has sent me I am sending you and with that he breathed on them. Right there you had the great commission in the day of Pentecost all wrapped up into one at the end of the gospel of John and that breathed on them reiterates the breathing that you find in Genesis 2 with the creation of the man of Adam and you find the valley of dry bones and the wind blowing and the bones standing up and becoming a great army. Receive the Holy Spirit. If you forgive anyone's sins they are forgiven. If you do not forgive them they are not forgiven. Wow there's power. But no tongues of fire. No sound of rushing wind. Well all that will come in 50 days. So what exactly does it mean that Jesus breathes on them and says receive the Holy Spirit. As the Father is sending me I am sending you. And if you forgive someone their sins they are forgiven. And if you don't they are not forgiven. But they are all just kind of still there looking normal and having to sleep at night and eat the next day and having conversations with each other and probably sometimes conflicts and and and. What you know certainly this this this resurrection should have changed everything right. But again what do you mean by everything. What is the nature of this Holy Spirit's transformation of the world and of history. So often I point to Tom Holland's book Dominion but lately I've been reading Bart Ehrman. Bart Ehrman became a Christian as a I think as in a youth group and became an evangelical and wanted to get a theological education in order to you know know everything better and and defeat all the atheists. And along the way he sort of deconstructed and became an atheist himself but he's still sort of an ancient historian and he writes very popular books about Christianity from a certain perspective. And a couple of years ago New York Times bestseller the cover says so somebody bought the book. Now I've I've bought the book the triumph of Christianity how a forbidden religion swept the world. So he's a skeptic and he's skeptical about the history of miracles and you find that commonly today a lot of people are skeptical about it. But if you ask them why they're skeptical about those miracles they'll tell you they'll say well miracles don't happen therefore they didn't happen back then. That's convenient. You could say well you can't make it from New York to San Francisco in in five hours in 1849. You can make it there in that period today. So can you make it or not. Well it depends if you have an airplane a jet. So we're going to talk a little bit about miracles because one of the theses of his book and I'm really enjoying parts of that book quite a bit. People become Christians because of miracles and lots of other things that happen to kindness to the poor taking care of the sea the sick and the weak and then all of that stuff happened as a result of Christianity. But often people became Christians because something happened and they believed and then bit by bit maybe not a lot right away they started to act differently. People become Christians because they have evidence that Christianity is true. Some people like to try to define faith as believing without evidence. I don't find that at all. Everybody believes on evidence. Now you might not like the evidence or you might not think that the the evidence merits the conclusion that people come to but that's pretty normal with human beings. Some people believe the Chicago Kings are a great basketball team. Look at their record. I don't want to make Freddie feel bad. It's moving forward in life learning to trust on the basis of usually past evidence. That's that's what people believe faith to be. Now Thomas also known as Didymus one of the twelve was not with the disciples when Jesus came he missed the meeting. So the other disciples told him we've seen the Lord but he said to them unless I put my nail unless I see the nail marks in his hands and put my finger where the nails were and put my hand into his side I will not believe. Some people say well there's all these ancient miracle stories because they were gullible. Thomas obviously wasn't gullible. Jesus is alive. You're out of your mind. We saw him crucified. We saw him buried. People don't come back from the dead. Everybody knows this. Maybe a ghost maybe a memory maybe something like that. But no you're saying he came physically back and I ain't buying fully comprehended exactly what his friends were saying and the plausibility of the story. A week later his disciples were in the house again and Thomas was with them. Though the doors were locked Jesus came and stood among them and said peace be with you. He's not a ghost. Then he said to Thomas put your finger here. See my hands. It's like Jesus were you listening. Did you hear what he said. You know where are you going to find Jesus to run and say did you hear what Thomas said about you. Jesus knew. Reaching out your hand and put it on my side. Stop doubting and believe. Thomas said to him my lord and my god. He called him God. Then Jesus told him because you have seen me you have believed. Blessed are those who have not seen and yet have believed. Remember noises on the street. We used to have a lot of noises in North 7th Street in Patterson but I wasn't recording anything then so I didn't have to stop. Remember how the angels didn't appear to Peter and John. How they go into the tomb and it's empty. And then Mary goes in the tomb and there are the angels. God seems to pick and choose how when where he decides what how and to whom. It seems to be exactly what the story implies. Angels are in many ways the same way and it's a hard thing. One group prays for a miracle and receives another group prays and doesn't. And it doesn't seem you know necessarily based on merit that one was worthy and the other unworthy. But that again is all about choice. Most of us believe on the basis of reliable people believing the story. I was on a podcast and people someone asked me do you believe that Jesus rose from the dead I said yes. They said why. So because my parents believed and they were wonderful faithful godly good people. And on the basis of them believing I believed too. Now we get all sciency when it comes to miracles in our culture way and this week Rick and I went and saw Jordan and Tammy Peterson and an event in Santa Rosa and got a chance to talk to them. And Tammy is exploring Christianity on YouTube with with Jonathan Peugeot and and having really honest sincere conversations. And you know this is sort of the Christian faith is sort of a new thing for her and it's alongside of all sorts of other beliefs that she's she's had in her life. And that's how we come to this week. And everyone does. Everyone comes with whole sorts of beliefs about this and that. And and and their daughter Michaela is is exploring Christianity and seemingly becoming a Christian. But Tammy received first the diagnosis from a doctor that she had a curable form of cancer and then they did some treatment and it wasn't effective. And then oh the doctors changed the story. No this isn't curable. In fact you don't have very long to live. And she tells the story in a number of places but she regards the healing that she receives. In fact she said she told her husband and told her daughter I'm going to be healed on our anniversary her wedding anniversary. And she was. How did she know this. Do you regard this as a miracle. Well the doctor said she would die and she clearly hasn't died and she's fit as a fiddle now and doing very well and her illness or cancer is gone. So is that a miracle. Certainly seems to qualify. Michaela her daughter was having some difficulties both of her parents were fighting for their lives and she was in the midst of a difficult marriage and had a child to raise and trying to start a career and she's got a lot of her own health issues and somebody told her well why don't you ask God for help. And she wasn't raised with that but her friend said well just just try it. And then the next week a whole bunch of things sort of straightened out. Tammy has evidence. Michaela has evidence. We say well I want something. Well you want something what and why. That's not the basis upon which people believe. People believe for their own reasons. It's hard to not look at Tammy's story and call it not miraculous. You might look at at Michaela's story and say there's more happenstance but. For them the miracle is good enough evidence enough to warrant. I should think about this. I should explore this. Maybe I should pray. Maybe I should read the Bible. Maybe I should worship. GK Chesterton said we have a God who knows the way out of the grave because he's done it. Found a interesting comment on Twitter. Susanna Black she writes and she's a Mennonite listening to an episode of Wet Brain. Never heard any of these people because of the Vanity Fair article. Then I asked her for the links. It's not important. Seems like Jesus gets to people in all kinds of different ways. Getting them because it's hip or reactionary to go to church and eventually become real. They also to be honest just sounded like a lot of very early days Christians and very young people flailing around. Every generation of young adult converts has this phase. You're kind of a jellyfish of chaos with a real self but also a lot of accretions and stupid ideas and no good boundaries and no spine which can coexist with being too rigid or judgmental or hard on oneself etc. And then when you become a Christian Jesus starts patiently giving you a real skeleton, a real shape to help that self of yours become really to really be itself. It's more restful and sane to be a mature Christian in the same way as it's easier to live in a body that has a strong core muscles and doesn't like have chiropractic problems. It's a messy business. Put your hands in my side. Touch my Lord and my God. Stop doubting. But Jesus doesn't show up to all of us. He shows up in the sky to Paul. Some people he seems to come in their dreams. Other people circumstances. Some people are healed. God seems to pick and choose. We still long for what we don't even know what we're longing for. It's true. Again just just just sit down and try and make a list and you'll be surprised what exactly do you want God to do to this world. It's usually just the opposite of some suffering or evil or pain or loss. Was Thomas's life all rainbows and butterflies after he got to place his fingers in the wounds? Changed his life completely. But still I'm sure he had his troubles. I'm sure he had his moments. The disciples get everything right after Jesus breathed on them. Peter and Paul wouldn't see eye to eye. There'd be plenty of squabbles in in the new church. This seems to be the way it goes. You say well I don't like that. Okay take it up with the Almighty. I don't know what I can tell you because it's been going this way for 2000 years. But yet things continue to change. Jesus performed many other signs in the presence of his disciples which are not recorded in this book. You can only write so much but the signs seem to continue. Just like Jesus story God works through suffering, loss, struggle, trials to accomplish the transforming work both in us and through us. It's almost always the way. When I meet an extraordinary Christian one that you might be tempted to call a saint. It's almost always because they've suffered. Now you might not know they're suffering. They might not tell you they're suffering. But if you're a nosy pastor like me and you start poking around in someone's life. Yeah they suffered. He uses these sufferings to make us real, to make us strong, to make us his. It's often these miracles that become poignant and ironic in terms of the transformations we desire. One of the guys in the discord community Chad the alcoholic he's often said to me something to the effect of I thank God for my alcoholism. It's like that's a strange thing to thank God for. Being an alcoholic is absolutely no fun and usually only stop being an alcoholic when you realize this is really no fun and it's not going anywhere and it's going to destroy my life. But he says if he hadn't been an alcoholic he doesn't know that he would have found Christ or the church or the people of God or all of the stuff that that he learned and grew in the 12 step program. If it hadn't been for Christ I don't think we'd have a 12 step program. It's the mystery of the Holy Spirit working without the rushing tongues and the without the rushing wind and the tongues of fire quietly through struggle every day. As the father has sent me I'm sending you and he breathed on them and said receive the Holy Spirit quietly slowly patiently changing moving doing. What's interesting about both Erman's book I haven't finished it yet I'm not too far into it but I am enjoying it and Dominion which I've read and I really want to read again because it's a lovely book but both are both agree to the fact that even if Bart Erman is skeptical and Tom Holland will say I believe in better days some days not so much. There's no question about what happened as a result of this man and the disciples saying he left the tomb. We've seen him in the flesh. Thomas even got slightly embarrassed having to poke at him. As the father is sending me so I am sending you and he breathed on them receive the Holy Spirit. The spirit of Christ has been changing the world through history and it's undeniable. Will you ask him to change you?