https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=_wDUKLLTclM

 Long time no see. How are you? Yeah, long time no see indeed. How have you been? I've been good. How have you been? I've been very good. Very good. Very well. Thanks. Is this our second or a third talk? This may be our third talk. Our third talk, yeah. Well, what are you going to talk about today? I'm just going to adjust my internet because I think there's something breaking up a bit. So, just adjusting my internet. Okay. If I was a good YouTuber, I'd have elevator music or I'd edit. Guess I better pause. Hello. All right. There we go. Yeah, I just had to switch to cellular data. Oh, okay. Wi-Fi is not as efficient. That's why I'm on my phone now. Well, you're looking good on your phone. Nice clear camera. Phones often have better cameras than mics. So, actually, it's quite interesting because it's the first time that I'm having a conversation with you, but I haven't been religiously consuming your content. That's probably good for your soul. I wouldn't say that. No. I just, I've been distracted with other matters. Oh, probably more important. Well, I wouldn't say more important, but I might say more pressing. Okay. Well, what matters have been distracting you? I mean, it's not that I've been an active participant in these matters, but as far as consuming content regarding things I've been doing. So, I don't know, again, I don't know if even this conversation would be one that we'd put out because I want to have a level of honesty throughout it. So, I'm just like, free-facing it, but that's it's not me trying to get a message out there, but I do want to hear like thoughts of someone like yourself on the current situation that we're in. Okay, which, which sits well, what we'll do what I always do and that will record it. And we will let me get my notes up so that I can, so that I can, we will record it and then afterwards we will see and if it's something that we think is appropriate to share or worthy of sharing, we'll share it. If not, you'll just have a copy and you can refer back to it. That'll be it. That'll be it. I know that it's not a guarantee. I'm just putting my intentions out there. It's not like, so it's not like I'm here trying to corner you, but because some of this might possibly get blunter than usual. Oh, I like blunt. Let's go for it. So I mean, I just want to hear you like, what are your thoughts on like the current, let's say, global political geopolitical situation like what what what what I, because I'm being out of the loop. I haven't been watching anything from the bridges of meaning or sphere for a long time. So, I don't even know what your thoughts are like on how things have developed. Well, you're, you're gonna have to be more specific because it's a very big world. Well, that is true, but I guess I'm talking about like the situation with the mandatory medical action. The whole coronavirus situation in general. And, like, just your, I don't know like how much have you been thinking about these things are like, I know it's not something that you wouldn't not be thinking about given that it's a front and center of reality. But have your just basically, basically let's talk about that Matt let's start with the, let's say the seeming in position of global coordinated action Well, clearly there is a virus that has gone around the world. And so part of what's interesting about this go round, as opposed to let's say the last pandemic that was of this magnitude which that we that we know of. I mean we could have had smaller pandemics that are less consequential less less life threatening that we're not paying attention to because it does like, it doesn't hit our attention let's say the HPV virus. So I remember when my children were getting vaccinated when they were young, the doctor comes out with these this this HPV virus. vaccination, and I'm like, what's, what's this about. Well, this can cause cause servitude cert service cervical cancer and women. Okay, and it's sexually transmitted. Okay, well why give it to my daughters, they're not having sex. So, you know, on and on and on but then all right I finally, you know, I put the doctor off a few times and finally said okay go ahead and They got the HPV. Now, what has the HPV virus been gone epidemic in the world. We don't know HPV is a very long term virus that might eventually cause cervical cancer and I know there's some doctors who watch my channel, if we publish I'm in. And so there's a virus that's gone around the world and we probably haven't paid much attention to it the medical community has they developed a vaccine for it that vaccine has been given to children long before they're sexually active, yada yada yada yada yada we pay no attention to that. So now we have the coronavirus. And let's compare the coronavirus to the begin to the Spanish flu that happened at the beginning of the 20th century. Now, the beginning of the 20th century, the world had a degree of globalization. That obviously it had more than a century before it but not as much as a century after it. So the Spanish flu goes around the world, partly pitching a ride, because of all the movement that went on because of the First World War, on and on and on and on but we really didn't have the kind of vaccination technology like we have today. So now we have the coronavirus, and the coronavirus coronavirus sweeps around the world. Do I could it could it be a human engineered virus seems quite possible, even if you listen to mass media. Now, after the Trump administration has gone now even in the mass media you'll regularly hear people say well, could be possible, could be possible. And at the beginning nobody you know we have that that whole thing got all caught up in American politics and it's certainly there in the middle of world politics because if in fact, it can be definitively demonstrated that this virus was cooked up in a Chinese lab, accidentally got out into the world. Well, people are going to have that's going to impact China's reputation in the world standing so there's that whole thing. And that's out there but that's not what people are paying attention to right now everybody's paying attention to vaccine mandates and in fact I made in my prayer on my Sunday school class I thank God for vaccines which I do because because of vaccines. A lot of the old people in my church. None of the old people in my church have died of the coronavirus. That's a pretty cool thing most of the old people in my church got vaccinated. I don't see them getting vaccinated as a problem, I think mandatory vaccination. And I think that's stepping on some different lines, but the fact that you have the coronavirus come out you also have the continued development of of genetic drugs, you know we've had genetically modified organisms GMOs. And we've had that conversation in some communities. So there's tons of stuff going on at all these different levels. And what I've found interesting is that I've known some I have some anti vaxxers in my life the old style anti vaxxers that were against the DMR, the measles mumps rubella vaccine questions about vaccinations and autism all of this stuff me I listened to that it's like, anything involved in this stuff with in my perspective as a matter of a lot of odds. They do the testing, the vast majority of people seem to be okay for now. You stick it in your body you roll the dice but the truth is anytime you stick almost anything in your mouth that you haven't grown yourself you're rolling the dice. So, I, my, my take on it has been. Yeah, could we have a really. Could we have a really unhappy surprise, five 1015 20 years from now, because of vaccination now could be has vaccinations have vaccinations seem to really retard the growth and spread and severity of the pandemic looks that way. So, life is about a lot of risk and so your risk if you take the vaccine your risk if you don't take the vaccine. And off we go, and I see people getting all dogmatic people who are against dogma getting all dogmatic on on some things and it's like, I'm just, you know, I'm not a, I'm not a virologist, I'm, I've got no expertise in the development of mRNA vaccines I don't even really know what, I don't know what that means. But there's a system that did some testing or at least alleges to and they stick it in my arm and so I got two shots of Pfizer and didn't really have any side effects and did I have coronavirus before I got vaccinated, you know, And I think in the early 2020 at about two days where I felt ill, had a fever and headache. Could that have been me having the coronavirus could be maybe I have natural immunity. I have no idea. But I watched people freaking out and it's like, people freak out. And so I guess we've got a new thing to talk about and a new thing to freak out over. But I got vaccinated, my children got vaccinated. Most of the people in my church got vaccinated. I haven't decided to make a big deal about pushing it. I haven't decided to make a big deal about complaining about it. I'm sort of riding the wave looking around, because it's not really my area. So I don't know if that satisfies your curiosity. No, it just, it just gives me some context as to like where where you are like in the broad menu of viewpoints on this. Because again, like I said, usually I'm listening to almost every single one of your, your podcast so it just so happened that I haven't been so I just, I don't want to like launch into something plain. And as you were speaking, actually, I started like actually realizing where I wanted to go this as usual the moment the conversation, I have something like planned out in my mind as to what I want to ask and then it just kind of evaporates the moment like it starts. Not just with you but like in many situations. I know it. So now, so up until when I have been following a channel for a good two years. This is going to be an oversimplification. However, you know that I, I know a fair amount of the nuance of like what goes on, but I'm just going to a lot of like what's happening just with your channel and a lot of stuff in this space is really like Christians in the scientific age, let's call it whatever whatever age you want to call this post the Enlightenment era. It's all been about trying to like find some need or place or like, or that has been left by the vast enterprise of science where like Christians can reinsert or is religion itself or spirituality that large can more and more structured religion can find its namely Christianity in your channel but like in other spaces, how whether whether there's actually a need for it and is there a need for it. What is the need like and a lot of it has been on psychological and socio psychological terms across, or maybe metaphysical but very abstract frontier level metaphysics, like in terms of like the very broad questions for which we all know that there are there are no answers, scientifically speaking right now. So that those have been the areas we've just been funded to the frontier, and we've also been playing around in terms of like you know, organization of society and all that stuff. However, the question is, what, what have we just been framing this wrong, all along, like, drastically, and I'm not even going to pause it, the actual specific theory but the actual specific way in which we could be wrong because there's only one area which I know that an entire scientific paradigm as much as I know anything as much as I know. Much as I know what is where, or as much as I know. I mean maybe that's an exaggeration as much as I know and as much as I can trust any as much as I know quantum mechanics of the thing, or as much as I know Newtonian physics of the thing. What if, what if it turns out that one of the mid, what if you found out that one of the major scientific paradigms is completely on its head, completely wrong, completely wrong. There are two questions which arise. One question being, we all are very conscious of like how we appear like everyone including myself so even when I went about this current, and I will not specify this current paradigm which I've been looking into a lot of Google research they call it but no I was doing more than that. I was like, with a lot of like a lot of depth. I was very aware of social socially like how you appear when you start to make claims about something which is not just a, not just a critique of the other of a certain establishment domain of knowledge, but like a complete rejection of it. So, so that being the case, us all having this social data like what would it take for a person who is, again, I'm not an expert I'm not an expert that the excuse people give it. I mean, myself included in many domains but I, whether or not, whether there are people who are speaking out against other paradigms which I don't, which again I'm not an expert in. But what would it take for us as laymen to actually come to terms with the fact that an entire scientific paradigm would just be completely flawed. What do you think it's more like a building of an epistemological tool set, or how somebody would not being an expert in an area how would how would you, how would a, like a let's say a metaphysical detective would go about observing a certain domain of science, not being an expert and actually coming to grips with the fact that it could be completely on its head. And the second. I know that was a lot but the second point is that you can maybe address later we have time would be. How would this, how would that change our entire worldview of how we've been viewing like religion like, we're trying to find some small place or like a frontier place where we could fit it in, especially namely Christianity especially. How would that affect the belief how would affect people's beliefs in the religion itself, if just so happened that the world was in the manner that someone who was in the manner which I just been expected, where an entire paradigm could be wrong and also intentionally don't think as much as something can be intentional over a long time but intentionally don't. I know that's a lot but yeah. That's why I take notes. Yeah, it is a lot. And it's very interesting it's it's a very interesting little couplet I don't know if we'll be able to get at both of them because when I start talking about one it's probably going to shoot us into some different directions, but let's, but let me kind of repeat back to you some of what I heard. When I was in college. That's when I first read Thomas Humes, the tunes the history of scientific scientific scientific revolutions, and I read that book in college and so I certainly didn't grasp the whole thing. But as I was reading it I grasped enough of it to sort of have a paradigm shift in my imagination of how science and knowledge and the world works. That's exactly what that book did that book itself was a paradigm shift for many people, because prior to that, we had in our scientific imagination, sort of the myth of progress, which was one steady modernistic evolution of knowledge that we continue to know more and more and more and more in a very linear way, and and Coons idea said no we sort of are always in the same thing, and they're sort of a regime, it, it sort of puts science back. It sort of frames science in a social political sphere, rather than this modernistic view from nowhere that science just continues to progress, because of the simple accumulation of knowledge, and we as impartial observers see the knowledge no more, and simply no more than our ancestors did, instead of understanding that science itself is in many ways our knowledge itself is deeply socially constructed, and I love what you added into it, because you said, basically what if we're seen to be wrong, because when you shift science from sort of this modernistic accumulation of facts and ideas into much more a sociological frame. I realized very quickly that issues of status social status come to play. And because we're human beings and because you know and go back to Jordan Peterson and his lobsters and serotonin and yada yada yada yada. We really like being top lobster we like the attention the favorable attention of our peers, we, we reputation matters I was listening to Mary Beards history of Rome, and going back over the story of Lucretia, where you know Lucretia one of Lucretia And she's sort of the archetype of the perfect Roman wife, and one of her husband's friends approaches her for sex. And, you know, basically gives you know pulls a knife out and says, you know, if you don't have sex with me I'll kill you. Go ahead and kill me, because her reputation is worth more to her than the actual, you know, the, the physical act of violation by one of her husband's friends. And so that was that committed to reputation and social status. And that's not a new thing. The Greeks, I was just reading this morning because I'm working on my sermon about Thessalonians, you know the Greeks thought that fame was really the only way to transcend death and fame is of course a function of reputation. And I love, you know, so we started talking about the, the, the epidemic. And when I think about the epidemic. I mean obviously I'm not happy we are in the midst of this pandemic not only is, as there been tremendous loss of life, but it has been a tremendous pain in the neck to have to deal with masks and restrictions and shutdowns and all of this stuff even though in the United States it hasn't been as brutal as in some places like Australia and Canada. So, but if we have this trouble anyway let's learn from it as well we can. And I think what we have seen through this pandemic is that a lot of the assumptions about knowledge and authority and authority and authority and authority and knowledge making, especially with respect to mass media has been tremendously undermined. For example, I just saw on Twitter someone basically constructed a little, a little GIF of sound clips about the efficacy of the vaccines. These vaccines are 9899 and of course now the delta virus comes at bearing comes in yada yada yada yada yada and so now, even though you're vaccinated, you should wear a mask if you're inside and people are watching this. And all of this suspicion about authority, knowledge, truth, science. It's all now very much in a social constructivist frame. Whereas, prior to this, people imagined it much more in a modernist frame, where there are all these facts now someone with a part of this function is a function of higher and lower resolution of knowledge. My impression is is that you, if you would have spoken to a doctor who has detailed experience about vaccines. They will say vaccinations are not silver bullets, for example, in a. I had a medical checkup a couple of years ago, and the doctor said oh I want to boost your measles vaccine, I want to give you a measles vaccine booster and I thought I had those measles vaccines when I was a kid, but he had, you know, done after my usual I have a very thorough personal physician and he said well you're, I think your measles immunity is a little low and stuff is going around so let's give you a booster and I didn't say ah mandatory vaccine by my medical professional I said, stick it in me and I said Doc I don't think it'll kill me half will go. And so I got a measles vaccine and off I went. So, I think you're right in that there's a ton of paradigm shifting going on and watching friends and relatives of mine who didn't have a thought or when the pediatrician was pumping their toddler full of substances from bottles and through syringes. Now suddenly are throwing fits and refusing to get vaccinated it's kind of like, well that's interesting. What's happening, and I think it has very much to do with the kinds of issues you just raised. Now, part of the constructive narrative that is our lives. Really, is tremendously biased. And so depending on if you believe you're a spiritual person and a Christian who, you know, is always following the will of God and so now suddenly you have a religious objection to vaccines or if you're a rational person who is a scientist or science and, and now suddenly you have a rational objection to vaccines that twisting I see mostly based on the person self constructive narrative, who they see themselves to be so Christians are out there having Christian complaints about the And rationalists are out there having rational complaints about about the vaccines and I look at them and I think you're having a human complaint, because then you're just framing it different so I think the current situation we're in is very much a function of a rather interesting experiment in changes of paradigms changes of authorities and changes of status, because, you know, one of the things I noticed right away when the pandemic hit. I am a person of North Northern European descent. You know I'm got pasty white and very light eyes. And, but I've lived most of my life in African American communities or Caribbean Ameri African communities, let's say, and I noticed right away when this pandemic hit that people believe, depending on basically their, their structures of belief and authority. And so college educated people tended to be predisposed to listen to CNN or the New York Times, people who generally voted for the Democratic Party had their structures of authority, and other pasty white people like me had their kind of counter cultural counter narrative structures of authority, and people sort of tracked along those lines, but because those are just some of my network, I was watching black folks and homeless folks and Asian folks, and I was watching all these other communities act very differently, because they have very different structures of authority. And it's a, and a lot of that has to do with the our assumptions about the way the world is how we should operate and who is for us who is against us who can we trust, who are we suspicious of. And, and so as I just paid attention usually with my mouth shut, who was getting a vaccine right away, who was suspicious about the vaccine. What are they saying about the vaccine. What are they saying about the vaccine, it's just been fascinating, watching this epistemological universe play itself out in the midst of a new variable, which was coven 19, so I probably answered none of your questions but that's what your thoughts prompted in me. Oh, that's good. That's good. And now I'm just now I'm going to really just like, stop making some bold claims that because I wanted to again I just have been kind of like subconsciously like curating what I wanted to say throughout this conversation, but now it's really going to seem like it's going to go off the rails. So you remember everything that you said about biology in the beginning and what you believe, just from your layman's perspective. I'm going to claim right now that it's all completely upside down. And the next prediction is within six years. And not because of some me predicting some evolution of knowledge within the sphere of biology or medicine in general. In six or seven years I don't know like around that the entire, the entire paradigm of biology will be on the notion of viruses as these are discrete distinct particles which are capable of, especially the ones which are claimed to be floating around in the air, and it's going to be completely my claim. Of course I'm not expecting anybody right now to accept this, but, but like I said I know this is as well as I know anything, just from looking into this normal level of depth. And that entire paradigm will be tossed out the window and it'll just be a footnote to a medical history. So, all the stuff that we're encountering now, my claim is that based on a completely flawed paradigm and not unintentionally so. And here's the here's the interesting rubric on that I crossed but at the moment I've had this. When you when you when you become convicted of a bully. So, outside of the norm. It literally flips the entirety of like your view of not just that one part of them but obviously every other part. The only reason being the reason I don't. And in fact for that reason I've decided not actually consciously decided not to even look into the other paradigms, because you know I don't know like Michael Mallis was saying on one podcast you take one red pill not the whole bottle. I've taken, I've taken my one red pill. And just so that I don't completely gobble myself into a state of self-induced schizophrenia. I've just, I'm sticking with this one thing that I know for certain is completely flawed. So that being the it, but it really changed. I mean, we all accept in the abstract that like, there could be, there could be forces that could be like corrupt, like you know like almost like you know you used to talk about school spirit and then like how a company could have a spirit or like there's a principal, it's a principality can become like a principality. And we all kind of accept kind of in a Hegelian sense of like all of these massive multi people like a multi like global entities can or whatever massive companies massive groups of people can function as if they have an intention of their own. And that side of it, we all, we all acknowledge. But I think like within polite society it's almost been completely neglected to be like addressed with any sort of like credibility the notion that actually could be true intentions behind certain, let's say I know that like because any logical person would not just write that off from the outside. But in their mind is just a psychological aspect that people will not take that seriously. Myself included until I knew something for certain. Before I knew this one thing for certain again as certain as anything can be without getting into the metaphysics of it. I was always hedging on the side of you know the more like well game theoretical reasons for people acting in this way or there are, you know, social reasons or and then there's incentives pushing them in this way and inertia like stopping them from going in that way and that's that's what is the appearance of intentionality to something. At this point, with what I know about biology, and just upside down backwards. It actually, in a strange way, it completely eliminates any justice one thing is completely eliminated any, any doubt I had in the existence of God I have, I still have questions about God's nature. But just the fact that this paradigm is so it's just not what it was not what it was taught to us to be. It's, it is just completely reshaped but I was thinking, let's say, I don't want anyone like I don't you or anybody else to like misconstrue me and like when I say this. This is biology. This is, if you think about it in the grand scheme of things. That biology being wrong isn't like the biggest upset like in biology, everything you knew about biology was bogus, this would just literally just be a footnote in history, but I was thinking what if something like that I'm not even going there but what if some are not, because again I don't have the tools to attack that area but like what if everything what if, for example, just a thought experiment, literally thought experiment, not subscribe I disavow. What if everything we knew about cosmology was completely wrong. That would literally change. We talked about all these ways in which like maybe religion could reassert itself like in all these subtle ways which only people who are esoterically day delving into the nuance of philosophy and psychology across like 10 decades, centuries, would even like. But literally if something like cosmology was proven to be like on its head wrong, that would the entire world would just wake up to the stock understanding or like knowledge that does not exist. And again, I'm not, I don't literally I'm not even saying I'm not saying this way or that way when it comes to cosmology I know nothing. But I know that one field is wrong. So I don't even know, like, I don't know those are just my verbal diarrhea because again it came out much more garbled than I expected. But it's always garbled when it comes out of your mouth and it is sort of in your picture in your head of it. I get that. That's why that's my videos are so long. And it's totally true. And I'll give you two, two examples of it. Number one, I was a missionary in the Dominican Republic. I watched a lot of, they would call them something like health brigades, they would come in, and they would come into because I was a missionary I was sort of like a gatekeeper for people wanted it all these well meaning people from North America Christians or non Christians who wanted to help the world and save the world and so they, they somehow want to get down to the grassroots and because I'm there and I speak English and I speak the local language and I have a network yada yada yada so via me this group from let's say youth with a mission or the church gets access to a tiny little community in an insignificant little but a which is sort of a workers camp in the middle of these vast sugar cane fields on the and south east this by Yola. And so I go down there and I watch these college kids come down and they've got someone translating Spanish or something in there. They're sitting there lecturing all of the people of this little but a about germs that there are these tiny little things that you can't see called germs. And these germs are making your children sick, and they're in this ditch water that you're basically drinking and mixing with milk powder to feed to your infants and you're doing this because of ideas and Dominican society that, you know, really plump healthy looking children drink milk powder and don't breastfeed and you know the whole thing that, you know, we've been talking about forever and I just watch because I know the people that they're talking to, and I just watch them. And they're just sit there it's it's sort of like the people who would go to the bread missions on skid row and be like okay we got to listen to the preacher talk about Jesus and afterwards we get the meal. And so they sit there politely and they listen to all this talk about germs and, you know, taking the babies off the ground and keeping the chickens and the pigs out of the hot and yada yada yada yada yada because they're hoping those going to be a handout at the end of the handout is something that can they can use and this whole germ theory is bogus. And in the meantime, if for example at that point my oldest was a, it was a toddler himself and I carry him around and sometimes I clad carry him around when it was cloudy or even rainy. I remember one time I was walking down my street with my toddler and it was just starting to drizzle, and a woman just flew out of her house and say say I said I know you're hurting him you're hurting him, what do you mean I'm hurting him. You've got him out here in the drizzle don't you understand what this does to a child. Of course I laugh because. That's a perfect example of, let's say, the entire paradigm of virology was overturned in the next six years, and suddenly people all over the place have absolutely no problem believe in the in spirits or God or anything like that I totally believe that the The second example of that is of course the fall of the discarded image, because basically when Galileo and others were able to demonstrate that physics below the moon were operating above the moon. The entire ancient paradigm that had been cobbled together over centuries from Aristotle and through Christianity and you know that was supported by the Vatican I mean Galileo got in trouble. I think I have a video of this from a guy named Doug. One of my guy who watches my videos just did all his own little video on this that I, I linked to in Twitter, what did a wonderful little half hour talk about this was really cool Galileo with that one turn the throned a worldview that they had taken centuries to construct that a whole civilization basically assumed, and with Galileo that entire edifice came tumbling down along with it. God and the music of the spheres and heaven and everything, just because Galileo is dropping balls from a tower in Italy. So, what you're describing is human history. And I think you're absolutely right that we all sort of walk around in our epistemological bubbles imagining. Well I'm, you know, our whole society, what has to be science based, and it's like, you don't really act that way you act on the basis of your little epistemological bubble, and I love the way you frame this whole thing. And if the entire paradigm of virology that there's these tiny little sort of semi living things because our viruses alive or not alive. I mean that's a whole debate, these, these semi little living things that sort of, you know, their parasites basically and hostage ourselves and they cause things to go in our bodies and you know if that entire paradigm gets overturned, then tons of religious stuff sort of gets reimagined. In many ways, it could be said that, you know, the Protestant Reformation is part of this reimagining and secular secularity is part of this reimagining, but at the same time to your big point which I think is an outstanding point. But it's also the case that if let's say virology were overturned, and our entire perspective on the world changed. Not much would change, not as much would change as we imagine it would just like when the discarded image was overturned. They would come in and out their front door, manage their crops, talk to their neighbors were married and we're given in marriage, yada yada yada. So, human beings have this amazing capacity to have your world change overnight, and hardly at all. At the same time. I love the way you frame this and it's such a cool idea. I really hope we I really hope you're bold enough to let me share it at some point because, you know, I know YouTube would be all upset because we're talking about COVID-19 and vaccines and they're like, don't say anything that breaks the positive narrative we're I mean, there's a little bar underneath saying, here's, here's Wikipedia because that's really where we know the truth. There's just so much bullshittery going on in our culture right now but I love the way you frame this because I think you're exactly right. And what you have said has happened, I've seen it with my eyes with Haitians and Dominicans listening to these medical brigades, what they call It's like, are they communist cells coming from youth with a mission from American evangelicals, it's just crazy but you're exactly right and it's a powerful really cool thought if you recognize that we are that irrational. And all of this fabrication about our vaunted rationality is sometimes just a fart in the wind. So, I didn't even think about the fact that what YouTube and the warnings and the, you might get the first community guidelines. This could happen. This will definitely be demonetized it's like, oh YouTube is going to take $5 away from me, I'm trembling. That's pretty funny. I mean, yeah that for what you said actually that the last point about like, yeah, in one sense, everything would change but in another sense, nothing would change that's a, that's a strange paradox. I guess like the only way to resolve that would be the changes. It's kind of like when when you when someone dies or something like the death of a loved one or something like going to it's going to hit, it's going to the the world has changed it's just the like your immediate actions don't change imminently but they change drastically over time so I guess that's kind of the resolution of those two things that you you're kind of like in a, well I guess it's almost like if some of you are in a war and someone just got blown up next to you, and you're all trying to check and escape like this horrible, or want on area or something. Well you'd still most likely or human your survival instinct would kick in and you'd still keep just trudging along in a certain direction. But at the same time, right. The fight state just me and. But, though, again, I think just link the one point which I would you. I mean not that I mean I said I have those again there's a lot of verbal diaries is not I'm not saying that you should have addressed it. This is all about verbal diarrhea I should probably rename it verbal diarrhea, subscribe. You didn't address was. So, on the one hand we have the paradigm crumbling and then what I'm sure that would happen. On the other hand we have like, whatever was shown that all the conspiracy theorists quote unquote but actually right more more right than the more right than the center that there actually was a body with that level of power and that much for say, and sophistication close to a century perhaps more that I've been able to willfully promote and utilize a fraudulent field, basically, if I am right, and I just take my house on it at this point. And I'm leaving right on this one particular point. So that's how seriously psychologically affect has that impact on me, but like, so just that in just that that in the little time we have that just to be good touch on that. Well I that happens all the time. If you read. Maybe I sound like an old history buff. If you read history, history is in many ways, a record of exactly what you've been talking about, because our salience hierarchies in terms of our interest in the past revolve around exactly the moments you're describing. Almost every, almost every regime change is at least those at, let me say it let me say it this way, almost every regime change that isn't just done at the end of a gun, which is how most of them are done throughout history is because everyone starts seeing the world through different eyes. And so the, the conquest of Christianity over paganism in the Roman Empire. Now, these things happen slowly often. I mean they might take decades or centuries, but they happen all the time, because as you basically noted the worlds we inhabit are in fact constructed, and they're constructed, they're constructed on culture they're constructed on symbolism they're constructed on social status. And so, it's an astounding thing to read in the revelation, the book of revelation the last book in the Bible, to have john right to the churches and Asia Minor. Well, you know right now you're kind of persecuted and small and, and everyone around you just imagined you to be weird and crazy, but you're going to inherit the world. Now a lot of groups think that, but what's crazy is that that's right there in the Bible, and then it happens that that the book of revelation is followed by Constantine and it's thought of followed by Theodosius and it's followed by, you know, the Roman Catholic Church and Western history and the rise of these European powers that colonize the world. The book of revelation comes to be. And when, you know, whether you believe it's john the disciple of Jesus or another one of the johns that wrote the book of revelation or someone in that community, however you want to construct it. They were right. They said, y'all little people who are believing in Jesus and again have this vision of him coming down to the world and you're going to inherit the earth, and they do the meek inherit the earth, right there. And so this idea of this, a conspiracy theory and in some ways you can almost any, almost, almost any theory sufficiently large for us to inhabit can be construed as a conspiracy theory. The idea of, of, of the devil, you know, being the prince of this age is a conspiracy theory of sorts, the idea that Jesus the resurrected, the crucified and rendered resurrected King, who manages the global path of history and the Spartan the parking space of the evangelical soccer mom really needs to find right now is a conspiracy theory. It's almost any idea worth worth worth living inside of can be construed as a conspiracy theory. And so, it's delightful. So here's, here's like, maybe maybe like just the last last. Obviously it's the last last question I last is like, put yourself like in my shoes. Somebody who somebody who's now living in a world where he believes truly convicted that like biology is fraudulent completely made up literally made up. And now, everything that was that just reshaped everything that's happening the world, this is no longer down to an efficiency and competence bureaucracy, and all the all the usual suspects in terms of like all the, you know, the governmental mess ups and malfeasance towards all the it's no it's no longer pinnable on those those culprits but it's no something completely other and I'm in this position but I have this knowledge. Maybe some may say a delusion, I say knowledge, but like, how would me in this position, go about convincing, perhaps people like yourself, very intelligent people hyper intellectual one might say, but who tend to hedge on the side of. Let me wait it out and see, and not act in urgent. Because there is a time for urgency you would agree like there's a time for everything under the sun. Oh, we get a clear the asked us about it. So when I would such a person, you know, try and bridge that gap because here's another thing I see there are people who uncovered some of these truths like with regards to biology and just allopathic medicine in general, and the government, the government, the government, the government, the government, the government, the government, the government, the government, the government, the government, the government, the government, the government, the government, the government, the government, the government, the government, the government, the government, the government, the government, the government, the government, the government, the government, the government, the government, the government, the government, the government, the government, the government, the government, the government, the government, the government, the government, the government, the government, the government, the government, the government, the government, the government, the government, the government, the government, the government, the government, the government, the government, the government, the government, the government, the government, the government, the government, the government, the government, the government, the government, the government, the government, the government, the government, the government, the government, the government, the government, the government, the government, the government, the government, the government these are very simple sides. The Ranchetral is the one, where there is a split mind kind of situation where you have one side which is the intuitive, imaginative, and the other side which is the rational hang back, maybe not the description of that, but it is like I am almost living in a world, where I see those people, and they have latched onto my my it is like I saw those people latched onto my firm beliefs rather. lack some of the wisdom in a gentle sense and historical knowledge that people like yourself and others in the more, you know, like academic ponderous communities, but also hesitant community have. So I'm seeing humanity now split into a bicameral kind of bifurcation and me in the middle, like a very horrible moldy bandaid just kind of like trying to like really badly doing his job trying to like bridge these worlds. And I don't know, if you put yourself in my shoes, how do you think I should proceed like to try it like, because I literally believe that in the middle of a massive crisis of like epistemology, life, death, people poisoning that children literally like, imagine if you could just, how would I proceed? How would you, how would you? You have to live as if you really believe what you really believe. And that's remarkably difficult. So one way would be to go full Alex Jones. And the only problem with Alex Jones is not necessarily that he's wrong about things, which he's a human being. So of course he is. But the only problem with Alex Jones is he has done this in such a way that I don't think he will actually achieve his outcomes. If his outcome is something like you're describing, if his outcome is to, you know, make a life off of social media, well then mission accomplished. He's managed to now Jesus Christ, let's say go full Jesus Christ. Well, what does that mean? Well, Jesus Christ was far sneakier lived at a very different time when being an outlier would in fact get you killed and went right to the kinds of issues that in fact did get him killed. And the resurrection of Jesus Christ basically is, is a, is his vindication in a sense of the creator God who owns the game and has the keys to the entire reality that we live within. So you have to live out and figure out how to live out what this paradigm shift means and all of its implications in your life with ruthless determination and discipline. And even then nobody may follow you. But if we believe and this sort of undergirds Western civilization, that truth finally wins out, you may be vindicated decades after your death, but the call would be, and this is, this is where you get into, well, do I really want to bank my life on this paradigm that I believe is true? Or do I want to be a sellout like VanderKlay and kind of look around and say, I don't know, I'm going to, I'm going to keep my family together and not risk my retirement and not endanger my YouTube channel because it's bringing me all that mad AdSense money, which is hysterical. You know, it's, you have to live out your belief. That's finally the test of the gray matter and the theoretical conclusions that we are offering with our flapping lips. So that's what you have to do. But now you have to figure out how to do it in a way that others will see and recognize and know now it costs Jesus Christ his life. It costs Alex Jones, some of his, you know, social media accounts. You have to live out the truth as you see it. It's the only way. And that's what life is for. Now, and finally, I'm at this is, I get the last thing I'm going to say is more of a favor. I never ask people for favors, but the favor I would like to ask you, and does it just hit me like last two minutes of you speaking? In the next, let's say 12 months, one year, would you be willing to have a conversation with somebody who's far more prominent than me who has, who can speak much better to these beliefs, like someone who's pretty, pretty popular? Like if I can ever manage to, would you, would you be, obviously this is off camera. Yeah, I'd be happy to. I talked to, I have a, I have a Calendly app that lets me talk to randos from the internet. You know, a church asked, would you be willing to have a conversation about our senior pastor positions? Like I have conversations with homeless people about the stuff they have in their dreams. Sure. I'll have a conversation. I'd love to. And especially if it comes through you, because I like you and trust you. And it's anyone that you send to me. I'll of course give a listen to. Okay. Thank you. Thank you so much. Great to see you. Now you're going to let me post this because this was an awesome conversation. I have no problem. I just prefaced it saying that it's just so my intention, like it's not me trying to like use you as I genuinely want to like talk to you and hear your thoughts on that. Well, I'll risk a YouTube strike or a little COVID-19 thing underneath that the YouTube algorithm listens and says, Oh, COVID-19, we have to make sure they're saying the right thing. So I love this conversation and I love your thinking. And it's, it's going to stir in my head for a while because I think it's, I think it's really helpful. So thank you. Thank you for your time. All right. Take care. We'll talk to you later. Bye bye.