https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=8ub_CNvjb0w

 Hi, this is Paul. Yesterday I treated the first 24 minutes of Jordan Peterson God in Christianity with Word on Fire, Jordan Peterson podcast, season four, episode 69, and I talked about Concordism, Jordan Peterson's psychological Concordism, and why that produced credibility in terms of the Bible. The conversation goes on from there, and it gets into questions about reality. And let's just dive in. He first, well, let's just go with it. And then there's another problem that the atheists have never come to terms with, I believe, and you guys tell me what you think of this, is that if what is rendered, if what is properly rendered unto God is rendered unto Caesar, then Caesar becomes inflated to God. And when that happens, all hell breaks loose. That's the genesis of totalitarianism. That's subservience to an idol. And so, and this is a case I think the church needs to make, particularly the Catholic Church, in the most strenuous of ways, is that if we don't segregate off the religious instinct and give it its proper attention and do, which I suppose you do in part with ritual and church attendance and so forth, then every single thing we do starts to become inappropriately contaminated with religious longing. Now, I made this comment yesterday in the video, but it bears repeating that he just made the argument that I think he's making in terms of the domain of the society. If a society doesn't give the religious impulse its due, politics comes in or other things comes in, and right now, including especially politics, comes in to fill the void. In other words, if you don't have something in the religious space, politics will become your religion. And once you make your politics existential and ultimate, you're going to slide into tyranny. I think that's an extremely fair point. But if I were, well, he's wanting to, to make this point about Catholicism is deeply ironic, given the history of the Roman Catholic Church in medieval Europe and the rise of Protestantism and that entire history, because all of that history was very much about the role of the state and the church. And I'm not trying to pick a fight between Protestants and Catholics here, because Protestants, in many ways, sort of stepped in and played like the Catholics did before. Key example of this is Martin Luther, where he, you know, he backs the nobility in terms of the peasant revolt. So there's a ton of history around these issues that he's not talking about. So, okay, so then there's the, there's the, there's the big piece. Let's talk about the small piece. Jordan Peterson doesn't go to church. Jordan Peterson is not practicing this point in his life. Now, again, I mean, I made hundreds of videos about this man. You know, I have a deep appreciation for Jordan, all of that. But in all fairness, the point he makes right here, the guy who loves to, you know, talk about responsibility and following through, he just made the point. Now, are you talking communally? Are you talking individually? Because the way his individual works, his individualism works, if he's not dealing with this as an individual, well, it's supposed to scale out to community. So Jordan, if you really believe the point you're making, go to church. That is the application of the point. You can make the point, and I think it's a fair point. And again, I mentioned earlier that, let's pull this up. Oh, nice. I didn't reveal any passwords or anything in there. James Lindsay's podcast. James Lindsay, Kale, James Lindsay released this podcast. Kale Zeldin immediately jumped on it and said to me, you better to listen to this one, the meaning and necessity of theology. And yeah, I'm pretty rambly, but he's pretty rambly too. It's about an hour and a half of going on about the need that a society has for theology. Basically, he's making the same point that Peterson is making. But James is sort of back along with Auguste Comte in the 19th century, asserting that, well, maybe we can develop a rational religion and have pageantry and ritual and all of these things. And it's like, yeah, that has been tried so many times and it never works. Why doesn't it ever work? Because you can't believe in it if you know, if you imagine that at this deep religious level, your belief is merely instrumental. You have to really believe. And it's sort of right here that Peterson's act as if reaches its limit. And this is displayed in Jordan's life. You know, again, I'm a fan. I'm not trying to take a cheap shot. I'm not trying to do anything. I'm just saying if you really want to come to terms with this point, the application is go to church. And okay, so maybe you got your doubts. Maybe you don't quite believe it. Maybe you got all that stuff. Well, I'm going to tell you as a pastor, churches are filled with people who have all of their doubts and all of their misgivings and their wonderings, yada, yada, yada, yada, yada. But you're not going to believe staying home. You have to actually, um, in the old world, you know, in the old lie, you have to sort of fake it till you make it. You have to act it out until you actually start believing in it. Belief follows behavior very often. So, you know, hey, I'm, you know, I'm sorry, I'm just telling you if you're going to make this point, live the point. And that's why you see the rise of extremely powerful political ideologies and the division of people, you know, for trivial reasons into moral camps. It's that religious instinct isn't hasn't got a grounding in it. It's searching for something to attach itself to. And it, it picks up. And when you listen to talk to Peugeot, all of this searching and all of this disease and all of this, you know, he's not comfortable and settled. It's he's making his own point. And he's right. Just, you know, and I, as a therapist, I'm sure he sat across his office from people who would talk and talk and talk and talk and talk. And I'm sure Peterson, more than anyone would want to say, just do it already, because the answer is not more thinking. The answer in this case is some doing. You know, basically to the point of the story of Naaman, and I think it's second Kings five ish somewhere around there, where Naaman, the Syrian general, who's been, you know, beating up on the northern kingdom of Israel, and of course, has a Jewish slave girl, because when you're at that place in the world, when you're beating up on a nation, you take plenty of slaves and you keep some for yourself. And of course, you know, you keep, you keep girls, but if you're a guy and the guy has leprosy and, hey, I hear there's a, I hear there's a prophet in Israel who's got real power. Okay, go down. So he goes down. And, you know, he doesn't get, he doesn't get received with the kind of status he imagines he has and should be received by, because Elisha's like, yeah, you're a general, so what. And, you know, sends out Gehazi and says, yeah, go dunk yourself in the Jordan three times and the leprosy will go away. And the guy's all offended and his slaves, probably again, slaves that were taken from Israel come to him and say, you know, if he asked for like a million dollars, if he, if he made some huge crazy requests, you would do it. But what he's actually shown is your pride. So what do you have to lose? So of course he goes down to the river, dunks himself three times, leprosy is gone. And then you have the whole story of Gehazi taking the money, yada, yada, yada. But no, really, how hard is it to go to church for one hour on Sunday morning and pick any church you want? How hard is it? You know, what's amazing is, you know, one person used to always say devil works really hard on Sunday morning. Yeah. How hard is it? I mean, if, if, if someone asked to do some, if someone asked to do some, some big crazy thing, oh, in order to solve this problem, you must you must march to the, you must walk to the Himalayas and, and ascend a castle, you know, 15,000 feet in the mountains on your knees fasting. You know, it's almost a Monty Python skit. Now, am I saying that just going to church is going to begin to resolve this? No, but it's a small ask. You know, really it's an hour. It's just an hour. Well, then I'd have to, there'd be songs and there'd be a preacher and there'd be a crappy sermon and there'd be meddling people. And if you're high status like Jordan Peterson, people would be taking out their cell phones and, you know, go, go to a church with five, go to a church with 20 old people where no one will know who you are. I don't know. I'm just getting flippant, but you know, I mean, the point he's making here is just like, well, if you don't, if you don't fill in this instinct, this religious instinct with something, what something well-defined and substantial, okay, go to a Catholic church and swear everybody to silence. I don't care, but then your politics becomes your religion. Having trouble always wandering into culture war fights that get you into trouble. You, that's how we know you. Up second rate substitutes. You know, they, people like Dawkins, they seem to think that if we all just abandoned our religious superstitions, we'd all become, you know, rationalists like, well, like, like Isaac Newton, who was an alchemist and not a rationalist, by the way, that great genius. And so one of the things I think that the Catholic church in particular isn't doing a very good job of is warning people how dangerous it is to lose the proper theater of expression for our religious instincts. They don't go away. They just get perverted and, and they show up all sorts of places they shouldn't. That's again, hold up a mirror here, buddy. They don't go away. They just get perverted and show up all kinds of it. You're, you're, you're speaking the truth. Apply it to your life. That's terrible. It's not good. So yeah, there's a status differential here. I would have loved it if one of them said, so what you're, what you're telling me is that the application to a degree of spiritual malaise and dissatisfaction would really be to pursue some kind of historically credible religious response in order to fill that need and that gap in your life. Now, neither the guy's going to say that. They're just going to, they're just going to make something else up. Yeah, that, that theme is one that Augustine talks about in the city of God. He talks about, oh, we're going to go up into thinky talky land, two loves. And he talks about the love of God and it creates a certain city, a certain organization. And if you don't love God, if God is not your ultimate love, well, you're going to love something. So it could be power. It could be pleasure. It could be money. It could be status, but Augustine thought that if you love say power, and again, everything he's saying, he's right. I agree with it. I probably said it. And you know, the truth is for most of us who have read all these books and done all these things, put a mic in front of us, ask us a question and the lips will move and something will come out the most. Well, what that's going to do is it's going to shape you and ultimately distort not only you, but also your relationships in your society. So the Christian view is that ultimately God is perfect truth, love and beauty. And so not only is it the case that worshiping anything other than that is going to fail to give God what's due to God. And that's what religion in a sense is about. It's a binding of oneself to God, giving to God what's due, but also it ends up. Now, I wanted to make this point in the live stream the other day. I wonder if I can find it. Let's skip searching for it. I'll just repeat. I think part of what they're arguing here is the idea that if you make any secondary thing ultimate in your life, there's going to be trouble. That's basically what Peterson has said. The difficulty that we have and now hierarchies develop, the difficulty we have is that there are so many things and there's so many important things. And a lot of what we do is sort of task switch. Well, right now for Jordan Peterson, the absence of a well vetted religious core will lead to making politics and other legitimately important things into the center of your life. And this theologian, I haven't learned their names. They're down in the comments, is exactly right. And it's very appropriate to bring in Augustine here because Augustine made a lot of points about this and Augustine's points have been well known and reiterated. Part of where I think the God number one, God number two stuff comes in is in a sense, God is a variable that you plug into the equation that can serve, that can actually let you properly task switch and create hierarchies because God is both ultimate and all. God is both ultimate and all. What do I mean by that? So Tim Keller was on to this stuff for a while in the, he had a whole bunch of sermons about false gods and things like that. He even wrote a book about it and a lot of high status pastors write books when they've preached a whole series of sermons because it's really easy to put into a book. And if you've got high enough status, people will buy your book, yada, yada, yada. And the point is that if you, again, if you make your family, which is a good thing and a wonderful thing, if you make your family the ultimate thing, you will in fact destroy your family. Or about your marriage, your marriage is a good thing. It's a wonderful thing. It should be a high priority thing. But if you make your marriage the ultimate thing in your life, in other words, if you turn it into an idol, you will destroy your marriage because your family or your marriage or your career or any of these other good things are not capable of bearing the weight as it were for what you are putting on them. Uh, what's his name? Wrote, um, it's a guy that Peterson mentions often. He liked his book. He's too Freudian, but he basically made the same point about romantic love. And I've got it on my blog somewhere that if you make, if you make romance, part of what happened when God left the picture is that very quickly, you see it all the time in movies, very quickly, people put romantic love as sort of the highest ideal, but it can't bear the weight because you're the object of your romantic attention will fail you. They are insufficient to be your God. And, and part of how and why this dynamic reality that everybody is pointing to about you needing a God is because on one thing, on one hand, everything that you try to use for your God will fail you and be insufficient because you've basically turned it into an idol. And the point is it can't, it's your life is, is all of these things are too shallow a pool to actually facilitate what you need them to do in your life. And so you not only, not only does your attempt at using romantic love to fulfill you fail, but you will actually also destroy it. And Augustine's point is that if you actually keep these things in proper order and the only way to keep them in proper order is in fact to have something and Peterson makes this point often. And it's one of the points that he made early on that really attracted me to him with respect to politics. If in fact, your highest ideal is above the age of decay is above the human level. Then now you can serve the king, you can submit to the king, but the king is always only a king and the king himself must be subject to that which is above the king, which is God. Same for, I mean, it's, there's sort of a similar dynamic in terms of the law in a democracy that no one is, no one is above the law. That's what we used to say. And it's a similar dynamic. So on one hand, you've got the, you've got the reality that everything that you meet down here is insufficient to give you the life that you need. So that's one of the reasons that this is important. The second reason that this is important is that you actually do have to manage family and marriage and career and your health and your political involvement and all of these things. And so ideally that variable that is above them all should in this, to a certain degree also include all of them. And that's where God number one comes in. Holy, holy, holy, God number two, the whole earth is full of his glory. God number one, he shines through all that's fair. He shows up in 10,000 places. All of this God stuff, especially God number one, includes all of those things. And so actually, again, if you get rid of God, you're going to have to invent him again because you're just going to wind up needing him just to have the world work the way, just have the world work better. And so Jordan Peterson is coming at it from a very pragmatic point of view. And so he's got, you know, he's got a point here and he just needs to live it. And these guys are agreeing. Thinking the person ultimately unhappy. So you can't think about this even from a psychological perspective that people like Martin Seligman would say things like love is at the core of human flourishing. And if we don't have that, if I love money or power more than I love God and more than I love my friends and more than I love my family, well, that's going to deprive me of the source of my flourishing. I'm going to end up harming myself and characteristically also harming others when I love power or money or whatever, too much. And so yeah, for Guston, at least this is a perennial temptation to replace God with something else. That's perhaps the warning at the end of Genesis with the story of Noah and also the story of the tower of Babel, you know, because the tower of Babel is that he doesn't mean at the end of Genesis because Noah is chapter six through nine and the tower of Babel is chapter 11. It's basically at the end of the pre patriarchal Genesis. People get together and they try to build an edifice that's absolute in some sense, right? It's a building that's under the control. It's an edifice that's of human manufacture and it becomes larger and larger and larger and then it devolves into a kind of chaos. And so with the flood story with Noah and the flood, that's one form of danger that emerges as a consequence of deviation from the proper path, let's say orientation towards whatever the highest good is. And the tower of Babel is the secondary one that has more to do with the... It's not really a good application of the flood story. Danger of egotistical human construction and it is something like the worship of these idols. So imagine we can think about this technically and psychologically in some sense is that in order to act you have to presume that that to which you're moving is more important than where you are, right? So you make a value judgment. And that's critical in terms of this political religious dynamic. Moving in this direction is appropriate and then you have to move in a lot of directions over the course of your life. And that's where if in fact God who in a certain way is in him we live and move and have our being, God number one, the the arenic God. You know maybe you search for friendship and you search for love and you search for money and you search for power and so forth. And if there's nothing integrating all that then you're pulled in all sorts of directions, right? It's like devils pulling you apart because you don't know what's more important than what. And that's very very confusing and off-putting. And if the wrong... And there are times when you have to focus on one at the expense of the other. I mean we're limited creatures and so we're always having to do these kinds of exchanges. And you sort of need something on top that will help organize them and also something on top that will afford you the belief that even though you're limited that you know someone bigger has your back. If the wrong thing takes control then you get demented and bent. And so what you see in Christianity is this struggle over thousands of years to specify the thing that should be at the top of the hierarchy. And one of the things that really opened my eyes to the depth of these works was this strange proclamation that the word that existed at the beginning of the time of time that brought creation into being was the same as Christ. Which is an unbelievably bizarre proposition. I mean I'm not speaking about precisely religiously. I'm thinking about it more conceptually. It's like people who had that revelation or intuition are making the presupposition that there's something about the emergence of reality into conscious being. Because reality without consciousness doesn't really seem to exist, right? So when we talk about reality we always presuppose a conscious viewer. And that the conscious viewer that makes order out of chaos is most appropriately the perfect being that's manifested in the figure of Christ. And so that we participate in that process in some sense to the degree that we're attempting to embody that mode of being. And in fact you are pursuing and giving attention, joint attention, with others to that mode of being in a way that is, and I've used a lot of different ways of explaining this, training the elephant to use Jonathan Heights, allowing it to imprint on you. Because again our intake valve through our consciousness is pretty small. The truth is we, lots more things imprint on us. You see this with children who are, you know, very young children who are not consciously taking in much. But in fact masses, massive numbers of things are being imprinted on their internal map. Completely apart from any conscious sifting or attempting to appropriate it. Which again is okay. You, if you're, if you're actually going to have, be a person who, be a person who, who fleshes this out. Gosh I did a, I had a conversation with someone last week. You know I, again, and he's probably gonna listen to this and he knows what I'm saying. It was a great conversation and he's reluctant to share it for very legitimate reasons. And I've actually started playing around with some editing software this week to say okay what if I, what if I can blur out his face and cut out all the personal references and you know because it's a really good conversation. And, but at the same time he's absolutely, it's, he's absolutely right to say I don't, this, this, putting this conversation on the internet could cause me problems. Fair enough. You know, absolutely. Yeah one of the things that he says to me, and this is someone who was raised, this is someone who was raised Catholic and then gave it up like many people when he went to college and, and now is later in life and, you know, after a divorce and trying to manage kids and trying to do all these things, he just says to me in all sincerity, I look at the people who have religion in their life and they have something about them, a stability, a solidity, a, a, a heft that that, that I deeply want, that I'm deeply attracted to. The only way you're going to get it is to get inside of it. Now we've talked a fair amount about insider and outsider knowing. You, you really only know a marriage from an inside. There's knowledge you can have outside the marriage that in some ways is clearer and perhaps more objective if we're going to use that word, but it's again, it's the, it's the difference in Spanish between saber and conocer. You might, you might know lots of things about the marriage in a very propositional way that, that perhaps the people inside the marriage don't know very well, but you don't know what it's like to be on the inside and that, that, that knowledge is, is the other three P's from John Verbeckis. It's perspectival, it's participatory, it's procedural. That's all from the inside. And when you're inside, even if you're, even if you're full of doubts and I just had an idea for what I could name this video. I think I'm going to stop this video at this point actually, because the whole conversation about time and consciousness is really quite fascinating. But this point right here, which I didn't intend, I was basically mainly thinking, okay, I won't, I won't skip this point. I'll go back to the time and consciousness, but it wasn't until I heard Jordan talking. It's like, just go to church already for Pete's sake, you know, rambling on and on and on and on and on about the need for a religious core and, and you know, politics takes way too big a point. You're going to have to get on the inside. I mean, your friend Peugeot has been saying it and yeah, probably if, if Peterson and I were having a conversation, I'd be a lot nicer. And, and maybe that's, that's maybe that's my own cowardice. Yeah, I've read what chapter was it in 12 rules for life. I thought it was the best chapter of the book. That so often our, our kindness is, is really cowardice. He's right. But you know, Jonathan said it very nicely and as a friend and kindly, but Jordan isn't going to watch this video, but for Pete's sake, you know, on and on and on and on and on, you talk about this thing. If I were your therapist, you know, walk through the door already and don't tell anybody about it. You don't have to make a big deal about it because again, you know, when you pray, go into your closet and what you do in secret, your heavenly father knows. So maybe he is already going and maybe I'm wasting my time because he's not going to watch this video anyway, but I know there's a lot of you out there that are sort of right there in this, in this, in this nether place. And it's like, it's an hour a week. Is that really going to hurt you? I mean, how much, how many hours a week do you waste already on pointless stuff? And just, just take a, you know, make a little game out of it. You know, go to one church one week and check it out. Put, put 10 churches on your list. Find five friends who are already go to church and boy, you'll give them all a Christmas present. Say, I want to go to church with you just one week. That's all. And I'll take it from there. Would, can I go with you? Your friends would be like, yes, I'd love that. I'll gain status in my church because I brought a friend to church and maybe the church will be horrible and the minister will be an idiot and the sermon will be terrible. And the music will make you want to pull your ears off your head, but it's an hour church service. It'll be a 20 to 30 minute sermon. The music will be 15 minutes though. You know, people will close their eyes and, and, and talk to the guy upstairs, yada, yada, yada, yada. It won't kill you. So yeah, this is a pretty ranty video, but if you really believe that for the sake of the culture, we need a religious core and for the sake of the culture, individuals need to have a religious practice in their life, then start with you.