https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=YC4zUz6OUBI

 Hi, this is Paul. I have a couple of special guests. Clay Liebolt is a retired minister in the Christian Reformed Church. He served in Lansing, Michigan for a number of years. He's been on the channel before and he and John and I have had a previous conversation. John Van Donk is of course less of a stranger to many of you. He runs the ElseNet. What does that stand for? Estuary Leaders Support Network. Okay, so John has been a huge part of estuary and getting that up and going and training leaders for it and really spearheading a lot of that. In the Christian Reformed Church, as many of you have been listening to me for a while, is obviously having a pretty significant conflict with respect to human sexuality and that touches on in terms of how the Christian Reformed Church proceeds with that conflict. A lot of the issues, as is common in Protestant denominations, tend to focus around how does the Bible work in our community? What is the Bible? How does it work? How should we use it? And actually sort of upping the resolution on that. In our previous conversation with the three of us, we talked about that, but John's been, John and Clay are in different discussion groups that meet more regularly. And so John really thought bringing some of that conversation up into a little bit more visibility might be helpful for the Christian Reformed Church that all three of us love and maybe help the entire conversation in the community continue to process its way through these conflicts wherever these conflicts take us. So if you need a little bit more introduction, well, Clay, why don't you introduce yourself a little bit more and then we'll have John sort of set the table. Yeah, so I'm Clay Leibold. I was, as Paul said, pastor of a Christian Reformed Church in East Lansing, Michigan for 31 years. Retired, moved to the Pacific Northwest where I grew up. And since that time, I've done a number of interims, including an interim as a high school principal for a year for which I was singularly unqualified. And I have recently been blogging a lot. So I blog under the parapeteticpastor.com, parapeteticpastor.com. You can spell parapetetic. You can probably find it. And when I started the blog by writing a series of blog posts about this long 175 page report to the Senate of the Christian Reformed Church, the General Assembly on human sexuality. And I responded to it not so much in terms of its findings as the way it uses the Bible. That was my principal concern. I'm actually doing a class on that for the Calvin Academy of Lifelong Learning starting in mid-March. So that's sort of who I am. Okay. Thanks, Clay. That's very helpful. All right, John. So why have you drawn this August panel? And what do you want, intend for us to talk about? Well, for starters, I should also like to mention that Paul, I mean, that Clay in his retirement also was the interim pastor at my church here in Chino and was much loved and well received. And that's where actually some of these conversations that we are still doing right now started. And so, yeah, Clay has been a long time friend. I actually go back all the way back to Lansing when I was a pastor in Lansing and he was in East Lansing. We met occasionally. So that was another. So anyway, yeah. So I had the weird experience last night of lying awake over this thing. And this is what I came up with because I wasn't sure that to focus on the problem that the Christian Reformed Church faces is all that helpful because it's too specific. And so that's why I kept getting the tune of how do you solve a problem like Maria from The Sound of Music? Because as the song says, Maria doesn't fit in well with the Abbey. Maria doesn't make the Abbey look good is what the song says. So anyway, that kind of kept playing in my head as a kind of a framework for our conversation. And the way I originally intended to start this was to make reference back to Jordan Peterson, Paul's hero, you might say, and the one who was partially responsible for getting this whole show on the road. Well, you can't say that you would be as famous now if it wasn't for Jordan Peterson. This is true. And we've got him right here. Yeah, there you go. And the famous quote, which has gotten a lot of attention from a lot of different people for a lot of different reasons to which we ignore the Bible at our peril. And I contrast that coming from a person who is not even a self-professed Christian all the way on the other side, where people in the Christian Reformed Church are saying that the problem of LGBTQ cannot be resolved. The problem in the church with LGBTQ cannot be resolved with the Bible alone, which raises questions about the sufficiency of Scripture and the ultimate authority of the Bible and who decides all these things. And that whole context for me was kind of the created a number of tension points, which I thought that the two of you especially would be able to address very productively. So I was going to basically throw it back to you, Paul, and say, okay, tell us what Jordan Peterson means by we ignore the Bible at our peril. Well, you want to create another context? Sure. Well, he recently said on the Joe Rogan podcast, which caused a lot of attention too, because the Rogan crew, they're sort of in the walled garden of Spotify right now, but they throw these little breadcrumbs out onto YouTube where YouTubers can sort of pick at things. And he recently said that the Bible is something to the effect of, the Bible is the foundational text of Western civilization. And people heard that and responded. And of course, that triggered a whole bunch of the new atheists and know that we belong and we're followers of the enlightenment, not the Bible as if the enlightenment also isn't somehow deeply embedded within Christendom and the whole tradition, the classical world. No, we have Plato and Aristotle as our father, not Jesus. So, but I think Peterson is right. Now, part of the difficulty when you make a statement like that is the difficulty, actually, I'm thinking about making a video today if I can find the time, it's difficult to say anything about anything this large in many respects, because it's quite obvious that the Bible is not, this is where we get into this word sufficiency. The Bible is not sufficient to understand whatever it is we mean by Western civilization. You have to think about Plato, you have to think about Socrates, you have to think about Aristotle, you have to include the Egyptians. But certainly, especially for those of us who are our cultural world very much derives from Western Europe and the long philosophical, religious, cultural conversations in that world, you really have difficulty understanding any of that without the Bible, a point that in fact, Richard Dawkins has made quite a number of times, someone who was very much a critic of the Bible. Sort of coming back to the Christian Reformed Church, you threw out these two words sufficiency, which sort of begs sufficient unto what, or an authority. The word, the authority of the Bible has been something that obviously has been a big point of contention, especially during the fundamentalist modernist feuds of the late 19th, early 20th century, of which the Christian Reformed Church certainly is an heir, given, you know, there have been some Christian Reformed players who participated in the split of old Princeton into Westminster. And the Christian Reformed Church has sort of always been a step out of that, but somewhat participating in it. And so, you know, on this, Clay and I are, I think Clay and I are in different places with respect to some things, and I think that's where we'll go to. But we're also the same, because when someone throws out sufficiency of scripture and authority of scripture, I usually want to say, okay, well, let's talk about what we mean by these, because where Clay and I are probably both more similar is that, well, the Bible, here we have these, here we have these rules in the Bible, and we find this behavior outside the rules. Therefore, anyone who wants to have a conversation about these dynamics and culture is not submitting to the authority of scripture. I don't think it works quite that simply. It can in some cases, but so that's to sort of set the table to say, okay, I'm very happy to have a conversation about sufficiency and authority. But again, in thinking about our audience, I know that a fair amount of my audience are individuals who have left Protestantism for orthodoxy and Catholicism, for whom these questions about scripture are also interesting and different. And this is where I very much see the crisis in the Christian informed church surrounding the human sexuality report as a crisis of Protestantism, because part of Protestantism framed sufficiency and authority, and one sola that gets a lot of grief in my little corner of the internet is sola scriptura. But of course, the orthodox and the Catholics want to say, no, we're going to look at not necessarily the authority of scripture, but the authority of the church. And when they talk about church, they also mean something slightly different from how Protestants sort of configure that whole thing. So there's a little bit of table setting of my own. We'll see what Clay would like to do with this. So you raised a whole lot of things that I'm of course ready to bite at. Thank you. And so, and I fully agree with you that the issue is, in some ways, the issue is Protestantism itself. Is it a failed experiment is really the way to think about it. And there are some indications that perhaps it is that it's sort of running out its string now. And that's something well, it'll have to change in some pretty significant ways. But before we get to that, John mentioned in an email, something about the Tom Holland book, this thing, this huge book called Dominion. It has St. John of the Cross, the dolly painting on the front, which is pretty dramatic. But you sort of indicated that maybe that's what Peterson also means in some sense. And what you criticized about Peterson is also true for Holland. So let me just set it up a little bit. So Holland's idea, this is called Dominion, this book, and how the Christian Revolution remade the world. And it's based on a thesis by Nietzsche. And what Nietzsche says is that even people who think they're a critics of Christianity, say Richard Dawkins, the New Avius, whatever, are in fact channeling Christianity. And they're doing it without God or doing it without some pieces of Christianity. But nevertheless, their ethic, essentially, that's what Holland's talking about, their fundamental ethic, which is to do justice to the poor, that we're all in this together, that kind of thing, that that fundamental ethic is deeply Christian and that it is not the ethic of the Greeks and Romans, and that many people who claim that they are followers of those ancient societies, in fact, are more Christian than Greek or more Christian than Roman or whatever. And this book can be criticized for exactly the reason you said, which is that it doesn't tease apart the strands of our culture. If everything in Western culture is Christian, then nothing is Christian. I mean, that's essentially. But the thesis itself is, I mean, the Nietzsche thesis is kind of interesting, that Christianity is far more pervasive than people think. But you have to distinguish between that faith, which I want to get to, by the way, between the faith itself and the Bible. They're not the same thing. So if you want to talk about the Peterson comment, we ignore the Bible at our peril, you have to ask a little bit of who the we is there, but you're really not into the Holland thesis, because the Holland thesis isn't so much about the Bible. The Bible appears many times in this book, but it's about the faith. It's about Jesus on the cross. That's really what it's about. And so anyway, by the way, just on that, I'm a little aside, but when I was thinking about that, I thought about teasing apart the strands in our culture. And I thought about that virtue tradition, the seven virtues. The first four are Greek, justice, prudence, wisdom, and courage. And then on top of that, the church added in medieval times, but added the faith, hope, and love. And those sit very uneasily together. They are just such different, I was going to say animals, but I'm not sure virtue can be an animal, but such different things. And so courage, the word for courage in Greek is under Sunni, which is manliness. So that was a Greek virtue, be manly, right? It's mostly for males. And how does that fit with the New Testament tradition of virtues, which include meekness? If you read through an examination of how religion affects society, like this Holland book, which is really what it is. So how religion is insinuated into society. He notes that there's an uneasiness, a back and forth. We're experiencing that now in Christianity. There are people who see Christianity very much as a kind of power thing. And there are people who see it the opposite of that. And to some extent, those go back to different traditions in our DNA, in our cultural DNA. But the question which John raised is why the Bible? And I've been puzzling about that one. And I've been puzzling about that in terms of two potential audiences. One is the people who actually read the Bible and think they know what it says, and for whom I would like to give them another way to read it. And you talked a little bit about that, Paul. The second audience is those people who don't read it at all, and for whom it would be a real stretch to read it. Who are very much part of contemporary culture in the US, Canada, whatever. And so of that second group, how do we say that the Bible is important to people who don't even know the first thing about it? Who've never read it, who only know a few stories because those stories may have heard them once or twice or something. And we might then ask the question, John, where you put it back. Okay, what peril exactly is this that ignoring the Bible puts them in the line of? Right, what's the peril? And because I think that's when it comes to a lot of these ethical questions that we're dealing with. I mean, especially something like sexual ethics. I wonder if in many ways the entire LGBTQ context isn't really in many ways simply downstream of the pill, of effective, ubiquitous contraception. Because certainly the threat of unwanted pregnancy and all that went with it was a peril that energized a traditional sexual ethic in many conservative traditional communities. Now we've got this entirely new question coming up, and I don't think that they're necessarily disconnected. But of course, what perils are we vulnerable to because we ignore the Bible? And however that book speaks to us, whatever that book means, and how that book figures into a worldview, because of course, in the Christian tradition, this Bible is connected with this Peter Enns, you know, towards a book that he wrote provoking his exit from Westminster seminary. Well, we've got Jesus is the word of God and the Bible is the word of God. And I was in a conservative Christian Reformed church that's leaving the denomination. And I heard word of God a lot in that meeting. And I'm sure Clay very much understands the kinds of meetings and has been in many of those meetings himself. So I think, John, maybe to kick it back to you, what peril do you think we are in by ignoring this book? Well, I actually really appreciate where Jordan Peterson goes when he talks about the Bible as kind of a Jungian, an expression of a Jungian consciousness of archetypes. And that, in fact, the Bible is a kind of a condensation of the wisdom of the ages, which has been articulated, because we made observations about how we relate to nature and to each other, and the various perils associated with that. For example, at one point, humans had to come to the realization that snakes are dangerous. And so that began to take on a metaphysical significance in our consciousness. And so this whole idea that the Bible is kind of an accumulation of human wisdom that has a multi 10,000, maybe even 100,000 year old, given the oral tradition prior, the stories we told around the fire, and the way we talked about life, and the way we talked about the monsters, and the way we talked about the Leviathan, and the way we talked about the outsiders, and the insiders, and the people of the tribe, and how we all relate to each other. I mean, eventually, the best stories prevailed, and the lesser stories fell by the wayside. But if the Bible is the pinnacle of the best stories that prevailed about our accumulative human wisdom about how to live together, and with our environment, then I would say that it seems almost glaringly obvious that to ignore that, to ignore that, we do at our peril. And that has nothing yet to do, initially, although we will have to talk about that, with the fact that another way of talking about the Bible is, you know, with a thundering voice from the pulpit to say, Thus says the Lord. That's a whole other kind of way to talk about the Bible. But I think what Jordan Peterson, where he's coming from, I think he is talking about it as the accumulative wisdom of the ages, which we ignore at our peril. So. I think he's, I think he, I think that's, when he says that, that's one of the things he says, but he's also got this Jungian side of him too, that is always sort of evocative in the sense that, well, there's probably more going on here. But I think you're right, John, in, for example, at the Village Church, Rod Hugin's church down in Tucson, just recently had a baptism, I played this on the video that I released today, where a young man, Ron Brown, was, it was a, he was a hardcore new atheist, that's how he identified himself. He, what the first he calls, he had never met me and had been involved in any of the work that I've been doing. But he said, the first angel that brought me to Christ, this was his baptism testimony, the first angel that brought me to Christ was Jordan Peterson. He had been, he had taken a class with Jordan Peterson, Maps of Meaning, in the University of Toronto. And what he took from that class is very much what you said, John, that a wisdom has been encoded and preserved in the Bible. And that in a sense, this is Jordan Peterson's map of meaning is very Darwinian in that these, that wisdom encoded in these stories and in this text and, and all of its various aspects, because the Bible is a library of lots of different things, it's got some law, it's got a lot of narrative, it's got a ton of poetry. And that there's wisdom in this, which somehow, usually in a rather pre-conscious way, forms and shapes us as a community. And the, there is success built in, that's what wisdom is, in a sense, you know, in the Old Testament way as well. It's, it's excellence, it's success, it's skillfulness. For survival even. Yeah, for survival, but not just for survival as individuals, but for survival as us as groups. What are the shared norms that we possess? And how, you know, so therefore, if we ignore this book, if we ignore that wisdom, which is very much a spirit of this age, where, oh, we know so much because we have science and technology and, and new experiences and pluralism and so much more information, we can throw out all of the old things and we basically see the world as it is, can make rational decisions about it, and choose what's best. And Peterson kind of comes along and says, that's the peril. I think that's what I hear him saying. There's a tendency in all theologies, and I'm going to count sort of modern secularism as one of those theologies, that in all theologies, there's a tendency to say, we can take from the Bible, whatever it is that we need, and then we can codify it. And once we've codified it, we don't really need the narrative anymore. We don't need the Bible anymore. We don't need the book. And, and so that becomes a way of, so I think that the Bible's friends do this, in fact, probably more than the Bible's enemies do, in some ways. I mean, Nietzsche probably understood the Bible better than a lot of the Bible's friends, because what we're always trying to do is to say, okay, it's these things, you know, the 10 commandments or whatever. And once we know these three, you know, we know these three or five or 10 things, we don't need the, you know, we can throw away this difficult text, and it is a difficult text, and off we go. We're beyond that now. And theology does that often by putting it into a whole system, right? And then it goes back to the Bible and looks for things that confirm what it is that the Bible says, what it is they say on the basis of what the Bible says. You know, I mean, a classic example of this, there's a long time controversy in the reform tradition between election and human choice. So, do we choose God, or does God choose us? I mean, that's essentially it. And the Bible says both things. It says both things often, frequently, all over the place. And so, if you are the person who says, well, no, we choose God, then you find all those texts that we choose God, and you read all the other ones as being somehow, you adjust them so that they fit your thesis, or you can go the other way around. We do that all the time. But what if we read the Bible? I think Peterson is actually pointing to this. What if we read the Bible as revelation, as something which contains wisdom that we do not have? And so, it draws us on. I have an old, I think I said this the last time we were talking, but I have this notion that there's the God who pushes and the God who pulls. The God who pushes is the God of creation. You need to talk about God in that way in some ways. But the Bible is more about the God who pulls, the God who summons us towards something which we do not yet fully understand. And so, the preaching of Jesus, for example, is about kingdom of God. And kingdom of God, and then Jesus is asked, what is kingdom of God? And he tells a story. And then he's asked again, what is kingdom of God? And he tells another story. And these stories draw you on, but they never quite define kingdom of God. So now you have this enormous scholarly literature about what kingdom of God is, but that's partly what Jesus was doing. He was pulling us on into something beyond what it is that we already know. Another way to think about that is to think about the Bible as endlessly subversive. The Bible is always, if you read the Bible and read it sort of as it lays on the page, tends to subvert. I remember a book years ago by Frank Kermode. Frank Kermode was a really well-known English critic. And he did this book on, I think called the Genesis of Secrecy, if I recall, and it's been 20 or 30 years since I've read this book. But he did it on the Gospel of Mark. And he says towards the end of that, that you can try to understand the Gospel of Mark, you get everything sort of nailed down. And then suddenly you come across a detail that just doesn't fit in any of you. In the crucifixion story in Mark, there's this young man who takes off his clothes and runs away. And Kermode says, what do you do with that? This young man who takes off his clothes, what is that doing in the Gospel of Mark? Why is Mark included? And what does that do? So the Bible is endlessly subversive. My favorite example of that actually comes from the Old Testament, Hebrew Bible. And it's the Joseph story. The Joseph story is, people love Joseph. I suspect that the Veggie Tales version of Joseph story is one of the most popular of all the, and well, and of course, Andrew Lloyd Webber, right? Joseph and the- Pota Minicolor. Pota Minicolor Dreamcoat. The Dreamcoat, right. Yeah, the Dreamcoat. And everybody loves Joseph, you mean, since Achiever. It's kind of a, you know, there's some indications early on in the story that he's a little obnoxious, but you know, he kind of gets over that. His brothers try to kill him or sell him into slavery, but he's the kind of guy that always rises to the top. And so he ends up running all of Egypt. And you know, he's second to the Pharaoh. He's the great power. And he both humiliates and then eventually reveals himself to his brother. People love the Joseph story. But right in the middle of it, the Bible throws a chapter, chapter 38, very little connected to the Joseph story about this woman named Tamar, who she's the daughter-in-law of Judah, another one of the patriarchs. And she gets married to his oldest son and he dies, and then she gets married to the next son and he dies. And Joseph is supposed to now marry her to the youngest son, but he doesn't want to do it because pretty sure that he'll die too. There's something that Tamar's doing that causes her husband's to die. And so she seduces her father-in-law, Judah. And he doesn't have any thing to pair with. So she acts like a prostitute. And so he gets his staff and his signet ring, you know, the stamp thing that seals the documents. And then he goes away and then he finds out she's pregnant and he goes back to her and confronts her. And she produces his signet ring and staff and says, these belong to the person who made me pregnant. And he says, you're more righteous than I am. That story connects to the story of David and then connects to the story of Jesus in the New Testament. The Messianic line doesn't run through Joseph. Joseph is just there to preserve Tamar in a certain sense. That's what it is. And Judah. Can't forget Judah. Right. And Judah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I know. But Judah's kind of a bad actor in this whole thing. But I think we keep going. I'll shut up. Yeah. No, no, no. I mean, so that's, I mean, that's so typical of the Bible, right? I mean, that's the, the, the patriarch who gives Israel its name is Jacob, you know, Jacob who comes Israel. And he is such a scamp, you know, and, and there's such humor in that whole Jacob story. It's as if the, the, the people writing this probably in Babylon are saying, yeah, this is what we come from. We come from this kind of stock, you know, we, you know, it's, it's, it's a, it's a wonderful story, but same thing. So it's, the Bible subverts, you think the story's about Joseph and then it's subverts, it's about Tamar or Joe and Judah. You get that with the, some of the other women, you know, Rahab and Ruth, Ruth's story is suddenly thrown into the, into their, all these, all these great stories. Brueggemann, Walter Brueggemann, leading Old Testament scholar from Atlanta and from Columbia from, yeah, anyway, he, Brueggemann in his theology of the Old Testament talks about the dominant tradition or the royal tradition, which is David and Solomon and so forth. And then that subversive tradition, which is always subverting it. So that's what, and that's what Tom Holland is working on in that, in that book, is the fact that the, the cross story, the central story of Christianity, that this person who was crucified as a slave is in fact the Lord of the universe. The, in Philippians two, you've got that whole poem, which starts off, you know, though he's didn't consider equality with God something to be grasped but poured himself out taking on the form of a slave. That that story is, is the center of the biblical tradition in some ways, or of the Christian version of the biblical tradition. You know, I want to acknowledge that the Hebrew Bible is a little different here, but that, um, in doing so, it's always a subversion of power. It always puts you the question, which side of the cross are you on? Are you on the side of the Romans who are trying to intimidate people and to, to assert their power against people and, and to make an example of people so that you won't have any, any trouble? Or are you on the side of the slave who's hanging on the cross, who then, as Paul has it, is vindicated by the resurrection? So that's, that's, again, now I want to be, so I say this advisable, so that that's the gospel in the Bible, and that gospel isn't found in that form anywhere else. Um, that's sort of the, so why the Bible and what is the peril? The peril is, is that we would lose that story. You sound very much like a Christian pastor, Dill. I mean, yeah, you know, what a surprise. And I, and I absolutely meant to. So I mean, I thought about this for a while and I thought, you can argue for the Bible on the basis of its cultural impact, but at a certain point, every time I went down that track, I said to myself, who cares? You know, I mean, really, who cares? I mean, you know, it's, it's, it's, um, the culture will shift, the culture changes, the changes all the time. We'll get a different culture. Um, you know, I mean, yeah, I like this culture, but you know, it's okay. What I, what I hear you say that now in this last little paragraph is that, um, the, the Bible can be seen as influencing culture and maybe, you know, maybe we can have that conversation, but you're saying that it's almost an irrelevant conversation compared to what may be more accurately described as its proper purpose. So now we are speaking about it in a kind of a confessional manner. We're saying, this is not just the book. This is also what we believe the heart of the message to be. And then the Bible becomes the Christian message from the point of view of those who, those who believe in the gospel, believe in the cross, believe in the resurrection. And then the book becomes important in that whole narrative. Um, but I'm, I'm not sure that, that Jordan Peterson would go there. I mean, am I, am I wrong about that or? No, I think you're right about that. I think that, that goes beyond what, um, uh, Peterson is saying in that thing. And what I'm saying is that, um, yeah, you know, that you've made the case that Bible has accumulated wisdom, but you have to hear it out of a tradition. Uh, you know, it's, it's like saying any other scripture, um, the Bhagavad Gita has a, has accumulated wisdom. You know, it does, of course. I mean, there's, there's wisdom all over the globe, right? Um, uh, there's the, there's the doubt, there's confusions, um, uh, it's, it's, there's wisdom everywhere. The only reason why I brought that up is that you are the one who said that, that sometimes the tendency is for people to find their favorite narrative or their favorite words or their favorite texts in the Bible and then hang the meaning of the whole Bible on that frame. Yeah. And you just did the same thing, um, from the Christian gospel point of view. Is that fair? But, but now that it's, yeah, no, no, I agree. I think that's right. Um, but it's, it's, um, so there's a tradition. I've been thinking about this a lot lately and, um, I used to think because I was trained as Protestant, um, I used to think that you sort of started with the Bible, um, and then you built up your theology and then you had a biblical theology, right? Your theology was based, it was maybe systematized, but it was based on the Bible, but that's not at all how that goes, uh, or has ever gone. Um, the way it's gone is that, um, the Bible gets read and then the church comes, the church begins to think about that and they talk about it or, or, you know, if you want to do it, I could do this also from a Jewish point of view, but the, but let's just do it from a Christian point of view, cause that's my, my own, uh, point of view. Um, so, so I'll give you an example. If you took John 14 through 17, the gospel of John 14 through 17, it's called the last discourse of Jesus, and it is a, um, a narrative written in very, very simple language about who Jesus is, but it's very difficult. Um, it, it, it, he says, you know, the father and I are one. He says, uh, if you've seen me, you've seen the father, um, uh, the spirit will come and teach you and lead you into all truth. There's all that in there. So the church takes that and it begins to say, now who is Jesus? And then it formulates, uh, ways of thinking about it. And it goes back to that text. And there are, it's not so much that it gets confirmed in the text as it is that the text raises issues with the way the church has formulated it. Um, it would have been very easy for the church to have taken an essentially Gnostic point of view, um, and to, uh, to believe that Jesus is God, but, and he's, he's not really flesh. He just kind of puts it on like a clothes, you know, and then, um, when he gets to the cross, he takes it off and off he goes, you know, he's, he's not really human. He's, he's divine. And that's how, in fact, a lot of Christians treat Jesus. You know, he's, uh, um, he's totally, he's, he's only human kind of on the outside, but the church kept, it was bound enough to the story, to the gospels, to realize that it couldn't get away with that. Um, so the Bible didn't solve it so much for the church as the Bible kept holding the church's feet to the fire. But, you know, if you're going to talk about Jesus, you have to talk about him as the logos, the revelation of God, but you also have to talk about him as a human being and you can't, uh, compromise on either of those. So it's that conversation that, uh, the church has. And so I used to think, go back to where I was, I used to think, okay, you know, you take the Bible, you kind of discern it, uh, what's, what's in it. And then you write it down and you make it into a systematic theology. And then you might have to adjust itself, but that's, that's sort of what the Bible says, but that's not how it goes. It's, it's a conversation. And as a matter of fact, that's exactly what the gospel of John is saying. The gospel of John is saying, you are going to enter into conversation with these words and that conversation will never end. It's always, it's because now that I'm going to get theological here, but because these words are animated by the spirit. Um, that is the spirit will lead you into all truth. The spirit will remind you of what I said and the spirit will, um, uh, lead you into truth. So it's in that conversation with, and it's not just a conversation with this text, which is the Bible, but it's a conversation with all the other conversations that have been had since the Bible has been written. That's the part that, that, um, orthodoxy and Catholicism get that, uh, a lot of Protestant churches don't. A lot of Protestant churches says, all you need is the Bible and your pastor, right? Maybe. Yeah. And maybe your pastor, right? Yeah. Well, yeah, that's true. I've been in enough Protestant churches to know that sometimes you, actually, I was, I was telling a story the other day about a, uh, sermon I did years ago in a church, um, an unnamed church and, um, uh, a guy who was very powerful in this church came up to me afterwards and said, if you, if you or another pastor ever preach in this church again, I want the right of rebuttal. That is, you know, I like, I like Clay, how you frame this. I think we want to talk about the subversive element because I think you're right in that, but the subversive is always within a dance. And even let's say when, when Judah says Tamar, you're more righteous than I, I think the point of that story within the entire Joseph cycle is this moment of conversion, because then at the point when you have the moment of crisis where Joseph is really leaning on the brothers, Judah says, you know, to Jacob, you know, I will go. And if, if Benjamin does not come back, it's my life for his. And it's that transformation in Judah that even though you're exactly right, Joseph is becomes in some ways, sort of a minor character, Judah, of course, is the, is the main character through the Joseph cycle. Let me see this again and again in these old Testament narratives that you think, you think the main character is Saul. Oh no, someone is coming beneath and the main character will be David. So we see that all the time. So that the dance of subversion, I mean, Judah doesn't say, Oh, Tamar, you're more righteous than I, you will go to Egypt and represent me before my brother. None of that happens. I mean, Judah still goes. So anyway, but, but I, I like how you frame this because this gets into this question of, of sort of the framing of the use of the Bible, because on one hand, in a very Protestant way, a la Luther pushing back on the, you know, being very subversive with respect to a whole bunch of the stuff going on in his context. In a sense, Luther reignites this tradition of it's me and the Bible. Of course, John Calvin emphasizes the Holy Spirit coming in there. And in this, in this, in this deeply personalistic way, I can have this encounter with the book and the spirit uses the book and it brings transformation. It'll go out to community. And, and in many ways, then you get, you get Protestantism. But of course, we also, we also know that, you know, when, when these books are being written in the, you know, in the first decades after the death, resurrection and ascension of Jesus Christ, these books are the conversation coming into the, you know, we, we've had, we've met this man, Jesus of Nazareth. And, you know, the gospels are remarkable in that they seem so transparent and honest about the fact that the disciples are just completely clueless as to anything that's going on with respect to him. And, and so then you see these, you see these gospels arise and these epistles arise, this thing that we call the New Testament of, of these, these men wrestling with this tradition that they have either the tradition that's, you know, deeply embedded in Judea or in Paul's case, the diaspora Jews are wrestling with what, what, you know, Paul, Paul having this vision on the Damascus road, and then, you know, what does this mean? And then going to Jerusalem. And of course, they're all, they're all terrified of him. What are you going to do if we let you in? No, no, I really want to talk. And, and I, you know, so you say that this Jesus came, you know, appeared after his crucifixion that everybody saw. Let me talk to the people who, you know, I need, I need my facts right. And then you see then in Paul trying to put together the story of Israel with the facts on the ground and doing that basic theology to try to say, Oh, in the way that, in the way that our reading of an old text always must take, which is there's an interpretive framework now in the resurrection, crucifixion and resurrection and ascension of Jesus that, that now I read these Hebrew scriptures through that now. And you see that in the gospel of John and the other gospels after Jesus has risen from the dead, what does he, you know, what, what does he spend his time doing? He spends his time showing them that his story is the fulfillment, the culmination of the story of Joseph and David and the prophets and all of these other stories. And so there is always this move of subversion, but subversion is always within the context of, of that, which that, which needs to be subverted and refined. And in many ways, the Protestant, I love how you said it, because I think we are really in a crisis of Protestantism with these questions. And the crisis in the Christian Reformed Church is a crisis of Protestantism because we, you know, okay, well, we've got this, we don't know what to do. The government has changed their definition of marriage. We always just sort of, if you got married by the government's eyes, it was good enough for the church. Now, suddenly the government changed its tradition and now, well, we have to come to terms with that. And in the way of the Christian Reformed Church, we send, you know, people who are at least top of various hierarchies and the denomination and spend a bunch of money so they can fly together and talk and they produce some document. And we all read the document and think, well, is this, is this, is this right? Is this right? Is this a guide? Is this faithful? Should we live this way? Should we, should we have shared norms surrounding and, you know, and even the systematic, you know, you said it very well, Clay, because, you know, you're a little generation, you're a generation before me in terms of the narrative of the Christian Reformed Church, but the Berkoff and Systematics, that was, that was, that was the project that, you know, the preeminent chair in our denomination was the chair of Systematics at Calvin Seminary and that, that there was the chair that would do this. Now we also see as modernity is receding, well, that, that, that entire, nobody, very few people write systematic theology anymore because in many ways the entire project has been abandoned. Biblical theology is a little bit hotter and really, I'd say- People don't do biblical theology anymore either. No, I know. Now it's, now it's sort of- That's a, that's a bad term in the, in the, in the field. Biblical theology is, you know- But it's all personalism, so it's all contextual theology now and, and in a certain way, the irony of this is that contextual theology is, is deeply Protestant in that in some ways you deracinate the text from this long tradition and conversation that you're right, the Orthodox and the Roman Catholics do a much better, a much better attempt to sort of instantiate that conversation, although they do so in their hierarchies and in their ecclesiastical structures, but I mean, this is the moment that we're in and so we're in this transition and we say, well, does, is, is the theology that deserves preeminence the gay man's encounter with the text? That's deeply Protestant because it sort of cuts off the roots of this whole long conversation, this dance of, of establishment and subversion and reform and back through, so. It occurs to me there's sort of two ways to go from what you're talking about and one way is to talk about the text and the fact that the Bible has always been subversive to power and so you're right, I mean that it is a dance and it goes back and forth and the Bible gets used for, it's to support slavery, for example, but if you wanted to maintain slavery, the biggest mistake that slave owners did is allow people to read the Bible because once they started to read the Bible, they suddenly realized that they had the same dignity as everybody else. They were made in the image of God that the, you know, the the Exodus from Egypt wasn't just the Exodus of ancient Israel, but it was the Exodus of all slaves from all slaveries and, and you know that, that whole wonderful American, African-American tradition comes out of that and, and you put the Bible, so you put the Bible into people's hands and, and Luther was actually right in this, you know, Luther translated the Bible into German specifically to put it into people's hands and when you put it into people's hands, they get it in many ways and, you know, they don't need the likes of me to, to explain the Bible to them. They get it, they, they sing it, they understand that it has an essential liberating story in it. So what I'm pushing back against a little bit in, in the stuff that I've been writing is those people who are like me, I'm not, and who, who want to nail down the reading of the Bible in a way that says this is what it means, it can't mean anything else. So yeah, you're right, but the other piece though that I thought about when you're talking is I've been reading, I just read the Rowan Williams book which is called Looking East in, in Winter. It's a new, Rowan Williams was the Archbishop of Canterbury, he's a theologian, does early Christian theology basically, and the Looking East is, that's a quotation from an early, one of the people who was, well so there's a, there's a work called the Philokalia from the early medieval times, it's a collection of writings that have been read in the Orthodox tradition. So he's looking east in that sense and the winter is the cold in the west at our backs. It's, this is a difficult time in western culture as we know, you know, thinking about Russia and Ukraine and the feeling that we are post whatever it was we were, that we're, we've lost the thread and we're not likely to regain it. That, that whole sense of failure, that's the cold in the back, but so he's looking east both to the Orthodox tradition for some inspiration but also, you know, you're looking towards Jerusalem, you're looking towards the original, original story. And as I read this book, which is a very, I mean it's, this kind of theology is extremely abstract and difficult. It's, but it's taking that story in, which essentially is, you know, four chapters in John and then asking the question, so if in fact Christ is the Logos, if he is, if Rowan Williams uses the Logos, if he is, if Rowan Williams uses the idea of a linguistic, God speaks and this is, you can also find this in Augustine, God speaks and then Jesus Christ is the word that he speaks, he's the Logos, Logos means, you know, in Greek word. And then, so that everything we know of the Father, everything we know of God is, as a matter of fact, what we know of Jesus. And that that's true not just of knowing of God, it's also true of knowing what it means to be human. And then he pulls in the theology of John Tsosulis and Orthodox theologian and others about the Eucharist, that in the Eucharist you have, you have God, the congregation, Christ the congregation, and you have the elements. And so you pull in all of creation. And in this kind of abstract theology, you are trying to understand what these simple words in John, you know, one in John 14 through 17 mean, and to express them in ways that are transformative in how we understand human beings. All human beings are, according to this, in relation, we don't know who we are, except for our relationship to the one who speaks us, to the Father. And we, the relationship between the Father and the Son in Trinitarian theology is the model for what our relationship should be. And every other human being is also in that. And so we are related together, whether we choose to be or not. And, you know, I'm just making a just a few of the conclusions from this, but it leads to a very radical idea. It leads to Bonhoeffer. It leads to a very radical idea of what it means to be a human being. And ultimately, I mean, this is, goes back to Irenaeus now, the earliest of all Christian theologians, that Christian theology, the Bible is not about being Christian or being Jewish or being Muslim. It's about being human. And so, where am I going with this? What I'm going with this is here, that how do we that, how do we, how do we help people into that conversation? Not reading Rowan Williams, but, but, I mean, sorry, Rowan, but, you know, big watcher of my channel, Rowan Williams is always leaving comments. Yeah, yeah, yeah. Actually, I, so it's not, people aren't going to just pick up Looking East in winter, because they're going to find it very daunting to read, because they don't have the background. I mean, it's like, you know, me trying to read my physics friends, papers, and I can understand the title, but not the, but everything else beyond that is, I can't, you know, I'm just not trained in that. And the more I thought about that, the more I thought about, you know, how do we actually get people to become part of the conversation that is the Bible, and that is the Bible and the tradition? There's no other way except the church. You, that does not bode well for the project. It, it, it has to be in the context of people actually reading the Bible, in worship together. I thought about a Torah, a kind of Christian Torah study. You know, you know, in Torah study, what you, what you read is, you read the Talmud, you don't just read in Torah study the, the Bible. In fact, you read what the rabbis said about the Bible. And enter into the conversation. You enter into the conversation. And so how do we have a place where people can enter into the conversation? And as soon as you say church, you think institution, and then you think of all the issues that the institutions have, and you need the institution, I suppose. But is there a way that we can once again return to, we read this, and in reading it, we read it in a way that the scriptures open to us. We read it not to confirm what we are, but to allow it to subvert what we think we are. And then to read it in a way of revelation. The, the, it sounds very bargain, by the way, just as a reference. And I'm just reminded of all the warnings we got back in seminary about how Barth was going to undermine the historicity of the, of the, of the gospel message in the Bible, in the biblical narrative and all that. But, so no, but I, I like what you're saying, except that the, the, from, from where I sit, the problem is that fewer and fewer people are exposed to whatever goes on in churches. And on top of that, even the people that are still exposed to what goes on in churches aren't hearing the conversation model expressed very well, precisely because there still is a good deal of, I mean, I, this is almost incidental to our conversation, but I got into the ministry for all the wrong reasons. I had a very immature kind of a power hunger and I want to be the guy on top of the heat. I want all the people to be looking at me and then very narcissistic kind of desire to be seen, noticed and listened to. And I'm sure that I'm the only preacher that has ever gone through seminary with that, with that attitude. And unfortunately, it was not caught in the filters of our ordination process, but then, then when for those first few years, it became pretty clear that that's kind of where I was headed with all that. It was actually a major intervention by somebody close to me who said, now you're not really pastor material, but a good number of people in leadership in Christian churches still are very much drawn to the idea that they are the dispensers of this biblical insight and that they are the ones who are going to lead people into all truth, which is in direct contradiction to the verse that says that the spirit will lead you into all truth. And so now we are still attaching our faith. I mean, I have this mental image in my mind that when people get to the pearly gaze and St. Peter says, why should I let you into God's heaven? They say, I believe what he said. And they pointed to the preacher, you know, or they pointed to preacher and they say, you know, don't blame me if I got it wrong. That's what they told me in church. And so that puts a huge burden on those in leadership. And perhaps it requires a different kind of restructuring that relationship between Orthodox leadership and the average church person or the average human being. And so maybe it is actually a very important question to ask. How do people come to experience this liberating conversation of the biblical world? And I am very serious that there are way to, I mean, you talked about how the friends of the Bible become part of the problem. And I totally agree with you about that because there are all kinds of people that are still very inclined to say, this is the Holy Word of God inerrant no less. It was given to us through me as a guide to living, almost the equivalent of saying, thus says the Lord from the pulpit. And there is really no context where we say to people, explore the Bible on your own if need be, or trust that this has something of value to you in our general culture. And even within the churches, there is not that much invitation for the church leadership to say, people, we don't really know the last word about all this. We don't have the total picture, but we are part of a conversation that has been going on for thousands of years. Join us in this conversation and for that to become a structural model of how churches operate. I don't see it happening. So the first thing we got to say is that Christendom is dead, right? It's gone. The idea that everybody is going to know all the stories and that basically everybody up and down your street is Christian is just, that's been gone for a while, and it's not likely to come back. We don't want it to come back in some way. So what we want is to rethink church some, I think. And you're right. I mean, narcissism is a requirement of certain kinds of pastoral roles. Look at me, I'm gone. I'm not immune from that either. But to take Jesus' own example, the kind of question asking, I'm invitational. Barbara Brown Taylor, a preacher, once said, you walk people up the edge of mystery, you never walk them over the edge because you lose the mystery. You invite people. So for me, I found in churches that read a lot of scripture that that's better for me. In churches that follow the lectionary, we read the Old Testament, a psalm, an epistle passage, and the gospel. And I know those are selected and they're not, there's problems with sometimes that they leave out some parts of the scripture. But nevertheless, so every Sunday, there is a good deal of time in the service given to just reading the Bible without any comment on it. You just read it. And then the person says the word of the Lord, and you say, thanks be to God, and you go on to the next passage. And then the preacher comes in and the preacher's task at that point is much different. It's not so much to thunder, thus says the Lord, but it's to say, okay, here's, we got these passages. What do we do with them? How do we understand them? It becomes kind of a first cut on understanding them. And I like that very much. I don't know if that works for everybody. It works for me. I think, John, your point is very important. And I, obviously part of what we're dealing with is all of the context in which the Bible works in our world in the midst of institution, in the midst of technologies, in the midst of cultural conventions of cultural transmission. You know, it's the fact that Luther, the Protestant Reformation, the thing that we usually call the Protestant Reformation, would simply not have been if it weren't for the eager desire of printers to pass along Luther's latest hot tweets to the world and the wood drawings. And I mean, the inflammation that was fanned into literal wars and flames in iconoclasm that rocked Europe. Today, we have social media, which is in some ways doing similar things, working off our most primal instincts to react and accuse and to love and to hate at the drop of an image. And it's in this context that we wish to make the Bible once again accessible. And that accessibility involves various layers of interaction, of interaction with the world, and it involves various layers of interaction where if people, because it is a difficult text. I mean, you said that yourself. And those of us who struggle every week to try to make this text intelligible, available, accessible to the men and women with whom we share our lives and the church community know the challenge of this. And quite frankly, that was in watching Jordan Peterson, basically hot take for two hours for 15 sessions in a theater in Toronto. And people paying money for that. And that people pay 40 bucks a pop and you can't get a seat. And then, every week waiting to see what's going to drop on YouTube. And before you know it, hundreds of thousands of views, the appetite for the Bible as read through Jung and Darwin and all that Nietzsche and Kant, all the stuff Jordan Peterson was pouring it through, seemed insatiable, at least in a little corner of the internet. So, you know, John, it's overly simplistic to have to choose between a figure of authority in a set frame of hardwood and, you know, really durable podium. You know, because here in California land, you know, reformed California land, John MacArthur is a big voice. You know, you got Doug Wilson up there and Moscow, Idaho, and, you know, there's continues to be an appetite for people to offer the Bible pre-chewed. And there is an appetite for people, I mean, again, if you look at the books that are hot to sell with respect to application for the topic of what does God think about my particular brand of sexuality, people likewise look for authorities. And those authorities may not by virtue of the whole cultural flow of conversation, those authorities might no longer come from, let's say, mainline pulpits or union theological seminary. But authorities, nonetheless, perhaps from blogs or Instagram or so it's a very live context. And in that sense, even though, again, I very quickly saw the signs of this coming down the road from the 2016 Senate when they said, okay, we're only going to put conservative people on this study committee. I thought, wow, we do have a crisis. We do have a confessional crisis in our denomination because we're already splitting, you know, we have our status hierarchies and, you know, the usual suspects got put on synodical study committees and no, now we're going to draw a line between the usual suspects because we know we want a certain thing coming out of it. Okay. And but all of this is coming through and I don't think the easy narratives like, you know, thus saith the Lord, dark wood, burgundy, cushioned churches versus, you know, we can pull back to the 1960s on the beach, ad hoc, guitar, Jesus people, both have their authorities. And anyone who is coming to this text, just as the apostles came to have to wrestle with the events that they saw in the life of Jesus Christ had to somehow integrate that with the story of Israel as they understood it, either from the diaspora or the Galilee or Judea. So now the, you know, one man that's in my community that Clay and I both know, now the young high school senior who, you know, now to simply identify yourself as same sex attracted, there's no more stigma in that like there was when I was in school or when Clay was in school. But now, you know, going to Christian school, even though his parents weren't believer, you know, weren't Christians anyway, they wanted a conservative school. So well, if you're in Lyndon Washington, you can find the conservatives by sort of following the conservative churches. And so now he's going to figure this out. And there's Jordan Peterson and there's all these people in now orthodox curious because in some ways, you know, it's the people that sound most self-convinced that signal to others. Oh, well, they must know because they're certainly convinced. And it's often some of those others who are like, well, you know, what do you think the Bible says? Well, I already know what I think and it's a mess. I want to hear someone speak with conviction. Yeah, on the ground in most Christian reform churches, as one of my colleague noted, you know, the pastor is always the last to know because people have made up their mind by virtue of the blogs they've been reading and the podcast they've been listening to and the YouTube channels that they've been in. And by the time they come back to church, they've already got a perspective that to them feels authentic because to one degree or another, it was crowd sourced pre-consciously from all of these influencers and something that they heard inside felt right. And so now they come to the pastor and they say, I don't know if I can be a part of a church that believes in and then fill in your blank either believes in that, you know, human sexuality isn't the ethics of human sexuality isn't best determined by an experience of authenticity or the ethics of human sexuality isn't best determined by the sexuality that I saw my mother express after the divorce and what that left of our family or and then just on down through the lists. So that brings again back the question because I, you know, I on one hand, I agree very much with Claire. I wouldn't continue to do the job I have that no, the church stands front and center as hopefully a place where for one reason or another people begin, it begins to dawn on them that this book, this book might have something to say to them about how, what it means to be fully human. And where can I learn about this book? Well, I, a church and a pastor, I guess, would be a reasonable place to start. And then, and then again, what will they find? Well, you'll either have, you know, you'll have different kinds of liturgies and sermons. This is a lectionary church or this is a Bible church or because, I mean, for those poor people looking for a little bit of guidance, the amount of items on the menu of a standard American city is daunting at best because sort of like Michaela Peterson, as she, you know, as you know, her father's in medical crisis, her mother's in medical crisis, her marriage is falling apart. She's got a young child. She has a friend that says, you should pray to Jesus for help. And she prays to Jesus for help. And the next week, a whole bunch of things just sort of line up and she's like, maybe there is something to this Jesus thing. And then, then the next question is, who can I trust to continue to explore? Well, the Bible is in there. And I mean, that's in many ways, when I look at people in their twenties and thirties, that's where they're at. And I want to see the church help them figure this out and say, yeah, a good place is to start engaging with this very difficult book. The difficulty is that we've got billions of people over thousands of years talking about this thing and how to dip into that conversation in a, in a helpful, intelligible, meaningful way. Not a, not a small challenge. What, for example, with the word biblical conjure up in people's minds Oh, it's, it's, it's such an embedded term right now. I have a biblical view of human sexuality. What does that mean? Like if you're passing by and you see a shrine prostitute that looks good, you say, Hey, how about a goat? Sounds like a good deal. There's, you know, there's the sexuality of the patriarchs. Is that biblical? And, you know, and so I've, you know, I've always been sort of uneasy on the countryside because I hear all certain kinds of churches talk about, you know, family values from the Bible. And I think you're really hard pressed to read that book and find a really functional family. Many of the families are in pretty rough shape, but, but then again, that's authentic to this world because families are in pretty rough shape. Marriage is hard. Parenting is difficult and to give a certain list of values, but you know, to sort of, again, also push back on sort of the liberationist thing. Many people are, are at this point in their culture are tired of liberate, of being liberated from anything. And they just say, please just give me a short list of, of basic things that I can begin to build a life on because I, I have lived my whole life in a context of chaos and I don't know who to trust. And by virtue of the fact that much of what I have received in terms of the Christian reform church has been ordered and reliable and credible. You know, when it came to Stan and Barb, there was plenty of order and, and a fair amount of liberty. And my parents got the order chaos thing quite good, quite right. And so I was able to grow up, but many of the people that I've, that I've ministered to my whole lifelong are simply drowning in chaos. And they just wait, can you just give me something reliable that I can work from to begin to get my feet under me? There go 12 rules. Yeah. So, so Paul, I think that the, in some ways the rules are not so important. I recognize what you just said, which is that, you know, sometimes the really rule bound kinds of communities are really attractive to people who whose lives are otherwise chaotic. You know, I can think of denominations that are highly rule bound and they do very well often in places where the Christian reform church wouldn't do very well at all. And I think though that it's not the rules, it's the community and you need order and community and you need love in that community and you need a certain amount of wisdom. But it can, it can look pretty different depending on the, the, I was just thinking about my Godson and his bride and they're going to get, they're being married. I'm doing the wedding in May and they just founded church together and it was a pastor in the neighborhood who was starting a new church. And I'm sure that the, I'm sure that theology wouldn't be mine, you know, but who cares in some ways. They found a place where they will in fact encounter the Bible. They will encounter Christian love. The story of the gospel will be there and that's good stuff, you know. I sort of watched them grow towards their own, their own faith. And maybe after 10 years, they'll find that particular congregation doesn't do it for them anymore and they'll move, but that's, you know, it's okay. Yeah, because what you just said does push me back into asking the question about the Bible because you now make it sound as though the community and its proper hospitality and its metamessage is more important than the Bible itself. And when Paul says rules, that's all good and well and some of those rules may even come from the Bible, but it is rules as opposed to the Bible as a whole. And so I'm still struggling a little bit with how... I have a lot of faith in the Bible and I think that when people read it, if they encounter it, even if, you know, the interpretive process isn't what I would think is the best, the story will out and it's more... the Bible is more powerful than we give it credit for. So if you... that's why, you know, as I said earlier, if you go to a community, if you throw the Bible into a community that needs liberation, they're going to find it in the Bible. It's there. They will read it in the Bible. Right now, in many countries in the South, I mean, by the global South, biblical churches are exploding, right? And they're exploding, you know, and there are lots of issues. There are lots of issues, none of which are mine to solve or even comment on because that's not my world. But they also hear the liberating message of the Bible in most places. So maybe we are saying something about the sufficiency of the Bible here. If I hear you correctly. Earlier when Paul was talking, I thought to say, I'm sure this is way too simple, but I thought to say that the problem comes when we try to systematize it often. So you get Martin Luther, you know, Martin Luther realizes that he has learned this new way of thinking about faith from the Bible. And he thinks, if I just get the Bible into the hands of people, so he translates it, spends his time at Wartburg Castle, and he translates the Bible into idiomatic journal. And it's published and out there, and people start to read it. And then people start to argue about, well, this is what you know, and it's in that next generation of people that you really start to get the problems. Luther, well, Luther had some issues too, but the but Luther's initial impulse, which was to trust people more than they had been trusted in the past was a good impulse. When I was a pastor in East Lansing, there were people in my congregation who would come week after week, perhaps. And I thought there was not a spiritual bone in their body. You know, I thought that these were people, these were just culture Christians, you know, these are people who came and sat there and, you know, they were good citizens in many ways in the church, but I didn't think they ever thought of spiritual thought. And then something would happen to them. And I would encounter them in a hospital room or in some other context. And all of a sudden, I would find out that these people had thought deeply about their faith, and that their faith was far more profound than anything that I had imagined. I would learn from them. And that happened often enough so that I finally repented of ever making that judgment again, of trying to figure out who has the spirit and who doesn't in a way, because it was, I was always being surprised by it. You know, I mean, that sounds a little like I'm a little, you know, Panglossian or something. But I don't want to make it easy. The church has never been easy. The gospel has never been easy. Jesus says it's not going to be easy. That's, you know, all that's true. But as soon as we try to figure it out, and we say, you know, if we only did this, we would have it all in a nice neat box and it would all work. That's poison. What we do is we're just faithful. We just try to be faithful. And to be faithful means to be part of a worshiping community in the best way you can. In the middle of that is the story of the gospel and the scriptures. And you allow that to do its work. And it's not your work, it's that's what that is. So if there's a bunch of people in a certain subgroup that are in the process of sorting themselves out, and if they might even go so far as to join an estuary conversation, which is the space between the church and the world, and they are sort of a little bit open to a recommendation from the likes of us. Would we steer them to the Bible or would we steer them to the church? The Bible is not a standalone book. It's not a book. It's a book that it's a conversation that came out of community and it needs to stay in community. You can do biblical studies without a community. I've done this. And you know, you can go to the the annual conference of the Society of Biblical Literature and there will be thousands of Bible scholars all well trained and you'll hear papers on some detail of the Bible, you know, the linguistics of Hebrew poetry or something. And that's all fine, but that's not what we're talking about. And as soon as you make the Bible that kind of book, you've lost it. It's a book in community. It's not a step. Sola Scriptura is just wrong. It's, well, it is. Address your mail to Clayton Leibov. In that argument, you know, between Rome and the reformers, the reformers said, we'll take the Bible and Rome kind of said, we'll take the church. Well, that's, neither one can do that. You just can't do it. It's impossible. The Bible is a book to be read in community. It is essentially a dialogue, a discussion, a conversation. And that's why all those methods that we that I learned when I was in seminary, Paul's so much younger than me, he probably didn't learn those. But all those all those methods that are designed to narrow down the meaning of the Bible. Okay, we want to make sure that the Bible means this and not this kind of thing. Those are all just wrong headed. And not only they wrong headed, but they are inherently Protestant. That's not how the church ever read the Bible. You read, you go to Gregory, you know, Gregory of Nyssa and say, so how did Gregory read the Bible? Well, you know, he's got a book of the book of Moses and book on Moses. And he goes through the whole story of Moses and kind of reads it straight as, you know, like you're making a history or something of Moses biography of Moses. And then he says, okay, that's, that's the first take on this thing. Then he goes back and he rereads the whole thing. From a spiritual point of view, he calls it theoria, which is contemplation. He reads the whole thing from a contemplation point of view and sees all kinds of things in it, wonderful things in that narrative that otherwise he would not have seen. You need to read the Bible in that kind of tradition, the kind of tradition which we are actually doing it in Protestantism by the back door. And the back door is charismatic interpretations of the Bible. So in charismatic interpretation of the Bible, you put yourself into the story. You say, you know, the story of, I don't know, David and Bathsheba, I don't know why that came to mind, but and you, and you put yourself and you say, now, what, what, what do we learn? You know, we all know cases of adultery and so forth, you know, and we put ourselves into the story and we make it a story about us. And then if you're properly trained, you criticize that and you say, well, that's exemplary preaching as opposed to the- Historically redemptive. Right, right. And you, but, but as a matter of fact, what we're doing is we're attempt, we realize that we're reading the Bible, that that text is more than just its history. It's more than just that, that, that, that narrative is about a lot of things and, and that we can get a lot of things out of it if we allow ourselves to do that, to live into it a bit. So we do it, I don't think we do it very well, but we do it from the back door. But the, the church for a thousand, for a thousand years, for 1500 years, read the Bible, always had two readings of the Bible. One they called Historia, which doesn't mean history, but means the kind of literal sense. Literal in terms of a narrative. Yeah. Not in the modernist section sense, although that was implicit in a sort of innocent way. Yeah, but it wasn't, yeah, that's, you're absolutely right. And then the second one, you can call it Allegoria, but I like theoria, which is a contemplation. You read it contemplatively. And there are ways actually the, the, the, like the lectio domina method are ways of actually forcing your mind into that second kind of reading. Well, I, you know, and I, you know, when I listened to this, it's so funny because on one hand, in the, in the current fight that we have going on in the North American church, part of the place that you find that reading is in these lowbrow, uneducated, little Bible on the little church on the corner place where people, you know, I figured this out very early on when I started getting into ministry, because on one hand, you're going to seminary and you're learning all of this ways to sort of systematize the text and sort of, you know, depersonalize it, understand it historically, understand it historically, yada, yada, yada. And then you'll wind up in a little neighborhood Bible study and someone reads this thing. I think this Bible, I think this text means this and off they go. And, you know, it can be wrong on how many different levels, but there's still a little something to it. And, and so, you know, I think this is one thing where Clay and I very much agree in the power of the Bible. And I'm, I'm, I'm going to draw short of making the bold declaration Clay did on sola scriptura, because I think, I think you're right. I see that the, you don't, the church and Bible are always working together, you know, you know, with the spirit and that it's, this is, and if there isn't, if there isn't a good or well functioning church, the Bible sometimes, you know, churches, churches erupt almost, you know, ex nihilo from the Bible and boom, the people got together and started reading these things. You find that in ministry sometime. I remember, you know, you bump into people and they, there's no reason these people should be Christians, but somehow they bumped into a Bible at a difficult time in their life and they opened it and bang, something happened and things started to grow. And, you know, and how many 19th century sex like the Jehovah's Witnesses and the, the Mormon church start out of, you know, people deciding I'm going to read the Bible fresh for myself right now. And oh boy, what a mess. But, you know, in, in long periods of time with enough community and enough seriousness and engagement things, you know, that the Bible begins to, to have its way with us. And, and I think, you know, when I look at the whole Jordan, you know, all this stuff that's happened downstream of Jordan Peterson, that's exactly what I see. I mean, Jordan Peterson kind of opened the door to the Bible and the Bible is having its way with people in groups all over the place and it's completely messy. And, but this is, this is in a sense the way that I think you're, you're right, Clay, in a sense when everything in the West is Christian, then nothing is Christian. And, and Protestants have been wrestling with that in terms of a state church or no state church. And you've got this crazy way in which American, you know, here we're not going to have a state church, but churches somehow flourish in America of all different stripes. And so in a sense right now, this is on one hand, the Catholics and the Orthodox that are listening to me, you know, love it when I talk about the crisis of Protestantism or the end of Protestantism or ending the protest, but then they don't like it as much when I say, but in another way, we're all Protestants now. And, and I've seen that with some who have gone to Orthodoxy, one vivid conversation with a young woman who's an artist and she was really unhappy with the fact that the priest, you know, I've seen this a lot, the priest wanted everyone to wear masks and she didn't want the priest, you know, oh, I want a church where there's real submission, like in the Orthodox church. Well, that until the priest tells you to submit to something that you disagree with. And so she finds herself out in her front lawn with her Orthodox Bible study, not wanting to go to the church because the priest wants her to wear a mask and she's studying the Bible on her front lawn and she says, I'm a Protestant again. And this is, this is what I'm seeing in this midst. And, you know, part of what I think is beautiful about, you know, the vision of estuary where you cannot have, you know, I want to push back a little bit on this, on the discrediting of, of systems, because, you know, once you talk about the liberational power of the gospel, you've already put it in a system. You've already, you've already taken that word and colored it with another word and, and people, people can't live without authority and systems and those things will always emerge. Yet at the same time, there's, and this is where I think you're, I agree with you, Clay, in that you got to hold those systems a little bit loosely because you're going to need a structure. You're going to need a system. That's, that's basically what all of us need to sort of get along in an orderly, productive way, but not too orderly, you know, enough order. And then, you know, and the whole estuary idea has been the church needs systems and structures and ideas, but we all also know that those things sort of rise and fall as we go through. And the Christian Reformed Church is not the same place it was, you know, when you went, Clay, or when I went through seminary in the late eighties or, and so, you know, and, but I, you know, I thought, I think I have to end this conversation by one because I've got another conversation on the heels of it, but, but this has been, you know, this has been really helpful. And I think that the thing I fear right now in this moment in the Christian Reformed Church, because of the, because of the collision that we are heading to, that, you know, that somehow that we're going to get, we're going to get a line drawn through our church and myself and others that I, because I'm, I'm just, I'm really in the middle of this whole thing, but that, that there's going to be a line between us and other people are going to be on the other side of the line. And I think as we, because on one hand, we're wrestling with the Bible and our little local Bible study, but on another hand, what we're doing in this conversation is church leaders with a degree of status and influence and, and preparation, we're wrestling with the Bible together. And you know, what I've wanted for the Christian Reformed Church over the last 10 years is we need to have these conversations because to hear Clay Leibolt, who is a, you know, bona fide person on one end of the church conversation say, I believe in the power of the Bible to change people's lives. That's, that's really important for people who have sort of written Clay off as a, as a terrible progressive over there for some reason. And you know, we've got lots of people that names that we could drop. And, and I think actually, if, if somehow we find a way to be able to continue to have these conversations within and outside these walls, this is something really important because whereas maybe now the issue is, you know, sexual ethics, you know, there's, there's so many issues in the environment that, you know, well, Clay's going to be over here for this, who is over there for that issue. Paul's going to be over the errors over there. And of course, then Don's just a mad man and he's going to be doing the crazy things he does. So, and I, I want us to, I want us to be able to have these conversations and to, and to learn from each other and to have, have a church where, whether you're, you know, really coming in from the chaos and needing strong structure, or whether you've, you've been in a very structured environment and for reasons probably beyond your control, you don't fit in that environment and there's no place for you. Well, both, both need an encounter with this book, an encounter with the spirit that has given us this book. And, and I want the church to be there to be helpful in some way. That's, that's really what I desire. You know, Paul, years ago, I, this actually happened at this church that John attends. I brought up a pretty difficult issue at, for the elders and I asked them, I said we were going to do three one hour conversations on this particular issue and, and the very first one I could, you know, that you could cut the tension with a knife when I walked in the council room, because nobody knew what, where this was going to go. And I started off by saying, well, each person, like each person, just to go around the table and each person explain where you're at in this issue and how you got there. And by the time we got to the end, there was actually some laughter in the room and we didn't solve that issue at all. But later, some pretty difficult issues came up in that church and there was a trust in the room that we could talk about them and disagree about them. There was one particular one I remember where it was a, it was just a naughty issue. And, and people said, you know, I don't agree with this at all. But, you know, I will go along with what you guys do. So I, for me, the best thing that Senate could do, but I'm sure they won't, is they could say, you know what, we're not ready to decide this. We need to have a conversation. We could start, maybe they could figure out some ways to do some conversation at the Senate, but then let's do conversation about this and let's not, let's keep talking to each other because the conversation is more important than the decision. If we can do something along those lines. That'd be lovely. Yep. I've been asking for that for a long time. I try to talk to, I try to keep my, I try to keep my relationships healthy with both sides of the church. And I'm just saying, let's, let's, let's have this conversation and, and let's, and, and I know it's very difficult for a community to not have, to not share a cohesive sexual ethic. It's very difficult for a community for very important reasons, but what will we tell our children? Well, we've, you know, in the Christian firm church, we know we've had splits before and, you know, I look at the women in office split and although, you know, people in my channel know my take on it. This, the, the political, the political solution, the expedient political solution has not necessarily brought harmony to the church on this issue. That's right. And, and we can't, and my frustration is it's difficult for us even to say, let's talk about this again. No, we don't want to open that door. And I'm, yeah, so anyway, this is, this has been wonderful. Any, any last words again? I've got a, I've got another convo at one. So any, any last comments? I really enjoyed this. We should do this again. This has been good. Yeah, that, that, that tension between order and freedom is, is something at the heart of what we're talking about today. And you need both. And how to, how to do that? And so people, when they, people hear me, they'd say, oh, then we could do anything you want to do. That's not true. But, and how do we, you know, how do we do the Bible and do church in a way that we are obedient to Christ, but we're also not using the Bible, we're not weaponizing the Bible against other people. I mean, that, that's a, that's, that's one way to put it. Yeah, I like that. I'd like to talk about that more. Sure. John, any last thoughts? We'll put it on the calendar. You can trust me to do that. Well, thank you, John, for you very much been the impetus behind this, because, you know, you and Clay have had some conversations and I don't, I, you know, I've never really done too much with Clay, but I've found these conversations to be helpful. We'll see what the, we'll see what the comments section has to bring, but it's usually, it's usually quite good. All right. This is fine. Thank you very much, both of you for being here and allowing me to be part of it. So, yeah, thanks, John. Thanks. All right. Thank you both. Take care. Bye bye. Bye bye.