https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=RDt__98Ijuo

 Hi, this is Paul and this is Rough Draft for Sunday where I run through the current version of my Sunday sermon. Last week we talked about transformations, life change, how can you tell if it's a good one or a bad one? How can you tell if it's better or for worse? Who's to tell? Who to ask? We looked at Jenner, we looked at Paul's transformation from Saul who was persecuting the church for the purification and the revitalization of the world as he sought to someone who very quickly switched sides. You can ask that in a political realm, are you better off under Trump or Biden? Transformations are all around us, they're individual, they're communal, they happen to us, we pay a lot of attention. Are you seeking transformation? Are you seeking personal transformation, communal transformation? From what to what? What's your imagination? What good do you imagine in the future that you want to transform into or that you want to bring into the world? In Matthew 28 there's a very famous passage called the Great Commission. Therefore, go and make disciples of all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, of the Son, and the Holy Spirit and teaching them everything I have commanded you and surely I am with you to the very end of the age. At the end of the Gospel of Matthew these are Jesus' marching orders to his disciples. Let's call Acts 1, 6-9 the Great Prediction. They gathered around him and asked, Lord, are you at this time going to restore the kingdom to Israel? He said to them, It is not for you to know the times or the dates the Father has set by his own authority, but you will receive power when the Holy Spirit comes on you and you will be my witnesses in Jerusalem and in all Judea and Samaria and to the ends of the earth. After he said this he was taken up before their eyes and a cloud hid him from their sights. Then you had the day of Pentecost and you had, well, the Jerusalem hay day, sort of a honeymoon period for the church. And they broke bread in their homes and ate it together with glad and sincere hearts, praising God and enjoying the favor of all the people. Every day they continued to meet together in the temple courts and the Lord added to their number those who were being saved. But of course the honeymoon came to a screeching halt in the synagogues of diaspora Jews. When a dispute broke out in the church and they laid hands on certain men of the diaspora to be deacons to overlook the distribution of food to the Hellenistic Jews, these deacons began to preach and to talk in the Hellenistic synagogues and a dispute broke out over the Holy Book and the Holy Place. And Stephen was killed and Paul sat approvingly over the execution, which became the first act of his wave of persecution. Of course, as we talked about last week on the road to Damascus, Saul turns into Paul, he gets turned around. Another diaspora Jew is recruited by Jesus directly, by a light from heaven, by a sign. And as we're going to see, Paul very much counted on these individual revelations as part of his process and he will become very much the center of Luke's story as he continues to tell it. Now if it weren't for Paul, Christianity it seems might have stayed in one place. Most world religions, if you chart their center of gravity, pretty much stay close to home. You can find graphs like this on the internet. But the center of gravity of Christianity has been moving quite a bit and many believe it will continue to move south as the population of sub-Saharan Africa booms, as Christianity booms in Asia. This will be the center of Christianity. Northrop Frye also notes, he has some very interesting lectures about the Bible, that Christianity is a religion that embraces translations. Many world religions basically say you can't understand the holy books unless you read them in another language, otherwise they are somehow corrupted. Christianity leaps into the Roman Empire by reading the Greek translation of the Old Testament that becomes their Bible. Paul's story is critical to Christianity's transformation from a Jewish sect into a religion that transforms the Empire, that in very many ways completely reduces the Roman Empire over the course of a few hundred years. Paul himself sort of becomes a bridge. He moves easily both in Jewish and Roman worlds. One might compare him to Philo, the great Jewish scholar of Alexandria who lived just nearly a contemporary of Paul, but Philo didn't have anywhere near the effect that Paul had on world history. The pattern for further bridges, Paul not only becomes a bridge from one civilization to another, but in many ways becomes the pattern for further bridges that will continue to transform the world as Christianity leaps from one culture to another. He planted churches and he also wrote letters and the kinds of things he wrote in those letters became the bridge by which Christianity would leap into other language groups, other people groups and continue to cover the world. Now, part of what's true about stories is that they are a massive compression of information. Every moment is filled with more information than you can imagine. If you were asked to just sit down and describe what is around you, you wouldn't have enough time in the rest of your life just to detail adequately one single room. You can go all the way down to the atomic level. You can look at cultural levels. We are simply awash in data. And what stories try to do is to piece out those relevant parts by which patterns can be seen and, well, patterns can be replicated by which we can be agents in a world, agents by which we change. Every time we communicate, we have to discern what's important and what's unimportant. And so we not only try to compress the stories, but we in some ways further the stories and continue reshaping the stories. So in this little diagram, you might imagine the potential data of Paul's life and the potential data and the consequences of Paul's life of which it has in fact not even ended. And all of this is digested into a story to realize the relevant parts and then to perhaps enact them ourselves to participate in these patterns. Now what you see through Paul is that he is appropriated again and again and again through history and he becomes the center by being sort of this bridge by which Christianity continues to change and mold and move throughout the world. A major element was the 16th century where young monk Martin Luther sort of discovers Paul and discovers an insight into Paul which transforms the world. And from that basis over the last few hundred years, sort of medieval Roman Catholics and ancient Jews were cast in the role of works, righteousness, and Protestants into, well, people of faith. This is currently happening all around us. It's not hard to find people on the internet that once again, well, they sort of like Jesus because he's nice to prostitutes and sinners and they usually recast sinners into some favored out group through which they want to demonstrate their generosity. But Paul is almost always the bad guy and that goes to speculations. Well maybe Paul was so anti-gay because he himself was gay and so Paul is somehow bad for women and bad for gays and it won't take too long to find these kinds of sentiments on Paul. But again, what we see is that we're taking this massive thing and trying to bring it down into our world and make it relevant for today. The fact that Paul keeps getting used again and again and again shows something about his bridge nature and about the letters that he left and about the way that he transformed the world. Now the book of Acts is an enormous compression over a great deal of, well not a great deal of time, but a fair amount of time. If you read through the book of Acts, things just seem to happen boom, boom, boom, boom, boom. You have Jesus talking with disciples on the mountain and then suddenly you've got a new disciple and then you've got the day of Pentecost and then you've got Stephen and then you've got Paul and then you've got Peter and Cornelius and then you've got Paul going out and it almost seems like, well, the book of Acts only covers a couple of years. But actually the book of Acts covers a great many years and there are certain silent moments in the book of Acts that Luke doesn't find relevant to the situation. Luke had to fit the book of Acts onto one scroll and so part of that, what he had to do was sort of make selections about what to talk about in Paul's life. Some of this can be addressed if you go on the internet or if you look in, this is from F.F. Bruce's book, you can find these timelines of Paul's life, but I want to give you a warning that these timelines are highly contested. Now there are ways that they are contested and ways that they are not contested and they all hinge on things about who exactly was Paul writing to in the book of Galatians and did Paul write that book before or after the Jerusalem Council? Now a little bit later in the summer we'll begin to get into this central conflict that Paul became a pivotal figure in, but we're not quite there yet. What we want to notice is, at least in this blue letter Bible, all of the blank spaces, all of these years where we don't really quite know exactly what Paul did and historians love a vacuum. As I mentioned before at the beginning of this series, we all have all these holes in, they don't look like holes to us because we just have all of the information we have and it looks like one nice story, it's one narrative compressing it and putting it all together. But if we look at it through other eyes such as chronological eyes, well, what happened to Paul after his road to Damascus experience? There are some what I call silent years. Now the dates are disputed, but there are a considerable number of years after the Damascus road incident and where we sort of pick up Paul's story in the book of Acts. And these were influential years we certainly surmise because the Paul we meet in the road to Damascus, well, he's turned around in his path, but then the Paul that we meet in many of these New Testament epistles that we're going to read is someone who has been living this and thinking about this for a number of years. So actually we're going to have two sermons about the silent years, this first one about some aspects of his life that led to his transformation and next week about other aspects of his life that led to his transformation. Now these influential years would shape that bridge that Paul has become and that he would create between the broader Roman world and the life and teachings of Jesus. And basically part of the reason he was so effective, I will assert, is built into his story and because of his life. Now we're going to pick up a lot of this from the book of Galatians and we're not going to focus so much on the heart of the book of Galatians, why he wrote the letter or to whom he wrote the letter, but we're going to look at some of the tidbits at the first piece of the book that gives us some clues about what happened to Paul in these silent years. He begins the letter this way, And you see right away, Paul sees himself as an apostle partly based on, mostly based on the revelations and his direct relationship with Jesus. To the churches in Galatia, grace and peace to you from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ. Some of you will recognize that certain line. We continue to use it in the church today. Who gave himself for our sins to rescue us from the present evil age. Now there's a little interesting tidbit about how Paul sees the world. According to the will of our God and Father to whom be glory forever and ever. So when we look at transformations, well, we're seeing that the story of Jesus, according to Paul was to rescue us from the present evil age. And we're going to have to look at that aspect of Paul more in subsequent sermons. I want you to know brothers and sisters that the gospel I preached is not of human origin. I did not receive it from any man, nor was I taught it. Rather, I received it by revelation from Jesus Christ. Now, this is a key piece of who Paul is. He's very clear about it. Now at the end of the sermon, we're going to see a way in which in some ways he's way up here in the sky and saying, I received it from above. A little bit later, we're going to hear what he learned from below. Part of my thesis statement about what the Bible is, is the Bible is the reunion of heaven and earth. It's the reconciliation of heaven and earth. And in fact, to a degree, we see this in Paul built into his very story. For you have heard of my previous way of life in Judaism. And if you remember what N.T. Wright said about Judaism, he was talking about this verse. Judaism was not sort of a religion alongside a way of life, which is the way we imagine religions today. Judaism was the chief way by which one, well, pursues the gods, pursues the agenda of the gods, the way one gets through life. Ancient people didn't consider themselves religious. They simply were sort of like fish don't consider themselves wet. You have heard of my previous way of life in Judaism, how intensely I persecuted the Church of God and tried to destroy it. You can see already, this is a considerable amount of time after Damascus, and he's already sort of built a pretty big divide between who he was before and who he is now, and who he considers to be the Church of God. As we continue to get into Paul, that will become a very big issue. I was advancing in Judaism beyond many of my own age, among my people, and was extremely zealous for the tradition of my fathers. But when God, who set me apart from my mother's womb and called me by his grace, was pleased to reveal his Son in me, so that I might preach him among the Gentiles, my immediate response was not to consult any human being. I did not go to Jerusalem to see those who were apostles before I was, but I went to Arabia. Later, I returned to Damascus. Now, this is a little strange. We're going to see, in fact, in a little while, that he eventually did get to Jerusalem. He had some questions for them, and he spent some time with them. But why, after this moment, would he go into Arabia? And where on earth is Arabia? And then why back up to Damascus? Well, these kinds of questions have baffled historians and theologians for a very long time. As I mentioned at the beginning of the series, we're going to be sort of using N.T. Wright, his latest biography of Paul, and F.F. Bruce as sort of guides through these scholarly wildernesses. And N.T. Wright is a very interesting theory as to why Arabia. Now, again, this isn't in the Bible. This is N.T. Wright's considered opinion as one of the preeminent New Testament scholars of today. Where is Arabia? Well, Arabia is sort of south. And what's down there? Now, N.T. Wright thinks, well, he certainly went into the desert. And into the desert to do what? Well, an ancient person would go into the desert to seek God, to seek God directly, to pray and fast and do these things. So this is what Wright says. We discover from the Arabian journey something about Paul's own self-awareness, including at that point a perhaps welcome note of self-doubt in the midst of the zeal. Now, remember, Paul was zealously pursuing one way of life. He's a zealous individual. We're going to see that through the Book of Acts. Everything Paul does, he turns the meter up to 11 when he does anything and almost always causes division and disturbance and trouble because everything he believes, he really believes. And if you're against him, well, he would make people really against him. Barnabas would have a bit more of an ironic character, a bit more of a peacemaker. But this is Paul we're talking about. The zeal of the persecutor and then the zeal of the proclaimer, whether on foot or by donkey, one does not go for several days into a desert just to find a quiet spot to pray. Paul wanted to be clear that the shocking new thing that had been revealed to him really was the fulfillment, the surprising but ultimately satisfying goal of the ancient purposes of the one God, purposes that had been set out, particularly in the law given to Moses on Sinai. He wanted to stay loyal. Saul was starting to come to terms with the possibility that if the divine promises had been completed in Jesus, it might mean that a whole new phase of the divine plan hitherto barely suspected had now been launched, a new phase in which the Torah itself would be seen in a whole new light. So it's N.T. Wright's belief that Paul went down to Sinai to in a certain way. Well, we look at the law and the prophets and the two big figures of that is Moses and Elijah. And Paul perhaps went down to retrace their steps because the Lord had appeared to me. And so he would seek the Lord. And so he would seek the Lord in the places that the Lord had appeared. It's a very reasonable approach to a dramatic turn. Paul I'm sure had a degree of skepticism, as many people do, about having a personal experience. And so he wanted to validate it. He had it from above. Now he wants to try and validate it from below. Then after three years, I went up to Jerusalem to get acquainted with Cephas and stayed with him 15 days. Cephas is the Aramaic name for Peter. I saw none of the other apostles, only James, the Lord's brother. I assure you before God that I am writing you, that what I am writing you is no lie. Now this has to do with the conflict that is brewing in the churches that Paul is writing to. And so he's trying to accredit himself as an apostle for them because they're actually having a really significant church fight. Then I went to Syria and Cilicia. I was personally unknown to the churches of Judea that are in Christ. Now again, he's talking about probably these synagogues that are increasingly believing that Jesus is the fulfillment of their revelation. They only heard the report, the man who formerly persecuted us is now preaching the way he once tried to destroy. And they praised God because of me. Now Paul's reputation in Jerusalem is going to become a very big deal later on in the book of Acts, but we're not there yet. So we basically see that after three years, he spent 15 days in Jerusalem, met with Peter, met with James, and at the end of the sermon, we're going to see when he touches back on that. We can't be completely sure the visit he refers to later on will be this visit, but I think the direction of what he's doing seems clear. He's had his revelation from God. Now he is trying to piece it together with Moses and Elijah, with Moses and the prophets, and he's talking to Peter. He's trying to reconstruct his entire world because Jesus has now turned it upside down. What did he do back in Syria and Cilicia? Well, we easily forget that the author of these letters spent most of his waking hours with his sleeves rolled up. The man has to eat, of course, doing hard physical work in a hot climate. That perhaps two thirds of the conversations he had with people about Jesus and the gospel were conducted not in a place of worship or study, not even in a private home, but in a small cramped workshop. Saul had his feet on the ground and his hands were hardened with labor. This Saul you might think is some egghead disconnected from regular life, but no, he bragged in many places actually about for the most part. He didn't live off the donations of others like a pastor does today, like myself. He lived off of the work of his hands. But his head still buzzing with scripture and the news about Jesus. His heart was still zealous, loyal to the one God. The second thing we can be sure of is that he prayed, he studied, and he figured out all sorts of things. He used those years to sort of piece things together. He had revelation from Jesus and he pieced it together with the book that he knew and the testimony of the apostles. Faced with his letters written a decade or more later, dense as they are with concentrated argument, we cannot imagine that when he wrote them, he was breaking entirely new ground. He could no doubt improvise on the spot, but in his mature thought he gives every evidence of long pondering. Saul spent a silent decade deepening the well of scripture reflection from which he would draw the water he needed. I would argue that it is in fact in these contexts, in this way of life, that he becomes this bridge that the Holy Spirit uses to leap over other cultural layers. In fact, the bridge that was used here has throughout history sort of become a moveable bridge by which it leaps and leaps and leaps and leaps. His letters are crucial to the entire project of what Jesus is doing in the world. Then after 14 years, I went up again to Jerusalem, this time with Barnabas. I took Titus along. I went in response to a revelation. This seems to be basically how Paul lived, how he spoke with Jesus. And meeting privately with those esteemed as leaders, I presented to them the gospel that I preach among the Gentiles. In other words, he presents to them all of the stuff that he had worked up and worked through in these 14 years. Now as we're going to look at next week, he probably had been doing quite a bit of traveling in those years and had gotten his feet wet in the church. All of the stuff that we find in the letters was stuff that he had worked through in those years and not just dreamed it up in his head and spilled it on people, but probably contested back and forth, back and forth with people where it got sharpened and refined and perfected. Continued to be controversial, of course, but that's how we meet the Paul that he does, that we do. And I think this is the way that the Holy Spirit is working. He's certainly receiving revelation, but he's also putting it on the ground among the people working through things together. I wanted to be sure that I was not running had I not been running my race in vain. Now that's an interesting thing because in one hand in the book of Galatians, he's basically saying I didn't get this from other men, but he is checking with other men. He is doing it as a community. Now the picture is coming together. You have direct personal relationship with Christ through visions and revelations. He incorporates these visions into the picture from the Hebrew scriptures. He's lived into all his life, but doing so in a Roman context. He does so in a cosmopolitan Roman world where he has to apply this to everyday life of everyday people. And I think this is how we see the bridge is constructed. Now what do Paul and I have in common? I don't mean me, this Paul, I mean you. What do you have in common? Well, we feel small. Our lives seem individual and perhaps chaotic and random. We don't know how we impact history. In fact, all of us go to our grave not having any understanding. I don't know to what degree Paul imagined he would be one of the most consequential individuals in all of human history. In fact, when we meet him in these books of Timothy, he's quite depressed and thinking that well, what have I done? Here I am in prison. And Paul seems to be a guy who's when he's up, he's up and when he's down, he's down. In fact, he's sometimes nearly bipolar in terms of his mood swings. And he certainly causes a lot of drama wherever he goes. We don't have any perspective on our actions. And that is almost always true of what we're doing in the middle of our lives. We need a bigger vision that affords perspective, gives hope, builds continuity and makes a difference now. All of these things we need because well, these things are deeply meaningful. And this is where I come to what I believe Paul when I believe Paul speaks of the heart of the gospel. And here we have references back to Peter and James. For what I received, I passed on to you as a first importance. And again, what he received? What he received from Christ, how he saw Christ, but also checking with all of the people and checking with the world, checking with the churches, doing all of this work, gaining all of this experience, which he now writes to the church in Corinth. For what I received, I passed on to you as a first importance that Christ died for our sins according to the scriptures, that he was buried, that he was raised on the third day according to the scriptures, and that he appeared to Cephas and then to the twelve. After that, he appeared to more than five hundred of the brothers and sisters at the same time, most of whom are still living, though some have fallen asleep. Then he appeared to James, then to all the apostles. And last of all, he appeared to me also as one abnormally born. He says, yes, I'm a little different from the apostles, but I ought to be considered one of them because I know Jesus personally. He has appeared to me a little different from the other apostles a little bit later. But we stand together. For I am the least of the apostles and do not even deserve to be called an apostle because I persecuted the Church of God. Notice he doesn't disqualify himself because he saw Jesus via revelation. He disqualifies himself because of what happened between Stephen and that revelation. By the grace of God, I am what I am, and his grace to me was not without effect. No, I worked harder than all of them. Yet not I, but the grace of God that was with me, whether then it is I or they. This is what we preach and this is what you believe. There it is. There's the gospel now poured through Paul's life. And that would flow out into this amazing collection of letters that we have from him that we will eventually get to. Now we see that this message, it comes from above. It comes up from below. Paul becomes this bridge. It crosses culture and language gaps. It comes through personal religious experience. It is communal. It doesn't just singular here. It is communal. It is, it is not done alone. Paul didn't want to run his race in vain. And so he connected these worlds. It is historical. It connects past, present, and future. It has worked out in the minds, hearts, and in the hands. So what transformations do you seek? Paul is giving us a pattern to follow. Personal transformation, communal transformation, historical transformation. Who do you call on? Who do you trust to bring these transformations? What are you allowing yourself to be available to God's spirit to be and to become and to do? And probably the biggest question of all, what are you willing to give or to give up?