https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=LvQjOCMKfRQ

 certain elements that are are missing. They don't really have a redemption. They don't have redemption. Which is a really scary element to not have. They will the problem with them trying to introduce redemption and asked me to go back to revoke you a little bit later. But the problem with their lack of redemption is that they the woke religion is rigged update very quickly. They're one of the things and this is something that I think Lindsay doesn't get I don't think he understands this at all that the the truly addictive and thing about about the woke, you know, followers, the thing they really like about it is that they are part of the process of generating morality in real time, right? They love that. They love that it's decentralized like Fight Club, and there's no one person that can like get, you know, knocked off and topple the thing. They love that. And they and then what happens is that new moral precepts disseminate through the network like fashion. Right. And so what that means is it's got all the same dynamics as fashion. So if you're closer to the central node of wokeism that came up with a certain, you know, I don't Latin X or whatever it is thing that they're doing, you know, right now, they, if you're closer to it, and you're the first of your friends to adopt it, then they adopted from you, then you're generated a higher social position within the hierarchy, just like people who come out of New York after Fashion Week, right. And so like, but the thing is, it adopts quickly. And because it goes quickly, they're over to the window of acceptable hatred, yours constantly moving. And when it moves out from underneath somebody, then they get canceled. That's like Rachel, Rachel Dolezal, right? She was doing everything right, according to wokeism. And then the woke change the rules out from underneath her and then canceled her for pretending to be black. And then, um, I mean, she wrote a book afterwards, it was all about how they should go back to the prior woke operating system. Right? Because she liked that one. Um, so that's the they don't have a there's no good redemption mechanic in it, because it's difficult to install a redemption mechanic because you're who are you? What level are you redeeming to? Right? Now, the flip side is the fact that that over some windows always moving means that in the long game, everyone gets canceled.