https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=UfTYddVk604

 Hi, this is Paul. This is Rough Draft for Sunday, where I run through the current status of my Sunday message. In about a decade or so, we've had a pretty big cultural transition. Not too long ago, My Name is Earl had White Lie Christmas, where Earl's ex-wife's mother was blowing up the family because of her lies and gambling addiction, and the mantra of the show was the mantra of a generation, which was, don't judge me. Christians were supposed to be judgmental and non-Christians were supposed to be libertines. Well, it seems that we've sort of flipped that nobody is woke enough. Barack Obama wasn't black enough. Mayor Pete isn't gay enough. Well, President Trump is too handsy with his, with his, you know, when you're a celebrity, they'll let you grab him. Vice President Pence is too prudish. We won't eat with women other than his wife. We've got this alarming anti-human ideas that are running around. There are too many people on the planet. And then the question is, well, which people do you intend to get rid of and how? And most of the people running around saying that there are too many people. Well, what would be the self-application of that? And I certainly wouldn't recommend it, but the charge itself is a difficult one. And then there's antinatalism, which I had never heard about, but it basically asserts that it's irresponsible to bring a child into the world because any child who will come into the world will suffer. And so in order to avoid suffering, you must not bring in any people into the world, which again leads to a strange application of, well, okay, a world without people is a better world, you say. That sounds strange to me because animals have suffered and continue to suffer and there's a world without suffering, your idea of a perfect world? The only answer is to not bring any more people into the world and we don't seem to be doing that anytime soon either. Everyone seems to have the right to judge people except, of course, their maker. And now even if you don't believe in God, this is deeply, deeply ironic given how people are. We claim God is negligent if he doesn't seem active enough about our suffering, yet we are upset if God is interventionist in any way that differs from how we imagine he should be, which reveals that pretty much the God we worship is us. The people of God have always had these questions. If you read the Bible, especially the Old Testament, the Old Testament prophets and the psalmist, you will see people crying out to God for justice, people asking God, why is there so much suffering? Why is there so much pain? Why don't you do something about it? Why don't you save your people? Why are you so absent? It's not inappropriate for Christians to ask these questions and to ask them of God. In fact, that is the best place to ask them. Why are you taking so long to bring justice into the world? Now we've been studying the book of Revelation and there's an old book in the Christian Reformed Church written by Hendrick's son and it was named More Than Conquerors and before a lot of this literary schemes were popular in biblical studies, he had a very interesting one from the book of Revelation, which he called progressive parallelism. And you can see how each set of chapters, there's sort of parallel between them, but yet there's progress as you go through and as I've said before, the book of Revelation is an updating of the Old Testament between the first coming and the second coming. And we saw in chapters one through three, Christ and the Church, and chapters four through seven, which we looked at last week, you have trial and persecution. And then eight through eleven, you have the Church's avenged, protected, and victorious. Now remember there's parallelism all the way through this. A dragon appears in chapter twelve and God has to deal with the dragon. And then there's the final wrath upon the impenitent in chapters fifteen and sixteen. In chapters seventeen through nineteen, you get the introduction of the city of Babylon. Well, what is the city of Babylon? It shows that in some ways the Bible can be conceived of as not only a tale of two lands, heaven and earth, but a tale of two cities. Babylon is a interesting one to point to because of course there was the Tower of Babel that was pointed at in Genesis chapter eleven. There's Babylon of King Nebuchadnezzar, which destroyed the ancient kingdom of Israel. They can't say Rome, but often Babylon is a stand-in for Rome, and that's pretty clear throughout the book. Then they have Augustine's city of God, city of man, and Babylon is the city of man. And then there's the new Jerusalem, which will come down out of heaven. And this is what Jerusalem always should have been, and this is something like Augustine's city of God. Chapter seventeen. One of the angels who had seven bowls came and said to me, come, I will show you the punishment of the great prostitute who sits by many waters. With her the kings of the earth committed adultery and the inhabitants of the earth were intoxicated with the wine of her adulteries. Then the angel carried me away in the spirit into a wilderness. There I saw a woman sitting on a scarlet beast that had covered with blasphemous names and had seven heads and ten horns. The woman was dressed in purple and scarlet and was glittering with gold, precious stones and pearls. She held a golden cup in her hand filled with abominable things and the filth of her adulteries. The name written on her forehead was a mystery. Babylon the great, the mother of prostitutes and of the abominations of the earth. Now prostitutes here isn't simply a slander. Prostitutes is what Babylon is. She sells herself for money. I saw that the woman was drunk with the blood of God's holy people, the blood of those who bore testimony to Jesus. When I saw her I was greatly astonished. After I saw another angel coming down from heaven, he had great authority and the earth was illuminated by his splendor. With a mighty voice he shouted, fallen, fallen is Babylon the great. She has become a dwelling for demons and a haunt for every impure spirit. A haunt for every unclean bird, a haunt for every unclean and detestable animal. Now here the point isn't the birds or the animals. It's the uncleanliness of it. It's a picture. Unclean in the Old Testament isn't a picture of you know filth necessarily. It's a picture of disorder. For all the nations have drunk the maddening wine of her adulteries. The kings of the earth committed adultery with her and the merchants of the earth. Well, how did they commit adultery? Well, they should have been betrothed to God, but instead they're sleeping with her. The merchants of the earth grew rich from her excessive luxuries. Then I heard another voice from heaven say come out of her my people so that you will not share in her sins so that what so that you will not receive Sorry about that. Any of her plagues for her sins have piled up to heaven. You hear this in terms of Sodom and this is echoing through certain other passages in the Old Testament. Her sins have piled up or Nineveh. Her sins have piled up to heaven and God has remembered her crimes. Give back to her as she has given. Pay her double back for what she has done. Pour her a double portion from her own cup. This is a cry for justice. Give to her what she's given the world. Give her as much torment and grief as the glory and luxury she gave herself. In her heart she boasts I sit enthroned as a queen. I am not a widow. I will never mourn. Therefore in one day her plagues will overtake her death mourning and famine. She will be consumed by fire for mighty is the Lord God who judges her. When the kings of the earth who committed adultery with her and shared her luxury See the smoke of her burning they will weep and mourn over her. Terrified at her torment they will stand off and cry. Whoa, whoa to you great city you mighty city of Babylon in one hour your doom has come. The merchants of the earth will weep and mourn over her because no one buys their cargos anymore. Cargos of gold, silver, precious stones and pearls. Fine linen, purple, silk and scarlet cloth. Every sort of citron wood and the articles of every kind of ivory. Costly wood, bronze, iron and marble. Cargos of cinnamon and spice of incense, myrrh and frankincense. Of wine and olive oil, of fine flour and wheat, cattle and sheep, horses and carriages and human beings sold as slaves. This is in a sense a reverse of Isaiah 61 where the wonders are brought to the king of kings. And here basically she has taken the wonders for herself. Then a mighty angel picked up a boulder the size of a large millstone and threw it into the sea. And said with such violence the great city of Babylon will be thrown down. Never to be found again. The music of harpists and musicians, pipers and trumpeters will never be heard in you again. No worker of any trade will ever be found in you again. The sound of a millstone will never be heard in you again. The light of a lamp will never shine in you again. The voice of a bridegroom and bride will never be heard in you again. Your merchants were the world's important people. By your magic spells all the nations were led astray. In her was found the blood of the prophets and of God's holy people of all who have been slaughtered on the earth. After this I heard what sounded like the roar of a great multitude in heaven shouting hallelujah. Salvation and glory and power belong to our God. For true and just are his judgments. He has condemned the great prostitute who corrupted the earth by her adulteries. He has avenged on her the blood of his servants. And again they shouted hallelujah. The smoke of her goes up forever and ever. I saw heaven standing open and there before me was a white horse whose rider is called faithful and true. With justice he judges and wages war. His eyes are like blazing fire and on his head are many crowns. He has a name written on him that no one knows but he himself. He is dressed in a robe dipped in blood and his name is the word of God. The armies of heaven were following him riding on white horses dressed in fine linen white and clean. Coming out of his mouth is a sharp sword with which to strike down the nations. He will rule them with an iron scepter. Quote from the Psalms. He treads the wine press of the fury of the wrath of God almighty. You can hear that in the battle hymn of the republic. On his robe and on his thigh he has a name written king of kings and lord of lords. And I saw an angel standing in the sun who cried in a loud voice to all the birds flying in midair. Come gather together for the great supper of God so that you may eat the flesh of kings generals and the mighty. Of horses and their riders and the flesh of all people free and slave great and small. And I saw the beast and the kings of the earth and their armies gathered together to wage war against the rider on the horse and his army. But the beast was captured and with it the false prophet who had performed the signs on its behalf. With these signs he had deluded those who had received the mark of the beast and worshiped its image. Two of them were thrown alive into the fiery lake of burning sulfur. The rest were killed with the sword coming out of the mouth of the rider on the horse. And all the birds gorged themselves on their flesh. And I saw a great white throne and him who was seated on it. The earth and the heavens fled from his presence. And there was no place for them. And I saw the dead great and small standing before the throne. The books were open. Another book was opened, which is the book of life. The dead were judged according to what they had done as recorded in the books. The sea gave up the dead that that were in them. And death and Hades gave up the dead that were in them. And each person was judged according to what they had done. Then death and Hades were thrown into the lake of fire. The lake of fire is the second death. Anyone whose name is not found written in the book of life was thrown into the lake of fire. Then I saw a new heaven and a new earth. For the first heaven and the first earth had passed away. And there was no longer any sea. I saw the holy city, the new Jerusalem, coming down out of heaven from God. Prepared as a bride beautifully dressed for her husband. And I heard a loud voice from the throne saying, look! God's dwelling place is now among the people and he will dwell with them. They will be his people and God himself will be with them and be their God. He will wipe every tear from their eyes. There will be no more death or mourning or crying or pain for the old order of things has passed away. He who was seated on the throne said, I am making everything new. Then he said, write this down for these words are trustworthy and true. He said to me, it is done. I am the alpha and the omega. Remember Revelation 1. The beginning and the end. To the thirsty, I will give water without cost from the spring of the water of life. To those who are victorious, I will inherit all. To those who are victorious will inherit all of this. They're the meek. And I will be their God and they will be my children. But the cowardly, the unbelieving, the vile, the murderers, the sexually immoral, those who practice magic arts, the idolaters and all liars, they will be consigned to the fiery lake of burning sulfur. This is the second death. Now remember that Revelation is the Old Testament images plus Jesus plus global. And so you see this in Sodom and Gomorrah. You see this in the threats against Nineveh. You see this in the great day of the Lord, the destruction of Jerusalem. You see this echoed over and over and over again in the Bible and throughout history. You have pre-echoes in Pompeii and we see it how many times when empires fall. We see it in the unresolvable because this is what we face in life. We see enemies that are too great for us. Masters inside and out that won't let us go. And we look and we look at people and we find that generational things bind them. Mental illness binds them. Substance abuse binds them. Economic binds them. Politics binds them. Racism and injustice bind them. All of these things bind us. And we can't get out of it and we cry, how long, oh Lord, how long? Will you not bring justice? Yes, he will. He will bring justice. And he will bring the new heavens and the new earth. Miroslav Volf in his great book Exclusion and Embrace addresses what is so instinctive because we imagine God isn't allowed to do this. One could object that it is not worthy of God to wield the sword. Is God not love, long-suffering and all-powerful love? A counter question could go something like this. Is it not a bit too arrogant to presume that our contemporary sensibilities about what is compatible with God's love are so much healthier than those of the people of God throughout the whole history of Judaism and Christianity? Here, however, I am less interested in arguing that God's violence is not unworthy of God than in showing that it is beneficial to us. Atlan has rightly drawn our attention to the fact that in a world of violence, where we live, we are faced with an inescapable alternative, either God's violence or human violence. Most people who insist on God's non-violence cannot resist using violence themselves. We see this in our new moralistic age. Will you punch a Nazi? Do you feel entitled to cast judgment over others? Most people who insist on God's non-violence cannot resist using violence themselves or tacitly sanctioning its use by others. They deem the talk of God's judgment irrelevant, but think nothing of entrusting God's judgment into human hands. Persuaded, presumably, that this is less dangerous or more humane than to believe in a God who judges. That we should bring down the powerful from their thrones. That's what we're all excited about. It seems responsible, even necessary, that God should do the same as the song of that revolutionary virgin explicitly states is dismissed as crude. And so violence thrives secretly nourished by a belief that a God who refuses belief in a God that refuses to wield the sword. And so violence is a way of saying that God should be the same. The book of Revelation says a day is coming. The injustices of this world will be addressed. Not by us, but by him. The unresolvables will be resolved. And it will be done. And it will be better. More than you can hope or imagine. Can you believe it? And will you be ready?