https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=080dDyNnRIs

 Hi, this is Paul and this is part of my Rough Draft for Sunday series. Those of you who are new to my channel, usually every Friday I will walk through the draft of my sermon that I'll be preaching on Sunday. I've started a new playlist on my channel of my Sunday work and so some of you are curious about that, you can find it. Talking into a microphone and a webcam up close like this, this is really in a sense YouTube language and again for my Jordan Peterson people, I'm using yourselves to death and so I've done a lot of thinking about what YouTube is, how it communicates, what it prioritizes, how it distorts. So my Rough Draft to Sunday is exactly what I say. It's a, I'm working through my draft, I'm working through my sermon, sometimes by Friday I feel good about my sermon, sometimes by Friday I still feel terrible about my sermon but I've still got Saturday and Sunday morning to clean it up and finish it up. And about at this point, 10 to 20 times more people see this Rough Draft than will be in church and see the sermon, which is okay with me, but it's a different medium and you'll notice if you actually watch this Sunday, I don't want to use the word performance, if you want to watch the Sunday service on the church's Facebook page or on the, you can watch it on Facebook Live or on the YouTube which I record and put on the church channel, the church is a separate channel from this, this is my personal channel, you'll see differences and you'll also notice that it's different watching me on stage than it is having my face up here close. The YouTube is a development of television and television is all about the face. Church is not about the face, church is about a much realer way of being together and so actually being in church is different from listening to me talk about it in this way, but this is all part of my experiment and I've actually found this talking through the the sermon beforehand to be a really useful exercise in terms of honing the sermon for me. If you go to my blog, leadingchurch.com, you'll notice that there's a lot of pre-sermon blogging that I've done over the years and that's been really helpful because it kind of leaves a paper trail of that, but all of those posts are exactly like this, in fact they're even rougher drafts than this is usually, but it's helpful to kind of talk things through. Well, we're in Easter and I have a good friend, I'll even name him, my good friend Eric Dirksen, you can find him on Twitter, he's a friend of mine on Twitter, he's pastor of Christ Church Davis, he and the Christ Church Davis people, I kind of smile, they're the Reformed Sacramentalists and they know a whole lot more about liturgy than I ever will, but they practice it and they do the seasons right and I'm a mess liturgically, as I said to Jonathan Pagel, I don't do the seasons right, but Christ Church Davis does and I love their daughter Church of Ours and I love them, Philip Majoren's too, Philip and his wife Sarah, they're just wonderful, wonderful people. So Eric just reminded the world via Twitter this week, he said Easter is so big, it deserves a season, not a day and in terms of the liturgical history of church, that's in fact what Easter is, it's an entire season and so what I'm doing after my Easter sermon that I preached last week, which you can find on YouTube, is I'm going to be walking through all the post resurrection stories and we're going to look at all the canonical post resurrection stories in, at least the ones in the Gospels, and then when we come to Ascension Day, we don't do an Ascension Day service at Living Stones, which is kind of too bad, but Americans are so disconnected from liturgy to come to church on a Thursday night for the Ascension, which is something that gets into very big discussion about Protestant, Orthodox and Catholic and the liturgical calendar and what it is and again the good people at Christ Church Davis have given me a wonderful education in this, but Easter does deserve a whole season and it's, and as C.S. Lewis noted in the quote I used last week of his sermon, you know, Easter begins on Easter Sunday and it goes through Ascension Day, which is an essential component of Easter and then I will end that in Pentecost and my plan is after Pentecost I'm going to go back to Second Kings and this just shows what a liturgical disaster I am, but I also think it's important that the church, that series where I'm in Second Kings is part of this very, very long walk through the Bible that I started a number of years ago because I got tired of doing little one-off sermon series. So there's a probably unnecessarily long preamble to my rough draft, my rough draft for Sunday series. So here goes. Now in my experience almost everyone believes that Jesus of Nazareth was a historical figure and a great teacher and a sort of a prophet saying controversial things. Now Jesus, I still regularly run into people now in the comments section on YouTube who do things like deny Jesus as a historical figure. That's a pretty out, in my opinion that's a pretty outlandish position. There's, yeah, there are lots of books that go into this. I don't think it's seriously, I don't think it's seriously contested that Jesus of Nazareth was a historical figure. It just seems, it's just pretty hard to swallow, but if that's your position, that's your position, you're probably not going to listen to this, that's okay. So almost everyone believes Jesus of Nazareth was a historical figure, was a great teacher. And again, I'll hear this from church and un-churched people that despite the rough treatment the church gets in popular culture today, Jesus still is, his reputation, I don't know, I'm sure someone out there is polling favorability or job approval ratings for Jesus. But Jesus, people say, wow, the church, but Jesus, hey, even, I was listening to Russell Brand with his conversation with Jordan Peterson and Russell just kind of trying to limit Jesus to the synoptic gospels. I'd love to have a conversation with Russell Brand on that move, but even Russell Brand, hey Jesus, Buddha, whatever person you think is nice and important. Well, and secularists tend to get mushy on the miracles. It's interesting to notice that for most of Christian history, the miracles were seen as validation and it's later on in the development of secularism and the enlightenment that that kind of flipped and miracles are seen as suspect. It's really helpful to go back and look at the breadth of miracle writing in the ancient world and to really try to get your mind around that. But almost everyone believes Jesus of Nazareth was a historical figure, a great teacher, a sort of prophet, and at least he was, people claimed that he did miracles. Now also almost everyone believes that the trouble is the other guy, the trouble in this world, that Christians blame non-Christians and non-Christians blame Christians and Democrats blame Republicans and Republicans blame Democrats and if you're in another country, you know who the out group is, you know how that whole thing works. Someone else is to blame for what's been going on. Those in power, and this is the thing, people have power, those in power of home or church or school of government blame the slackers who resist their power and won't volunteer or won't show up and now we have this whole other conversation, this whole other narrative that says we blame those in power and you know it gets really binary in terms of just about everything and that's kind of how things work. As things get lower and lower resolution they get practically to binary and then we have good people and bad people and bad people are to blame. So almost everyone believes something about Jesus, almost everyone believes that the other guy is to blame and almost everyone believes that we see things mostly right or good, if not perfectly and that's when we're trying to be humble because if you didn't believe what you believed you would believe something else. It's just natural, a natural aspect of believing and yeah we might say well yeah maybe I don't have everything right or maybe I'm a little cloudy but for the most part I see the way things are and then we imagine that if we only had a little bit more power or a little bit more money or a little bit more information or a bit more control then we could put the world right. But my contention is that even as I watch people grow in all four we never arrive and I remember this at the, I remember the acceptance speech by Barack Obama and I remember that talk and I'm thinking because you know I live in a blue state and I'm you know much you know I've always tended to be more over on the blue side of things. You know people I'm listening to them talk and I'm thinking you know this is way overreaching in terms of you know what you think will actually happen and the same thing happened when Trump was elected. This is the day that yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah and I don't know why we accept this kind of talk or so many people eat it up that just kind of shows our biases and our weaknesses but we always imagine that you know when our party reigns or when we get the job we want or when we finally have the lover that we've been dying for and when, when, when or when you know again mostly Jordan Peterson watching this when Jordan Peterson accepts the resurrection or when Jordan Peterson gives up on these religious people then yeah then the kingdom comes then it's eschatological. Now before Good Friday Jesus followers were confident. I mean the whole Palm Sunday triumphal entry thing Jesus had power. Jesus was right. Jesus was going to change the world politically and religiously and his disciples had left fishing boats behind, left taxation behind, left all kinds of things behind and were following him and you know they had some real questions about heading to Jerusalem. They thought you know maybe we should hang back in Galilee and continue to build our base and maybe do some weapons training or you know just wait for God to come in and do a number on Herod just like he did a number on Pharaoh and you know we're going to first take Jerusalem and then we're going to take Antioch and then we're going to take, then we're going to you know march in and take Ephesus and then we're going to go all the way to Rome. Yeah and then Jesus of course goes to the cross and then all comes to an end and so what we imagine that what Peter just needed was you think or what Jesus just needed was you know thinking in Peter's mind Jesus has it mostly right and we really believe in him and we really think he's you know he's the Messiah but he just needs a little advice. He just needs a little help. He's mostly there so then Peter takes him aside when Jesus says you know I'm going to go to Jerusalem. I'm going to be delivered over into the hands of Gentiles and I'm going to be killed and Peter says I'm not going to let this happen and Jesus says get behind me Satan. Satan? Well I was, these were my ideas to improve things. Now as many of you know I had this conversation with Jordan Peterson this week and Nancy Schuller in the Freddie and Paul show last week says you sure do like Jordan Peterson. It's funny because I didn't think I was that affirming in the sermon but Nancy watches me on Facebook and all that stuff and yes I sure do like Jordan Peterson. But one of the things so in anticipation of this talk I was going to have with him I made it known that I was going to have this conversation with him and people did exactly what I probably would have done. They came up to me and they're you know Paul this is what you should talk to him about and this is what he needs to know and maybe if you know maybe if you talk to him and if we pray really hard then we can God pill him. You know we're going to God pill Jordan Peterson and he's going to become a Christian and you know and off we go. And if Jordan Peterson becomes a Christian then you know then we'll have a testimony and it's like when you're it's like when if you're a Christian and your team wins the Super Bowl and the quarterback comes up just like quarterbacks often do and says first and foremost I want to thank my Lord and Savior Jesus Christ and and all the Christians all go oh this is so wonderful and all the atheists say yeah yeah yeah yeah get on. I still like it you still threw the touchdown. So you know this is this this is this tribalism game that we play but but even if you're a mega Jordan Peterson fan I want him to get him to believe in Jesus in the right way and and I want to get I want to give him these books to read and I gave him some book ideas and talked about some books I was doing that intentionally. We all see tools right baby and so you know the the the guy higher up on the hierarchy you know when we look down we see obstacles and or sometimes tools and when we look up we see obstacles and sometimes tools. So I don't know if I'm going to say I'll listen Sunday but we'll see how many we'll see how many Jordan Peterson fans are in church this week. So so you know get him to broadcast to his larger audience than mine whatever we think we need the message for the day to be. And this is no different from what Peter does to Jesus and it's no different from what we we all do to each other because deep in our hearts we really do imagine that if if our vision of the world were to come true then well everything would be perfect. And and if you just sit and think about that for a moment what does that say about us and what does that say about our ability to critique and our ability to judge and our ability to know the right thing. And when it comes to each other when we look at each other of course we look at each other suspiciously because the people in the other secular cultural religious political camp are all doing the same thing. And so now we're all resisting each other because we're all going to combat each other with different theories of what the world should be like. And in Christian terms we call this eschatology. This this is tell us this is ultimate ends. This is life the way it should be. And and we think yeah maybe in Christian terms yeah maybe Jesus will get us 98 percent there and it'll be his power to get us. But what Jesus is supposed to bring in is exactly what I have in my mind. So Good Friday is just an utter catastrophe. The disciples flee and this year I actually we did a joint service with with Christ Church Davis or we didn't really do a joint service. We moved off them because I knew they're going to have four services this week and I talked to Pete who you know organizes worship here I said Pete you want to you know you want to organize a good a good Friday service or you want to just go to Christ Searchers Davis and and mooch off them. He said yeah let's mooch. So we drove over to Davis and we mooched off them. And and you know so Eric was doing the Eric was doing the service and they're doing it tragically. So we're just reading we're just reading the whole story. And these are stories that I've read forever. But but each time you read even a familiar story something sometimes something pops out of you. And this year what popped out of me when Eric was reading the story was Jesus was abandoned by his friends. And I just thought how crushing that must have been that you know I'm with Tolkien and Lewis that you know friendship is one of the great joys in humanity and and like so many of the good gifts of God it doesn't scale according to our hierarchies and and you can be you can live in the crappiest country in the world you can have no money at all you can have a horrible marriage you can you can be in prison. But you know if you've got a friend you've got one of these things in the world that is you know worth more than gold and we joke about that. But it's true. And and then to have Jesus friends abandoned him even after Peter had said you know I'll go to the death with you and Peter runs and then when he when John gets him into the the high priest's house you know he he he folds under the you know he folds under the questions of a slave girl. I mean yeah this is archetypal. So you know the disciples flee three years of their work down the drain. If only Jesus had taken their advice this horrible thing could have been avoided. And and so you know look around who to blame Jesus let's blame Judas and in a sense yeah Judas set the whole thing up. But you know everybody's got their theory about Judas and my theory is if you know was Judas greedy perhaps that's canonical. But you usually don't usually let your most trusted person your most you know usually let your most trusted person hold the money. And so Judas was a guy they trusted. And so my you know my theory on the on the betrayal of Judas is that Judas. Judas Judas Judas just got frustrated with Jesus and got disillusioned with Jesus and turned him over because probably Jesus wouldn't follow his plan. Now there's a lot of question about who Judas was was Judas is zealot. You know was he part of that camp. Jesus seemed to have all of the camps. Jesus seemed to have all of the culture war camps in his inner circle which to me says something amazing. Read about Lincoln. But you know all of those cultural camps in his inner circle. And so did Judas just get frustrated that Jesus wasn't going to organize an army and overthrow Herod and and you know besiege the Antonia fortress and begin a revolution like many many many other supposed Messiahs had tried in Judea and the Galilee. During this period of time read a little bit of history. There's a lot of people who went that route and Jesus turns from that route completely. And well maybe Judas thought if he do this this would this would force Jesus hand and Jesus would you know do a do a Gandalf in the in the in the troll in the in the goblin kingdom and you know just you know wipe them out. But Jesus doesn't and he dies. And of course maybe if you're a you're a skeptic or an atheist you'd say of course he died. He was a dude. All those miracles were fake. So what do you expect. Well let's read this story because this story comes at an interesting point in Luke's telling. Now the same day two of them now two of them were going to a village named Emmaus. Now what's really interesting here is is two of them were going to a village named Emmaus. Now what's really interesting here is is two of them were talking about one of the things we often don't realize when you're reading the Gospels is that there's these disciples so there's the three and then there's the twelve and don't forget the Jews love their numbers and the meaning of these numbers. There's the three and then there's the twelve but but we do know that there's this this other larger cloud of people that were in the mix and these two are part of that other larger cloud and we'll get one of their names soon and they're going to a specific place. And now this this particular in store particular story and Luke reads kind of more like a legend. It's almost too good to be true and it's very interesting and I don't think it's a legend but but it kind of reads this way and it's only in Luke and and I would prefer to think that this is probably probably from Cleopas. And so now that same day the same day after the women had visited the tomb this is remember Sunday is their Monday so it's the first day of their regular week the Sabbath is over and and after all of the events of the weekend these these two people they might be husband and wife are leaving Jerusalem and they're walking to Jerusalem and they're walking to Jerusalem and they're walking to Jerusalem and they're walking to Jerusalem and they're walking to Jerusalem and they're walking to Jerusalem and they're walking to Jerusalem and they're walking to Jerusalem and they're walking to Jerusalem and they're walking to Jerusalem and they're walking to Jerusalem and they're walking to Jerusalem and they're walking to Jerusalem and they're walking to Jerusalem and they're walking to Jerusalem and they're walking to Jerusalem and they're walking to Jerusalem and they're walking to Jerusalem and they're walking to Jerusalem and they're walking to Jerusalem and they're walking to Jerusalem and they're walking to Jerusalem and they're walking to Jerusalem and they're walking to Jerusalem and they're walking to Jerusalem and they're walking to Jerusalem and they're walking to Jerusalem and they're walking back to their to their village in Mayis where they live and that's about seven miles from Jerusalem and they're talking to each other about everything that happened there. They're debriefing and and as they talked and discussed these things with each other, Jesus himself came up and walked among them and now. The cool thing about this story is that now Jesus had the three and Jesus had the twelve, but but Jesus picks these two who seem to be well, they're kind of following him, but they're nobodies. They're you know again in Jordan Peterson language. They're like all y'all out there watching his videos and and and you kind of like him and you you know you pay good money to show up to an event and and and maybe you're even a bigger fan. You know you get to go to the VIP thing and you and you get to go to the special the VIP meet and greet and you get your seven second selfie with Jordan Peterson and that's all cool. Because you know this is just this is a in the words of Jamie Smith. This is a cultural literacy. Jamie Smith is a philosopher at Calvin College. This is this is a cultural liturgy and this is what we do and so and so these two were in it and now Jesus shows up completely unexpected to them and that would be like if you had you had your little Jordan Peterson meet up in Sacramento or guy called me from Fresno. He has none in Fresno, so if you're in Fresno and you want to start a meetup contact me and I'll put you in charge connection with the other guy and you guys can meet together. But Jordan Peterson shows up in your in your Jordan Peterson meetup group in Fresno. Poop! He pops in and this is like a fantasy that that people who are are fans of people have. But they're kept from recognizing and the language here is ambiguous. Does God keep them from recognizing them? Does their hardness of heart? We'll get into that as we as we go through but they're kept from recognizing him and they asked and he asked them what are you discussing as you walk along? And they stood still their faces downcast because hey Jerusalem is not a big place. This is a well integrated community with a very thick culture and they're they're just incredulous. One of them named Cleopas and again the name dropping is important because again if you read Richard Bauckham's book this probably is Luke's way of footnoting this because he's saying to the community that he knows is going to read this. You know who this dude is if you don't believe me go ask him about this story and he'll he'll tell you the story. The poor guy's probably tired of you know someone walks in your Cleopas. Yeah. Yeah. You're the one who had that story about that your trip other. Yeah. I have the story. Can you please tell me the story. I gotta tell the story again. It probably tells the story again. So Cleopas asked him. Are you the only one visiting Jerusalem who does not know the things that are happening that that have happened in these days and and that's the story. And I just love how in this story Jesus pops in and he's a rube and and you know again it would be a Jordan Peterson comes. I'm not going to probably going to use all these illustrations in my sermon because nobody in my congregations going to get it. But most of you are listening to this or part of that. So I'll use it here for you. You know Jordan Peterson comes to your two person meetup group in Fresno in disguise. And if I were Jordan Peterson I would definitely think about doing that because that would be so much fun. But anyway because hey you can't you can't go out and not get hassled by people when you get famous you can't have your email out there you can't have your phone out there because everybody wants to talk to you. So hey you go around in disguise and you know pop into a meetup group and say yeah we're talking about Jordan Peterson we're talking about this resurrection stuff. Is he a Christian is he not a Christian. I don't know. I'm probably failing at my rough draft but I haven't done another video since that anyway. As you can tell discipline is is a growing edge for me. All right. So the clip says dude what what what is your deal. Jesus says what things playing dumb about Jesus of Nazareth they replied he was a prophet powerful and word indeed before God. Surely you must have heard of this guy the chief priests and the rulers handed him over to be sentenced to death and they crucified him. But we had hoped that he was the one who was going to redeem Israel. Now what's critical about this is that this actually shows us exactly who they thought Jesus was and and they well Jesus of Nazareth they use just as the name that he would be referred to. You know and I made a comment in in the YouTube that when we say Jesus Christ Christ is not Jesus last name. Christ is a title it means anointed. And when I said in my comment in my conversation with Peterson Jesus wouldn't be Christ without the church. Yeah I still stand by that statement. You should think about it. I think it's theologically correct and I think it's at a jet exegetically true even though it's not in the Bible. But you have to understand what Christ is and what Jesus is one's a name and one's a title. It's not that different from the Lord which is the you know kind of the English version of the Tetragrammaton and God. God is kind of a title while there's Almighty and there's there's other titles like it used in the Old Testament but there's the name and there's a title. So Jesus of Nazareth they replied he was a prophet. He's a prophet. Well this is actually a big conversation when you read the Gospels. Is Jesus a prophet. Yeah he's a prophet. Now later we'll say prophet priest and king. But to claim him to be a prophet is actually a far lower thing than what he claimed to be. He was a prophet powerful and word indeed before God. So that's that's an interest in a sense he was he stood before God. He served God. He he worked on God's behalf and all the people and he did this before them. And so these are these are in a sense pre-Christians because they're still good monotheists and and they haven't kind of crossed this heretical border into Trinitarianism where they're going to worship Jesus and we're going to see as we look at some of these post-resurrection accounts. This is going to be right now in terms of the history of the church. This is something they're really dealing with because you know just because he comes along and does miracles and stuff that does not mean you're going to abandon your ideological theological religious framework. People don't like it as Jordan Peterson says when you poke him in their axioms. And so these guys were fans but he was a prophet powerful and word indeed before God and all the people the chief priests now they might be the repugnant other as Alan Jacobs calls them. The chief priests and our rulers are you know those those elites in Jerusalem handed him over showing you who their real masters are to be sentenced to death and they crucified him. But we had hoped that he would be the one who was going to redeem Israel and now there's so much in that word redeem but but you can understand that that ever since if one way to understand the entire Old Testament as Christians call it is is to understand. There's so many lenses that you can look at it through but but one of it is you know let's say. Israelite nationalism the Israelites are slaves again and again and again and again if you look at the geopolitical realities of of where where Israel was compared to the Mesopotamia the great empires of the Fertile Crescent and the great empires of Egypt. But they were always somebody's client and and you know they have this little golden age with with David and Solomon and then some of the other kingdoms had had little mini golden ages of a civilization fan golden ages are a thing. So you know that they have these they have their golden ages but but you know they're they're just waiting for God to deliver Israel because they've been they've been fed this religious ideology that you know the God of creation has you know that they're his special people. And of course the rest of the nations are looking at them and say they think they're God's chosen people well gosh if that's what meaning if that's what being God's chosen people looks like count me out because they seem chosen for suffering is what they seem. Well now suddenly some lights might start coming on because this is exactly what Jesus has been talking about and Jesus is going to say this is exactly what the whole story has been about and you all have the book. And what he exposes here is that these people have their implicit assumptions about what the redemption of Israel should look like and in many ways Israel will travel up a hierarchy and if you read the Old Testament prophets it's all there that Israel will travel up this hierarchy and they will be the dominant empire over all the world. Not the Babylonians not the Egyptians not the Greeks not the Romans not the British not the Germans not the Dutch should mention them not the Americans but God's chosen people are going to deliver this now. Now it's exactly Jesus ambiguity with this agenda that got him into trouble with the religious faction like the Pharisees that should have been his natural allies because the Pharisees I think in some ways were closest to Jesus in terms of just the right amount you know they weren't the Essenes way out in the desert praying oh Lord come in and kill all the bad people and rescue us here in our bunker in Idaho and Montana. That's the Essenes they weren't the zealots who were out there the social justice warriors looking to you know throttle free speechers and folks like that they weren't they weren't any of these things they were the moderates and they were you know they were they were evangelical Christians in some ways and they they believed that God would intervene but they should they believed that their politics should be sensible and you know they were going to they were going to fight they were going to fight corruption and fight the worldliness by you know deciding not to watch Disney movies and by not going to R rated movies and to kiss dating behind and all of these ways and in many ways Jesus should have been closest to them and it's usually those it's the I think it was Freud that made that comment about the resentment of the familiar but because they're so close to him they were so angry with him because they would look at Jesus and think you could have been so useful in our in our mission to save the world but you wouldn't go along with us and so here are these two followers Cleopas being one of them maybe the other being his wife maybe someone else we don't know but Jesus didn't fulfill their plans for how the world should be saved and what's more it is the third day since all of this took place in addition some of our women amazed us now there are women so we're not quite sure we believe them because of course women you know not terribly reliable witnesses my mama maybe but you know they've got hormones and periods and stuff so can't really trust them with things like testimony and power nothing like that so some of those women amazed us they went to the tomb early this morning and they didn't find his body they came and told us that they had seen a vision of angels who had said he was alive and so all the skeptics said angel again yeah angels and then some of our companions went to the tomb and found it was just as the women said dog got it even a clock is right twice a day now that's analog clocks for all you young folks out there that's um that's that's this kind of clock I know you don't know how to read it because you're used to the digital things but think about it clock can be right twice a day I'm way off the rails on my sermon. But anyway let's keep going. Some of our companions went to the tomb and found it just the way the women had said but they did not see Jesus. He said to them meaning Jesus how foolish you are. This is you know again people are like well Jesus would never say anything nice and the thing is that Jesus people imagine Jesus to be this kind of Zen mystical dude who seems just permanently wasted on pot or something that's just you know oh nice oh you're going to crucify me groovy man yeah I grew up in the 70s I know I remember the 70s. You know oh wow this wasn't Jesus at all Jesus Jesus got frustrated Jesus got vexed Jesus had a temper Jesus Jesus Jesus was it you know Jesus was one of us how foolish you are he says to them and how slow to believe all that the prophets have spoken and what's what's really cool about this is. He doesn't say yeah you didn't listen to me did you he doesn't take it in the ego direction he takes it in and I know this is going to drive some of you crazy he takes it in the biblical direction and it tells them hey you you you've got the law and the prophets you've got Moses and the prophets don't you read them and they're like read them that's all we do is read them all we do is debate them and and Jesus is like why can't you read them. Why can't you see I sent you the book well you don't even get it even when you study it all the time and yeah we're all Homer Simpson. Did not the Messiah have to suffer these things and then enter his glory and then suddenly we should begin to put together the relationship with Jesus and Israel and their story and if you want a real lesson in that read the gospel of Matthew because Matthew just focuses right in on that and then Paul goes to that many times. And you know Jesus is is you know Jesus is saying yeah you understood that Israel was always suffering that that being chosen by God meant she was chosen to suffer. And you're like no no no no no I want chosen by God to mean chosen to get lottery numbers and chosen to have you know the hot wife or the rich husband or the kids that never go astray or the job that that only you know makes me money and is always secure and the great travel and the life I've always wanted and Jesus is saying. Have you seen Israel have you seen me it's the same story boys and girls why can't you get this and again Jesus he gets frustrated sometimes says to his disciples oh you have little faith and then we see this dynamic that Jesus will be enormously patient and generous and tolerant of people who in a sense are far from the story. While those who should know better the Pharisees his disciples these are the ones he these are the ones he gets upset with. And you begin to begin to understand that in the light of say the story of Israel that we see in the Old Testament and explained with them with Moses and the Israelites and the Pharisees and the Israelites and the Israelites and the Israelites. And you begin to begin to understand that in the light of say the story of Israel that we see in the Old Testament and explained with them with Moses and all the prophets he explained to them that what what was said in all the scriptures concerning himself now. Would you read this someone is like well why did you write that sermon down. The point of this is that it's obvious and you say. How obvious can it be I keep reading all these books I keep trying to figure it out please would you just let me in and then right away we have to begin to ask the question why can't we see him. And you see that that's at the center of this story that they can't recognize him and in fact Jesus goes and when he's debating with the religious leaders they're complaining about Moses and Jesus says to them. Hey you know what if you knew Moses you'd recognize me and they're like. And in fact many people today I'll pick on our pick on rushel brand who's you know I've watched a couple of his interviews I really think he's a he's quite a good interviewer I thought the guy was just gonna be a cloud but he's really smart. He asked interesting questions and he's fun to listen to so you know thumbs up Russell brand and your little show. I'll even have you on the Freddie and Paul show if you ask nicely. It's it's it's it's a sure sign of a sick mind if I find my own jokes funny but. You know right here is the key to this passage that well they can't recognize him well they can't recognize him because they don't read the scriptures and all of us are dying why don't you flesh out Jesus sermon and here's the thing Jesus didn't write a book. All we have our accounts from him and and and why don't you and I think the point of that that Luke and Jesus is making here is. You don't need more information you have everything you need in fact Paul will make that argument and and the Old Testament will make that argument that even if. You know even if you don't know the Bible well or all of us really have enough information it's not really a matter of the information it's a matter of our hearts. And something inside has to change and you say well why can't I just change it well it's kind of like why can't you just. Stop drinking because one day you think you should or or why can't you just treat your friends like you should. Or why can't you just treat your friends better or why can't you just or why can't you just all these ways that you know would improve you if you wanted to do it why can't you just well it's because of our hearts. And our hearts are hard and our hearts are are are rotten and self serving and and and we don't love because we can't and we're a mess and Jesus is frustrated with them he said you have everything you need. And as they approached the village to where they were going Jesus continued as if he was going further so so Jordan Peterson comes to his meetup and he keeps the disguises on and and and when they say when he says wallop they all think. He just said wallop in that funny way and he said God only knows and and and and you think well. Sounds familiar and that's why he says oh dude you know yeah yeah yeah yeah. You're talking to us and yeah you're beating us up a little bit but I kind of like being beat up in that way so so why don't you come on home it's getting dark the roads are dangerous stay with us and and this is an important signaling here because. What what Luke is signaling is again is is is hospitality and it's a very important theme in the Old Testament Abraham lot why does lot take them in what happens in in. Not not Gilead but what happens and give you a Saul's hometown at the end of the book of judges. They take him in and no no no I don't want to come and you know different cultures have different dances and games like this and and Paul would you like would you like to stay for dinner no no no I couldn't eat I'm not really hungry oh please please stay for dinner oh no I don't want to oh please please okay I insist that maybe you want to stay maybe you don't want to stay this is how the game is played so. Come and say no no no no so they urged her urgently strong and please don't go come and stay with us and this is like a lot you know bringing them in and stay with us for it is nearly evening the day is almost over so he went and stayed with them. And when he sat at the table with them he took the bread now now. The previous verse and this in person are important because they work together because they're the hosts but. He is the host. What's happening here it's it's symbolism it's it's a moment it's a it's a cultural it's a cultural liturgy it's a real liturgy. When they were at the table with them he took bread gave thanks broke it and began to give it to them. And then their eyes are open and now you can preach this text so many different ways and they're all right here where it's it's in the and then sometimes I were I wish we were a church that did communion every week. There's issues there's issues we got issues. But he broke the bread and then they're like. What does that mean he he and and then you know it's Jordan Peterson taken off his mask at the Fresno Jordan Peterson meetup and then poof he's gone it's like. Why this is this is like telling Mary Magdalene don't cling to me. Well why do you tease us so God why why in this world do we only taste the glory do we only see it for a moment why is it just beyond our reach. And actually there's a if you think that through it's important because. When we had glory within our reach let's say in the garden what did we do with it we can't be fully trusted this is why the American. Political system is set the way it is we can't be fully trusted no one is safe no one is fully trustworthy everyone is corrupt and so until God just gives us the pointer and says he takes the bread he gives thanks. And gives it to them it's like bag there you are the the the the object of our desire the one that we but but what does it mean. Prophet women at the tomb what and and now we begin to see well what are they what are they going to do well. So they asked each other we're not our hearts burning when he said wallop and and when he said lobster and then when he said God only knows. When he talked to us on the road and open the scriptures to us weren't our hearts burning why why couldn't we see and this is this is always our problem. They got up and returned at once to Jerusalem braving the night they're going into the darkness and they found a lab they found the 11 and those with them see there's always this group with them if you read the gospels carefully you'll pick it out the stuff's in there. Assembled together and saying it is true the Lord has risen. And has appeared to Simon now i'm not going to go into that but it's you know Paul talks about that in first Corinthians 15. Then the two had then the two then the two told what had happened on the way how Jesus was recognized by them when he broke the bread. All right now all y'all who know anything about the Bible have been in church enough where you raised Orthodox Roman Catholic Protestant right there is a sacrament and whether you got seven or two right there is a sacrament and when he broke the bread they could see him. What's going on well here in Luke 24 there are three stories back to back there's the women at the tomb there's the road to Emmaus and then there's the Jesus setting and that kind of sets up Luke's way into the book of Acts. Luke is telling theophilus this story now now it's really important this story here because Luke is telling us about the resurrection and he's not telling us about that that moment you know bright light or the shout of Turin or you know Luke is saying this is what the resurrection means. That these two bands who have Jesus wrong who are not the three or the twelve but they're you know people who never get named except Cleopas because you know somebody's got to verify this story otherwise everybody's going to think Luke made it up. This is where he shows up and this is how we are he's he's he's told us everything he's given us everything we can't see it and we can't see it because we we don't want to see it and also because just like when he disappears God says I can't let you I can't give it to you yet. Because you're not trustworthy you're you're not there yet and and in fact this the more I give you the more. What's the relationship between Israel suffering and Jesus suffering because that's right there at the center. What's the relationship between power and brokenness Tim Keller tells this great story that was from Martin Lloyd Jones that was from a group of old Welsh pastors who were talking about this this young man who was coming into the ministry and had all these gifts and everybody was coming to his church and and and and everything was going great and everyone was so excited about his preaching and everyone was so excited about what Jesus was doing. And and basically the comment made about them as well he hasn't been basically he hasn't been wounded yet. We like our heroes not in prison. We like our heroes uncaptured we like our heroes without scars. No no no that's not. We need to be wounded healers we need to be broken shepherds we need to be because once God puts the glory in our hands it's our it's the scars in his hands that show he's able to hold the glory. And and and so they cannot know Pentecost without Good Friday and Easter and what you will see in the stories of the apostles who are kind of the 12 certifiable witnesses witnesses within the the religious cultural frame that that they are working. You know they don't get wealthy usually they get dead and and some of them get dead fast and and Jesus says this is the story and and so you wonder well why did the gospel spread in China when they kicked out all the wealthy privileged powerful with option foreign missionaries from China and left it to people who are going to be persecuted. It's the same story it's it's the same story and and we can't recognize him not because we don't have enough power not because we don't have enough information not because of any of these things but because of the condition of our hearts you say well well I'm going to change my heart and I'd say good luck bucko. Yeah you're going to change your heart just on good intentions no you know our hearts get our hearts changed because they're broken and again you know some nice little Christian cliches but there's something increases it's only in the heart that's been broken open that God can fill it with himself because otherwise we're just too simply full of ourselves. So Jesus is Lord Master and God and he isn't almost right but with a little more help from me to be made perfect no that's not it we are not almost there but needing a little bit more time power money information or control we are rebels that need to lay down our arms we are people of stone hearts that need to be broken open so God can fill us. Jesus is Lord and we are not and that is a that is a lesson that only brokenness can teach us. I'm reading a biography of Dallas Willard right now and Dallas Willard had all of these sometimes slightly heretical things to say about Christianity and someone once asked him you know well how where will I find God and Dallas Willard tells him at the end of your rope. And there's so much truth to that and that's why you know David Berkowitz the 44 caliber killer becomes you know a schizophrenic becomes Christian where in prison and so many people become Christians in prison and so many people start their Christian journey in AA meetings and so many people start their Christian journey because of a horrible divorce and so many people start their Christian journey. I remember Mark Maron has this podcast and he you know he interviewed all kinds of different people and you can look at Mark Maron's podcast and I haven't listened to it for a while but I remember listening to him once and he was making the comment about because he was a guy who got sober and all that you know I think of him kind of Russell Brand in the same category and Mark Maron basically said yeah you know it's the really messed up people that can only get sober by becoming a you know a nut job Christian and I think yeah that's right. Where will I find God at the end of my rope and and and as one other person you know you hear these stories as a pastor you know you can't have your you can't keep your face and your ass you know it's one of the other baby if you want to keep your face you won't save your ass and vice versa I probably won't use that in my sermon but this is YouTube so. But here we are and this is how it is so why can't we see him well we are we are both responsible what did I mean both you see I write these notes sometimes and then I preach it's like what was I thinking God's maybe I have to take that out God seems we are responsible in both ways we you know. We we and God are both responsible that's what I meant pause let me let me edit the slide yeah see I do edit it so we and God are both responsible God withholds it from us but it's the hardness of our heart that we can't see him and and and well that's what God seems to have his hand in it too. All the information there is you know it's been this book has been translated printed studied discussed Jordan Peterson is filling theaters full of people paying customers to hear him ramble about the Bible this is this is the most well known book in all of human history and we say but I just need more information and God says now what you need is a new heart. And only I can give it to you well how can I get it well why don't you start by asking. Well well I don't know if I believe in him that's for a lottery number you know what's it going to hurt you to ask just ask see what happens to say why asked before ask again you know read Luke 18 ask again keep asking until you're tired of asking because where will you find God probably at the end of the day. At the end of your rope and it's not and even that you say well if I ask how do I know for sure no no for sure no no for sure in this because if there's one thing we know about God is is you're not going to get him on a leash you and this is the big complaint about how many churches and Christian preachers that they think they have God on a leash and you know that's that's just stupid. Walk into a walk into a room with a Bengal tiger with a leash and see how well you do you know no one puts God on a leash this is why CS Lewis had had a lion for God for for Jesus and you know this he's not a tame lion you don't you don't just stroll up to him but he's he's he's good but he's not tame which should terrify you because he's good and you're not. Well is it misery deliverance graph to I almost always have my sermons that way deliverance what's with him hosting the bread breaking well it's good Friday and and so that's dripping through this passage you know it's it's his sacrifice and this is how you know you can trust him this is how yes he's a lion no he's not a tame lion well I don't want to be in a room with a lion like that because elite me yeah maybe maybe should be at maybe should be at the maybe should ask to be eaten by him because this lion gives his life for you remember Edmund and Aslan this is the story this lion gives his life for you and everyone around says Aslan you idiot you know give Edmond to the witch he's a he's a brat and Aslan says yeah but he's a brat I love and no it's not it's not this doesn't make economic sense for you to give your life for these people they're undeserving oh that's right they're undeserving which is exactly why it's an archetypal story and exactly why I'm going to give my life for them. But also read Luke nine because Luke nine the same language is in it and this is why it's the historical grammatical method not a bad way to go if you can learn it. He sends out the 12 without bread or provision in Luke nine and they discover that God can meet their needs and then they're with these 5000 men plus women and children and Jesus says so Jesus people people say oh I wish I knew Jesus and I think have you read the Bible you know what this guy is like and those Christians who are the really serious Christians I know the really serious Christians I respect they know what letting Jesus into your life will do to you. Boy do they know and it is not for cowards. You know Jesus says give them something to eat. Look around they say hey we got five loaves and two fish. And Jesus says give them to me. And he sits and he gives thanks and he breaks the bread and he keeps breaking and he keeps breaking and he keeps breaking and the baskets gets filled and the men eat and the women eat and the children eat and there's 12 not 11 not 13 remember the Jews and their numbers. 12. Baskets left over says resurrection this is abundance, this is a new life you say, but I don't know if I can trust Jesus yeah. That's exactly right you don't know if you can trust them you probably can't because if you're committed to your idea of eschatology and your idea of what should happen in the world and your idea of where everything should go. Don't bother with Jesus because he is not going to take your suggestion and just like you could go to Jordan Peterson say oh Jordan Peterson you know if you can only read this book then. Hey baby he's way too far up the hierarchy. He's not looking for new books to read he's going to read whatever books he picks and maybe you'll be excited that he's reading NT writes books or maybe you'll be upset that he's right reading NT writes books I don't know. But Jesus is way bigger than this baby and when you let him into your life when you really let him into your life. There's no telling what he's going to do well I wanted a nice orderly life we'll go back to Tolkien you know Bilbo once Bilbo lets Gandalf in his life and he opens the door to the dwarves. there's no way of telling where that road's going to go yeah he may die yeah he may die but guess what all y'all gonna die me too. Life is 100% fatal that is the way it is the only question is what are you going to do between today and the day you drop and this is so often why you find God find God at the end of the rope so all eight and we're satisfied. So y'all almost anonymous followers do not despair over not enough money over not enough power over not enough control over not enough knowledge God isn't running the world according to my little plan or according to your little plan. If he'd only listen to me everything would be great give it up. Give it up. You do have prayer you can't ask him to run according to your little plan and here's the crazy thing he's he's he's often very gracious and. For those of you who believe and even some of you who don't you ask for stuff and you get it and you think oh well you know, thank you universe Thank you karma Thank you. Good darn luck whatever you want to say to it go ahead and pray and and I believe God is gracious and often gives us things we want, but a lot of times he doesn't and a lot of times well who prays in the garden of Gethsemane and says you know Lord if this cup could pass from me. But not my will but yours be done well, this is our life and. This is the Christian life, this is, this is the life that we are called to live with our resurrected Lord are you blind to him he's given you all the information you need he's given you his spirit he's given you his body. He's given you his body. See the offering he gave to redeem Israel it's a path of suffering it's a path he walks in front of us it's a cross he invites us to bear and see the bread of new wine. Amen now well I had a good preamble I'm at 60 minutes which is way too long I usually don't want to go over 30 for my sermon so I'll pare this down I'll take out a lot of the Jordan Peterson stuff again if you're interested in watching the final cut. I've got a playlist on this channel where I link to my sermons that I have on the church channel and if you're interested fine. Send in your comments part of what is really cool about this little process for me is. I get comments from you and sometimes I finished this video and I think that was a dog should I should I put this out there and then someone will write me a note and they'll say oh pastor I was blessed by your sermon I think well you know. You know you know rescue dogs can rescue dogs can bless people so so here it is baby and if you're blessed by it let me know if you think I'm full of it let me know. And yeah rough draft to Sunday.