https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=TD98k80BjXE

 Hi, this is Paul. Just a few more days until ticket sales end for the Quest for a Spiritual Home conference. We posted a warm-up video that came out a few weeks ago. It appeared on my channel, on Jonathan Pajow's channel, and on John Vervecki's channel. And I hope you enjoyed it. It really gave me a taste for it. I just finished relistening to it myself and also in anticipation of the conference, I picked up the book Catherine mentioned as well. But I also picked up this book that John Vervecki mentioned. And I thought maybe as a warm-up, I might read the introduction, do a little bit of commentary on it, because right away, I mean, John Vervecki is like a book pusher to me. It's not like these aren't all the books in my life, trust me. So yeah, that's maybe I need a 12-step program. I was, when I was reading the Kierkegaard biography, Kierkegaard had a real problem with his youth buying books. He had a wealthy father and he just kept going into debt buying books. You've got to be careful with this. So I also picked up a scanner so I could scan a lot of these things and I can easily mark up PDFs and take them with me instead of always doing Kindle. I get a little frustrated with Kindle sometimes. So let's just take a good look at the introduction for the book. Often, if there's not enough time to really dig into a book, at least read the introduction because it'll give you a sense of it. It's funny because I do audiobooks quite regularly. For a while, I was doing a lot of Kindle just because I have a space issue, but I'm kind of going back to physical books just because they're sort of easier to manage. Let me see if I can set up a different view here too. Alright, this looks good. A little bit of OBS work. In 1884, 42-year-old Reverend Father J. M. McHale left Ireland to take up a position in the Brooklyn Parish. Shortly after arriving in New York, he became afflicted with nostalgia and began to waste away. I think that nostalgia is a word that gets used in this little corner, usually in a pejorative sense. Nostalgia is almost always used in a pejorative sense, but again I think Clay Rutledge has some interesting things to say about that word. Newspaper accounts reported that McHale proclaimed, I cannot eat, my heart is breaking. In his troubled sleep, he talked of Ireland and his friends there. He often murmured, I am homesick, my dear country. I will never set foot on your green shores again. Oh my mother, how I long to see you. He eventually lost consciousness and died. His death was attributed to homesickness or nostalgia as it was called. It's interesting how that word has continued to develop. Such a diagnosis was not unusual in the 19th century America nor is the newspaper coverage of McHale's death. Paper sometimes printed in the pathos-filled letters of migrants separated from their loved ones sometimes carried news of their sorrowful deaths. Before the 20th century, homesickness was a widely acknowledged trait of the 19th century. Throughout the 18th and 19th century Americans moved frequently but they were not fully accustomed to leaving home and did not find the process easy or natural. There was a trauma associated with migration, a trauma they did not shy away from expressing. Americans took homesickness seriously as did their doctors, many of whom maintained the only cure was to return sufferers to their homes before the condition turned fatal. More than a century after Reverend McHale's death, the New York Times carried news of another homesick migrant of Toon, New York. In 2004, the writer Catherine Lanfer moved from Minnesota to Manhattan. She found the move painful. First week ended with a sharp bout of homesickness. To cheer her up, she dedicated, she decided to get a manicure. She told Korean women who were doing her hands, I'm pretty homesick but encountered little sympathy. The manicurist herself, far from home, looked at Lanfer with impatience. Her eyes narrowed. She sucked in some deep breath and then she barked out in an uppercase admonition, don't be big baby. This was the modern attitude towards homesickness, an attitude predicated on the belief that movement was natural and unproblematic and central and uncontested part of American identity. And if you look back at the conversation we had, we talked about this a little bit, how there's sort of an obligation to this, there's a status with respect to this. And the very much is, one of the things that I noted earlier in the conversation is that all five of us, John Van Donk is an immigrant and his story is a very different. John's story with respect to home is a very, very interesting one, John Van Donk's. Today, those who suffer from homesickness are considered immature and maladjusted. This also gets into this issue of mental health. With the proliferation of mental illness diagnoses, the myth of mental illness and how we sort of medicalize mental illness and by medicalizing it in a modern sense, sort of suck it up into the monarchical vision and say, well, there's ill and there's well, there's healthy and there's maladjusted, but all of these things are deeply tied to the normative and of course the normative is deeply tied to the religious. Well, this perspective on homesickness is now widespread. It developed open, it developed slowly. Americans have not always been able to leave home with ease. This book explores how they learn to do so. It begins with European colonization and continues up the 21st century. Tracing changes both in emotional prescriptions and lived experience. It examines how homesickness was transformed from a dire and potentially fatal malady to an inconsequential emotion rarely mentioned. One of the things again that I notice as a pastor is what people do and don't mention to whom. As a pastor, people will often tell me things that they won't say to their family or friends in other situations. I mean, often involving, I just had someone recently just tell me, you know, a member of the congregation died and how that day that this member of the congregation died, the experiences that she had and how afterwards she connected that. Now people can very quickly say, well, that's just kind of a matter of post hoc reasoning, but I hear a lot of stories that are not quite so easily dismissed. This book explores how love of home, once seen as the mark of a refined and sensitive nature, eventually came to signify backwardsness, prissiness, and a lack of ambition. You can just feel the, you can just feel the, you can just feel the, basically the cultural norms change, the ideals change. It seeks as well to illuminate how Americans dealt with these changing norms and how in doing so they gradually learned the habits of modern individualism. During the colonial era, a significant number of those who came to America hoped to return home. Those who could go back did so at a surprisingly high rate. It's very interesting that, for example, a lot of my ancestors never visited the Netherlands. Both of my grandparents, both sides of my grandparents, visited the Netherlands once. That's all they got a chance to visit and they both had cousins and second cousins and distant relatives there that they were still in contact with. I've now visited and I didn't visit any family in the Netherlands. Those who do go, those who could go back did so at a surprisingly high rate. For instance, as many as one in six Puritans eventually left New England and returned home to Old England. If you read the book 1493, the rate of death in the American colonies was just absolutely astounding. American colonies was just absolutely astounding. I think for some going back would be just simply survival. Many more colonists would likely would like to have done the same but could not for a majority came to America in some state of unfreedom. Well, there's an interesting word. Whether slave servants or wives. You just sort of equated wives with slaves there. I, you know, in reading, here we go a little bit more. They had to submit themselves to the patriarchal and communal order that guided social life and subordinate their desires to the will of the larger society. It's funny because sometimes if you listen, for example, to to Muslims, if you watch that show Ramy on Hulu, often religious people just sort of drop in like God be praised, God be praised. Evangelicals have their own, you know, Lord willing to things or something like that. Some of these contemporary things, well you just always have to mention all of these things and here they are popping up in the book. They grappled with their longings. Some regarded their circumstances as God's will and resigned themselves to sadness. Other took as if resigning it to God will, well that's actually in a way of dealing with the sadness. Others took action to resolve their homesickness, but often to no avail since the ocean separated them from their homes. By the mid 18th century, a new set of ideals began to alter both the colonial social order and the individual outlooks. Enlightenment philosophy celebrated the freely moving individual who maximized happiness and who could be at home anywhere in the world. This monarchical vision sort of brought up into homelessness. Colonists who could act on the cosmopolitan philosophy, generally white, generally male, began to develop new expectations about their lives. They became less willing to submit to communal imperatives that dictated their isolation and they manifest new spirit of autonomy as they searched for contentment. I think this actually has a lot to do with liberalism as she connected in the book. This recent substack by Eric Torenberg first quotes Paul Kingsnorth. As Paul Kingsnorth puts it, rather than seeing humans as hefted creatures rooted in time and place, liberalism offers a new conception. The sovereign human person disembedded from community history and nature would utilize reason informed by science and enabled by technology to choose how to live. The rational individual making her choices in the marketplace, overseen by a government committed to liberty and guarding her rights through social contract. This is the basis of a holy new world. What is crucial to understand here is that what makes liberalism an ideology is that an order for the liberal world would come into being. It needed to be created. Just as Marxist regimes attempted to destroy the traditional family, the church, and the private land ownership so that communism could materialize, liberalism did not naturally evolve from previous existing arrangements. It needed to artificially create a sovereign individual from new cloth. How did this version of human nature get created? Let's segment liberalism in different ways. The first phase of liberalism tried to free people from tyranny. This was the revolution of England and France to free people from kings. The second phase of liberalism tried to free people from tradition. This tried to free people from an all attachment and context, particularly religious and national ones. The locus of one's identity becoming freely, became freely chosen belief, not family, country, or God. This is deeply religious and Protestant as well, of course. The third phase of liberalism tried to free people from culture. This was the era of mass capitalism promoted by the right and mass democracy promoted by the left. The voter knows what's best. The consumer is always right. The fourth phase of liberalism is trying to free people from nature. It's trying, this is Mary Harrington's, this is Mary Harrington's work, the transhumanism. It's trying to affirm the individual's human right to make oneself anything at all and to deny any constraint resulting from the ancient accident of birth. This is very different from Tom Holland often talks about the demos, which is we sort of took democracy, but in Athens it was a different thing. You sprung out of the ground. You know, we still have this to a degree when we talk about Native Americans, sort of like Athenians, they sort of got birthed out of the soil of Athena. They birthed out of the soil of America. Liberalism is based on the protection of autonomy, but with every passing decade, there's been an expansion of the scope of that autonomy, including the realm of human biology. We must consent to everything, including our families, cultures, and bodies. The latter was included transhumanism, which attempts to transcend all brute facts of identity and transcend the human altogether. At no stage do we find a rejection of what came before, only a recognition that it did not go far enough. The history of liberalism is the history of an idea taking itself ever more seriously. Become what you are is the mandate, not only for men, but also for ideas. In the mid-18th century, a new set of ideas began to alter both the colonial social order and individual outlooks. Enlightenment philosophy celebrated the freely moving individual who maximized happiness and could be at home anywhere in the world. Colonists could act on the cosmopolitan philosophy. Generally white, generally male began to develop new expectations about their lives. They became less willing to submit to communal imperatives that dictated their location, and they manifested a new spirit of autonomy as they searched for contentment. For them, independence led to novel opportunities and points unknown. For others, it carried them home. Faced with unprecedented liberty, many individuals came to realize that even freely made decisions to leave home or to stay carried hefty emotional costs. This became more apparent in the 19th century to the 19th century Americans who lived through the market revolution and the emergence of full-fledged capitalist economy. Influenced by the ideal of the self-made man, American men and women abandoned the familiar in search of new profits and possibilities. Yet they did so with some hesitation. Although they remembered as a period of great restlessness and individualism, antebellum America was also characterized by a great deal of homesickness. Explorers, pioneers, gold miners, and mill girls all moved forward, but often did so with some reluctance and looked back with regret. To them, their destiny was not manifest whether they should go or stay was not a settled question. They discussed publicly the reservations about moving and worried about the implications of their restlessness since love of home and mother was a mark of good refined character. While attentive to their own pain at parting, white Americans often unmoved by the emotional plight of Native Americans who were forced to vacate ancestral lands. If you read Blood and Thunder, the way to destroy the Navajo was basically to move them off their land and then Karsen who was tasked by the U.S. government to sort of watch over them, who had had a fair amount of living with Indians including marrying one, suddenly becomes basically heart-stricken by just watching the destruction of this people. Native's attachment to home is seen as atavistic trait standing in the way of progress. Similarly, homesickness that slaves experienced as they were bought and sold generally went unacknowledged by whites who presumed that primitive blacks lacked their level of emotional sensitivity and capacity. The phenomenon of homesickness so widespread during the Antebellum period received systematic attention during the Civil War. During that time, European conceptions of the condition as a disease became popular and the diagnostic category of nostalgia gained acceptance. The term nostalgia was used to describe the acutely homesick who many doctors believed might die if their condition went untreated. In fact, during the war, Union doctors and more than 5,000 soldiers were diagnosed as suffering from nostalgia, 74 of whom succumbed to the condition. Given such alarming statistics, some Army bands were prohibited from playing home sweet home for fear the song might provoke deadly illness in soldiers. After the war, the idea of homesickness that might be fatal continued to circulate among laypeople and physicians alike. Native-born Americans flocked from farms to city, and European and Asian immigrants streamed to the United States. These immigrants inspired prolific commentary on homesickness and nostalgia. As the nation's racial and ethnic diversity increased, many observers claimed they saw patterns among the homesick populations and suggested that nostalgia was a condition to which particular diseases were associated. For example, psychologists and social commenters influenced by Darwinian theory hypothesized that the groups least able to conquer their homesickness were the least culturally advanced. Those who succumbed to it were unfit for life in modern American society, for they lacked the prized characteristic of adaptation. As the charity worker Morris Fishberg observed in 1906, nostalgia is the first and most effective aid to the natural selection of desirable immigrants. According to this view, those unable to adapt to a new environment and stricken with nostalgia were doomed to fail in life and business, perhaps even to perish. Observers maintained that a variety of different ethnic groups such as African-Americans, Native-Americans, and women of all races were unsuited to movement and independence because of their alleged vulnerability to homesickness. Homesickness gradually became a marker of dependence and inadequacy. If there was a new condemnation for homesickness, there was also a new way to assuage it. For during the late 19th century and early 20th century, revolutions in transportation made migration easier. And of course, one of the things to note is that now we have via the internet ubiquitous communications. I weekly chat with my family of origin with video chat and we message each other pretty much daily. Transcontinental railroads spammed the country and fast steamships linked nations. Leaving and returning home became much easier for migrants and immigrants, rich and poor alike. Yet the rapid industrialization of the late 19th century that produced these new technologies also led to radical transformations in daily life. Migrants who returned after years away discovered that home was no longer what they imagined it to be. Their homes had changed and so had they. As a result, many Americans began to yearn not just for a lost home, a longing of homesick, but for lost time as well. As they journeyed between old homes and new, many began to wonder if they had any home whatsoever. A sense of homelessness began to emerge that would become endemic to modern life. In the 20th century, the imperative to move became greater. The need to accept dislocations more pressing. From expanding corporations, government agencies, and the military, Americans heard they should subordinate themselves to the large institutions of modern society and move cheerfully when asked. Child-rearing experts suggested that parents prepare their offspring for these inevitable partings by sending them away from home so that they might master their homesickness in early life. One of the interesting things that was common in the Christian Reformed Church was ministers' kids were often known to be subjected to this rootlessness. My growing up was an exception. My father spent 36 years in his first church, so my first 18 years before I went to college were all spent in the same home, all spent in the same place. But my father grew up in one, two, three, four, five different places growing up, and that was pretty standard for children of a Christian Reformed minister. Psychologists, corporate leaders, and government officials hoped that ultimately individuals would learn to transfer their loyalties from mother, home, and hometown to their employers and the government and would be transformed from mama's boys into organizational men. It's very interesting in the 1950s if you read George Marsden's book this institution institutional man theme would sort of go back and forth. People were afraid they were becoming plastic people. There's currently a lot of anxiety. I think Mary Harrington had a tweet. That might not be her. Basically not only have people moved physically into other locations, but children are not even being raised in a home. They are being raised in institutions. Impatience with those reluctant to leave home grew over the course of the 20th century and the perception that homesickness is a sign of immaturity solidified. Americans learned a code of behavior and emotional management that taught them to repress all signs of homesickness in public life in order to appear modern and mature. Only in the late 20th century and early 21st as faith and organizational culture declined did Americans begin to publicly question the relocations that the modern workplace demanded of them. And of course with COVID, now suddenly a lot of people at least of certain class are working from home. Did Americans, yet even today those who resist moving or are reluctant to discuss their misgivings in terms of homesickness or love of home for this would mark them as lacking ambition and drive. Instead they express their emotions in other ways as historian Peter Stearns has noted, in the 20th century individuals faced increasing pressure to restrain their emotions in public yet found greater opportunity and leisure time and private life for emotional release. As they type on their Facebook pages or email accounts watch Bollywood films on satellite television satellite television streaming or visit the taqueria to eat food. Redolent of the flavors of home, Americans moved through the culture of memory and connection and tried to recreate what they had left behind. Although it had been repressed in speech and overt action homesickness made its appearance in daily rituals and ways that often go unnoticed precisely because they are so commonplace. The history of homesickness recovers the story of how Americans learned to manage their feelings but beyond that it reveals how Americans learned habits of individualism that supported capitalist activity. Central to modern individualism is the ability to separate oneself from home and family to wander in pursuit of happiness to leave communities if only to rejoin others to be fluid and unfettered. Church obviously has a big place of this and part of the development of the Christian Reformed Church so before the Second World War and the Christian Reformed Church there were basically just little enclaves this was true not just the Christian Reformed Church many other immigrant churches. What happens after the Second World War is now suddenly this home this migration brought people to cities and so for example people who had settled down in Ripon California about an hour south of here now suddenly are coming to Sacramento for work and people from different places different places in that where Dutch immigrants have settled now start to move to major cities and major population areas and so there was a sense in the middle of the 20th century that okay in the second half of the 20th century that the Christian Reformed Church basically joins this whole thing. Now the Christian Reformed Church is is dealing with that as I mentioned before part of what happened is of course assimilation. One of the things that's a big theme in the Bible particularly in in the book of Judges is the question of local gods and locality impacts us religiously and I think that is part of this story and John mentioned in the in our little warm-up talk about studies about well people going away from home and then sort of secularism it's sort of that they're they're absorbed into this machine. That ability has been portrayed by some observers as a trademark American behavior however the ability to be mobile is not innate. This book explores the long education Americans went through in order to be able to live like rugged individualists and to make movement appear unproblematic. In doing so it offers a new history of mobility and individualism a history that shows ambivalence hesitation and reluctance so often experienced by those who moved on it as their society came to enshrine movement as necessary for an expanding capitalist order Americans learned to live with their mixed feelings and to subordinate the desire to stay behind the goal of getting ahead. A book that this touches on for me is Andrew Root's The Children of Divorce. This was the first book that I had read by by Andrew Root and and he talks quite a bit about what divorce does. The existence of the kin unit was dependent on children. The mergers made in marriage were fleeting if children could not continue the economic advantage and possible societal esteem that marriage union offered. Today we often judge a good parent by his or her ability to raise independently thinking and behaving individuals who can seek self-fulfillment but in the pre 16th century buttressed by the Augustinian theology of original sin parenting was about breaking a child's sinful will a will that could easily threaten the stability survival or reputation of the kin unit. Good parenting was not about forging independence in children but about securing his or her own commitment and contribution to the kin unit hence to the home. Therefore once the child was old enough to work around six or seven he or she was thrust into the adult world alongside others in the kin unit. They seem to be simply no such thing as the idea that children were too innocent or too vulnerable to participate in the adult activities necessary for survival in this period. The dawn of the enlightenment saw the possibility that the individual the self could be thought of and reflected upon outside the community read the communal reality of a kin unit village or tradition. Now that people could read the bible for themselves and individually were justified and with the enlightenment's concern for individual knowing the self became something to reflect on. I and mine became understood as reality separate from kin clan village or I would add home and here's some things about marriage from Stephanie Kuhn's work. Kuhn stated for the first time in 5,000 years marriage came to be seen as a private relationship between two individuals rather than one link in a larger system of political and economic alliances. Making marriage about love freed the individual or the self. As Degler observed love is the basis for marrying was the purest form of individualism. It subordinated all familial social or group considerations to personal preference. No longer did parents choose a child spouse although they no doubt continued to influence the decision nor were the people choosing spouses for their own for their ability to work. Rather marriage was now based solely on the couple's individual feelings of attraction and desire. The question the question became do you love him not what does his family offer us or what can he contribute to our home. The older conception of family was a little commonwealth a microcosm of the larger society had receded and been replaced by a new image of the family as haven in a heartless world a bastion of morality and tender feelings of refuge for the aggressive selfish world of commerce. The criteria of marriage transitioned from concrete operations to subjective feelings. Marriage was now something chosen by the individual not something constructed by kin units and village communities something constructed by home. Becoming a self became the child's vocation and the family his or her location to do so. The child was dependent then on on belonging and meaning provided by the tenuous family which when sunk by divorce left the self of the child without a place or purpose to grow. Divorce in a modernized world then attacks the self because the self is formed within the belonging and meaning provided by the family when it is destroyed the family meaning or the home. We used to talk about children coming from broken homes. Now children more and more children are being produced by no home at all. The threat of lost places and lost purpose became a reality. Without place or purpose one becomes a lost self. Back to the homesickness book. Being a rugged mobile individualist involves mastering an emotional code knowing how and when to express some emotions and repress others. It means acting optimistically cheerfully and with little regret while embracing change and novelty. It demands for such traits first emerged in the late 18th century did not become dominant until the 20th. Individuals and families were watch guards of emotional expression and helped to incubate inculcate such habits and behaviors in each other. But so too did influential success advisors, child rearing experts and modern psychologists who helped shape emotional norms and work to create models of personality well suited to the need of the capitalist economy. During the 20th century and 21st century they celebrated their individuals who can separate and move on and have portrayed as pathological and maladjusted those who could not. Scholars commenting on contemporary attitudes towards homesickness suggest that in modern America since homesickness is seen as something childish it's socially sanctioned even among children. So it's very common you take your child to nursery at church for the first time and the child cries mama don't leave me with these strangers in this room in this institution and basically all of the older women are like drop the kid off and get out the door the kid will be all right and same thing happens at school you go to kindergarten class and you just see how many are crying and it's a mark of parenting success if your child walks away happily into the arms of the school district. Oh my is Grim Grizz going to have a field day with this video. Because it has become a taboo emotion homesickness is not a category that Americans use to assess their society or their past. The emotion is absent from nationalist narratives in which historical actors are largely portrayed as happy movers. Alexis de Tocqueville often offered perhaps the most famous sketch of American mobility when he wrote an American will build a house in which to pass his old age and sell it before the roof is on. He will plant a garden and rent it just so that just as the trees are coming into bearing he will clear a field and leave it others to reap the harvest settle in one place and go off elsewhere with his changing desires. Now this of course is getting changed Jonathan or John Verveke noted that many are there's no way to sort of buy home and offers are many others are saying well what you should really do is rent so then well you're not responsible for anything physical in your domicile in your domicile in your domicile you're not responsible for anything physical in your in your domicile you just well when it breaks find a new one or find a new one when it appeals to you. Later commenters like Frederick Jackson Turner elaborated on this vision portraying unceasing movement as essential to the American identity. Modern historians have continued to use the interpretive mode describing Americans as uprooted restless and a nation on the move. The emphasis on effortless mobility and the silence on the topic of homelessness has been self-perpetuating because homesickness is absent from modern accounts of the past it is seen as an illegitimate emotional emotion in the present. For instance the mythology of individualist individualistic pioneers has been used to motivate successive generations to move on bravely and without hesitation despite the fact that the pioneers themselves were homesick and hesitant and that many hoped to and sometimes did return home. Telling their stories the history of homesickness restores emotional complexity to the U.S. history and undercuts now she's basically saying well this is justification for the book. Let's see how much more we want to go. The first historian to critically study homesickness and nostalgia maintained that while individuals longed for home throughout history the new invention the invention of new names for the longing changed the meaning and experience of the emotion transforming private feelings into socially recognized problems and disease. One of the interesting things in this is the public private thing that happens in secularity. Religion of course goes private emotions go private. What's left for public? Well cheerful happy beautiful those get displayed on the screens now suddenly you've got tensions between and this of course is accentuated with social media. Everyone on Instagram is cheerful happy beautiful has has an incredible body has a lovely six-pack and here am I looking at myself in the mirror thinking oh maybe I need a hair transplant. This book builds on the observation beginning in its examination in the colonial period when the words nostalgia and homesickness were first coined and employs the words in accordance with their historical usage. It also takes seriously the fact that homesickness means different things to different people at different times. Some use the words longed for family some for houses others for towns and landscapes. So now that we don't have the bachelor and bachelorette I've been watching farmer wants a wife and one of the interesting things in that show is that basically for a lot of these farmers the criteria is well is she beautiful yeah does she have a good personality yeah do we get along yeah but she does she love the farm as much as I love the farm and one of the contestants in it has is a mother of an 11 year old daughter high risk looking for another husband on a game show but of course that mother is going to be does he love my daughter will he love my daughter or if she's not particularly caring about that where on earth is does is the daughter what on earth is the daughter left with. Maybe I'll end this with the beginning of Andrew Root's book. We excitedly told both of our families they received words of incur we excitedly told both of our families then received words of encouragement with good wishes flying back to Los Angeles passing over the mountains I would cross with dread months I would cross with dread months later I eagerly anticipated my future he was beginning a home. When the automatic exit doors slid open at LAX terminal and the warm southern California air hit my body I felt whole happy hopeful but on a cold rainy LA night this all changed I returned home from a late class and found a frantic voicemail from my fiance I raced to her apartment where she was curled on her bed sobbing her mother had caught her father who had been her hero with inappropriate and illicit material on his computer including love letters to and from another woman just as our own was months away from starting her parents marriage was over. The grief consumed our lives the laws of her parents marriage seemed to be affecting my fiance from the inside out at 23 Kara found herself questioning who she was and where she belonged there was not simply questions of social location where will we spend Christmas what about the house she grew up in although those thoughts were painful in their own right her more distressing questions were existential they seemed to come from the core of her being in the middle of many nights she would call me awakened from a deep sleep in the state of terror Kara felt as if the split in her parents marriage had become a split in her own being I have to start all over again I mean seriously who am I she stated repeatedly it was Memorial Day when her questions became my own we had returned from Kansas City where Kara's sister had just gotten married it was the first time that Kara had seen her father since her parents breakup thoughts of seeing him paralyzed her for weeks it was painful as it was we had we had survived as painful as it was we had survived I sat down to work on a paper when the phone rang it was my father since it was a holiday I wasn't surprised to hear from him he began by asking me how I was and thought we were easing into a routine conversation with this in mind I rehearsed recent small events then returned that his softball question with one of my own what's going on there a lot actually he said for the next 20 minutes my father explained that my mother was having an affair and that she'd had she'd had had his and that he he'd had his own in the years of their marriage he explained that they didn't know what was next but they wanted me to be aware in phone calls over the following day both my parents assured me that they were going to that they were going to work through this that they were going to try to save their marriage I doubted them from the start I had never been privy to many specifics but I had known for many years that their marriage was anything but solid now I heard of their infidelity I like Kara felt as if I had been sucked into a dark pit in a real sense I started to wonder who I was to question where my very existence rested on anything whether my very existence rested on anything solid at all I couldn't help but feel that their actions attacked me the core of my person after all I was a product quite literally of their love and commitment I came into being out of their union their mutual desire that created a community called parents to love and to care for me I existed because of their choice and now they were choosing to destroy their very communion on the very communion that had made me the disunion threatened me nothing less than ontologically it's very interesting how that word for us continues to sort of be a foundational word which is to say it shook my very being and existence that was why during the flight to Minneapolis I wanted anything to interrupt my first encounter with my parents since their confession even if it was a plane crash Kara and I were returning to Minneapolis to finalize our wedding plans we were we were struck by the irony that in the brief six-month course of our engagements both of our parents marriages of more than 25 years had fallen apart Kara and I were married a few months later her parents divided into separate into her parents divided into different pews I don't even have the book on I often tell people funerals are in some sense easier than weddings doing weddings from children's from of children from broken homes just watching the parents boy it's something to watch her parents divided into different pews sitting on different sides of the room and at our reception my parents were arm and arm pretending that all was okay only to return home to sleep in different rooms after a while the tension became too much and separation was inevitable as it approached my mother especially tried to discuss it with me she tried to explain they had married young and that she had been unhappy for many years she explained that if she was able she might go back and not have married my father I could see how painful this had been for her it was clearly that their separation would be a relief a liberation for her but she taught but as she talked I could feel that her liberation would mean my oppression while she discussed the relief and pain of admitting the defeat of her marriage I could only feel the defeat of the community that was once the source of my very existence hearing her quiet earnest explanation I could almost feel myself sliding back into non-being I felt numb cut loose unbound my family had never been perfect but it had been my family now that it was falling apart it seemed as if I had nowhere to stand it was like the scene in the movie back to the future when Marty begins to become transparent as it looks like he will fail to bring his teenage parents together it seemed as if I were fading into nothingness I never forgot reading that it opens the book it's powerful that's it for homeroom leave a comment and I'll try to read them