https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=uhwqT5K8cb0

 Hi, this is Paul. This is my first me video out this week I've been having a lot of conversations with people and I try not to post more than once a day Generally because I don't want the conversations to don't want things to stack up too much There's only so much stuff you can put through a channel So if I've had a conversation with you and I haven't posted it yet and you're kind of waiting for it Just be patient though when I get busy I post conversations instead of these videos that I make because I don't have time to make these videos But I was so this morning I usually wake up fairly early in the morning and I start to work on things immediately and I start to work on things that Where I won't get interrupted so I can think and process and create So this morning I was working on my sermon for Sunday, and if you watched last week's rough draft for Sunday I'm in the Gospel of Mark. So I'm gonna be in the Gospel of Mark until Lent and I'm every time I go through a book like the gospel like a gospel I Usually read a commentary that I haven't really paid much attention to before and I Try to get a sense of the book now with the Gospels there's four of them Matthew Mark Luke and John and each of them is their own witness and they have their own voice and so I try and get a sense of what's unique about that voice and Let me grab a book What one of the things most of you know who Julian is I've had a couple of conversations with him and he's very active in The comment section one of things Julian asked me is do I still use these books? Because he says I you know in your rough drafts you have a lot of Peterson stuff that comes through and the answer is yes I'm using these books but what I'm trying to do is integrate and so I've been I've been looking at Jordan Peterson for about a year and a half and Jordan Peterson and his January Q&A talked about learning and and so much of learning is integrating and so it takes time to figure out the Jordan Peterson stuff and then I have to Actually when I learn that what that is is a process of integrating it into the knowledge and the worldview and the frameworks And the layers I've already accumulated in my lifetime So for example, here's a book that I bought back in seminary when I was in Calvin seminary in the late 80s and one of the things that this book does is it lays out the Gospels in Greek and and you have You have You have Matthew, Mark, Luke and John John didn't have a parallel passage in this case And so what you would what you would do with a text like this is you would go through it and you would compare The different accounts in the different Gospels and you'd pay careful attention to word choices between them This is this is part of what we call the grammatical Historical interpretation of scripture. That's a certain school of scripture. It's a modernist school of scripture and and it what it This this connects in with the with the kind of with the with what I'm working on in terms of the the Paul Maxwell video So we got through Hagle, but we haven't talked about Boltman yet because what what happens in the modernist period is that there's a skepticism about the About our disconnect from the world of the text and and on one hand that skepticism is appropriate because in terms of our worldviews We live in a very different world from the first century where these stories are are very different And that's where these stories are are set and and once he come out of gets different because of course Luke is writing to Gentiles and he's out in the Roman Empire So this this gets very very complicated very very quickly so that the hysterical the hysterical the hysterical grammatical the the historical grammatical Approach to interpreting scripture pays a lot of attention to the text itself now that that fits in fairly well with obviously the reformational aspect where We have a great deal of trust in texts, but it shifts a little bit in the modernist period because there's also a deep skepticism And so the attempt is to find again for especially for conservative Christians to find authority in the text, but authority in the text in a certain relationship with history Okay, and so that's that's the that's the school of biblical interpretation that I was that I was taught in and that school really reached its peak at the in the in the mid and late 20th century now in the 20th century along came Along came and since I forget who it was but along came this fella Robert Alter and Robert Alter is a Jewish scholar so he studied the the Old Testament scriptures and what he began to do was really enliven what was called the the literary approach to scripture and And so instead of necessarily always trying to deconstruct the text and then you have the documentary hypothesis that that Peterson here's a here's another book by Robert Alter literary guide to scripture and and what what these guys looked at instead of maybe saying well. As you heard Jordan Peterson allude to in his biblical series in the Genesis series well there's the you know there's these different background texts that come together and are patched together and redacted together what what what Robert Alter and people of his his age began to look at the text as a literary unit and begin to say well. Well how does it speak to us as a literary unit and what they discovered was that while in. While the older school of the older school of interpretation. Was having a lot of problems what what the literary approach basically exposed was that there were there were cultural filters on our eyes in terms of. The assumptions we projected back on to the ancient authors of the text and so when you see repetitions and stories and certain patterns and and certain things that don't look like a seamless chronology, which is how we imagine history should be represented. And conveyed well then then we would say well they were clumsy but what Robert Alter and many others began to show is that they're they weren't clumsy at all what these are our literary devices used to elevate certain themes. Okay, and and so what that so I was in seminary at the point that this was then getting rolled out at least in the Calvin seminary is a pretty conservative place so things get rolled out there a little later they like everyone else to beta tested and. Of course, conservatives have to fuss over it longer and you know figure it out until they decide okay what's safe and what's not safe so. So by the time i'm in Calvin seminary in the late 80s, some of the fruit of this type of literary criticism. Criticism is a great word but literary approach to scripture was was really being seen, and it was fruitful and it was. It was in many ways embraced by conservatives because, whereas in the early part of the 20th century, if you were a conservative scholar of scripture, you are always defending the text and and what happened was an approach which. Brevard childs okay. What happened was an approach a canonical approach, and so you had a scholar like Brevard childs who came along and introduction to the Old Testament to scripture What did that mean it meant that. Sure, you could go into this is the, these are the this the documentary hypothesis, these are perhaps some of the different documents beneath the Old Testament and we'll see the New Testament. A little different, but this, these are some of the documents documents beneath the scripture but what's really important is the. Is this the text as such as it comes to us, and so what that what that in effect affords is a new. A new a new standing for the text that we have received. Okay, that doesn't really especially doesn't eliminate textual criticism because we're still trying to think in terms of authorial intent and the autographs that they wrote and I don't mean that something that you write out for a fan, but the actual first documents, none of which we have. But, but it leaves us in a sense with a whole text again which the other the the source criticism methods didn't really leave you with and so that that obviously for preachers who were. Working with people out in the pews that had just their Bible in front of them well now again we have the whole text and this literary approach to scripture. Is is helpful in terms of well, this is now all these things in the text that we don't understand, we can understand them as literary devices that are pointing to themes and messages that the authors are intending to convey to us okay. And I picked up a I I stuck my see I got a big nose because I stick it into conversations on Twitter and on YouTube where it doesn't belong, but you know when I hear people always saying well well. You know, sometimes it's people it's atheists mocking Christians say well God didn't write the Bible blah blah blah and it's like that's not a. That's I know that there are some Christians that imagine a mechanical dictation view of scripture, which is what the the Mormons have with respect to the Book of Mormon it's what the Muslims have with respect to the Quran. But in Christianity, at least in my tradition of Christianity, we have what's called an organic inspiration of scripture, which means that God doesn't. mean that God moves through history okay and if you want to look up someone on that look up look up Herman her Google Herman Bob ink organic. interpretation of scripture so there's a little bit of history of interpretation to get there, and this gets into again Julian's question do I still use these books and and yes, I use these books so i'm. i'm working in the gospel of mark actually I don't have the books on the shelf because i've had them over by my other computer so. I should really pause. Sorry for the dead air. But it wasn't planning ahead so so here are a couple of there's some others up there, I should grab. oops sorry about that just bang the Mike. Okay, well, so so then what you have are books like these, which are commentaries and I bought I haven't used this one much not necessarily highly recommended. edwards fights are on mark I remember reading this when I was in seminary and found it had a lot of fresh ideas which I really enjoyed. word biblical commentary started producing commentaries in the 80s and actually I am using this one, but I'm not going to use it for the commentary, but I'm going to use it for the commentary. This is a can field that now all of these scholars have their own backgrounds and their own biases and their own agendas and when you get into New Testament studies and you have to have a good understanding of the gospel of Mark. And we'll get into logos in a little bit, but this is, this is another commentary from word on the gospel of Mark. This is a can field that now all of these scholars have their own backgrounds and their own biases and their own agendas and when you get into New Testament studies, you begin to understand kind of where they're coming from. Here's a more recent one and I be application commentaries, the popular publisher and they're you know they're trying to make. I think I bought it because it was cheap and you know every sometimes if you're really digging particular passage and you really want to get a broad view interpretation it's good to look at some so this is the kind of commentary that that lay people could have. Because you don't necessarily need to have any handle on Greek or anything like that, this is a, this is a classic on the gospel of Mark a conservative classic it's been around a long time, but it's a it's a wonderful commentary, which is. There are classics in the worlds of commentaries too and i've used this one over the years, and so this time when i'm going through the gospel of Mark. I am if I if I look at it i'll look at it last because i've used it so often and i'm trying to see the text from with new eyes from a fresh angle. And i'm gonna have to clean my office have these books on the floor and then there's this series, which is a really fun series actually started buying these. IVP introversity press started sending me things and I kind of you know this providentially frankly in my mind I started buying them and I actually accumulated the whole set, this is one of the few commentaries that I actually have. The whole set of and what is interesting about this commentary and for those of you who are big fans of Jonathan Peugeot and and the church fathers. What this commentary series is is a collection of citations of church fathers and then ancient Christians who commented on particular text now in the ancient world. They didn't write commentaries like we have today, but but what they did do was they would talk about particular text when it comes to sermon and and what I immediately saw about this. When I started buying this set in the early 2000s I started buying it right when it came out and again, this is so completely providential because I never had. Any clue about what i'm working on here, but but what I liked about this was that all of these commentaries approach the scripture from their point of view here let's say. Let's say William Lane wrote this commentary in 1974 and you might say well it's a long time ago it's not very long for a commentary, but. he's writing and he's dealing with the issues in New Testament studies in 1974 and and part of you know that that story I told you about historical critical historical. Grammatical historical approaches to scripture Jonathan Peugeot made a made a disparaging comment on a on on Twitter. Jonathan Peugeot made a disparaging comment on Twitter about not being able to learn anything from biblical scholars. And I understand what he's saying and and part of that was because the the school of biblical scholarship got so waylaid in the skeptic skeptical issues of modernity. There were many times when many of these scholars would spend most of their. Most of their time writing about issues that no practicing Christian would ever care about it'd be something like. If you were if you if what you really cared about was driving a car you probably wouldn't want to read journals on debates between hybrids versus electric vehicles versus. Fuel cell vehicles of engineers debating the technology and all of the details okay as a driver you'd rather read car and driver and say well, it has good pickup and it goes around the turns. Well, this is what was happening in biblical scholarship and so and so some of these commentaries. This is a this is a shorter one, but but some of these commentaries they would spend most of their time just just debating actually more technical series. Things like so then you have different commentary series and they had different emphases and this series in particular would tend to focus most of its time on on critical issues and it would be scholars debating other scholars well what was first. This this is that it's pre modern it's way pre modern and what's really interesting is seeing how ancient people approach the text and the kinds of ideas they had about them now what's interesting if you read. Things like this is that you'll often have the sense of. Well, you have polysemy you have the different layers of the texts and these ancient fathers were using that and so when a modern reads this sometimes you get the sense of going to a. Of going to a lay persons Bible study and I talked to someone yesterday that video will probably come out later and we talked about his lay Bible study so you sit around and you sit around and you look at the text and you start to think. And when someone says well I think Jesus was walking by the sea because it was pretty. And as i'm about to when I talk about Jesus passing by the sea and I'm going to talk about the story of Jesus walking by the sea and I'm going to talk about the story of Jesus passing by the sea. And I'm going to talk about the story of Jesus walking by the sea and I'm going to talk about the story of Jesus walking by the sea and I'm going to talk about the story of Jesus walking by the sea and I'm going to talk about the story of Jesus walking by the sea. And I'm going to talk about the story of Jesus walking by the sea and I'm going to talk about the story of Jesus walking by the sea and I'm going to talk about the story of Jesus walking by the sea and I'm going to talk about the story of Jesus walking by the sea. And I'm going to talk about the story of Jesus walking by the sea and I'm going to talk about the story of Jesus walking by the sea and I'm going to talk about the story of Jesus walking by the sea and I'm going to talk about the story of Jesus walking by the sea. And I think that's a good point to make about the historical criticism because the question was, well, with symbolism you can make almost anything mean anything else. And part of what the reformers and other people later on would try to rein in was a sense of anything could mean anything. And so now the Protestant Reformation by no means ended this. The reformers just in many ways did it in different ways. But here's an example that in the beginning, in the beginning God created the heavens and the earth and you have the spirit, the ruach, hovering like a bird over the waters. And now what Christian scholars would do would maybe go, they'd maybe put an S on first of all they wouldn't say wind. If you look in the Jewish, if you look in the Jewish translation of the Jewish English translation of the Old Testament, Tanakh, they'll likely say wind. Whereas Christians will say spirit and then really excited Christians will say spirit with a capital S and really, really excited paraphrasing Christians will say Holy Spirit. In other words, you take the full-blown New Testament Holy Spirit and you bring them all the way back to the Old Testament. And now, okay, many Christians will say, well, you have the Trinity right there. You have the logos. We're going to, we're going to pull in the logos from John one. We're going to pull in the Holy Spirit from the New Testament into Genesis chapter one. And then you've got God the Father. So you have the Trinity right there. Now, Jordan Peterson does this kind of thing in his biblical series. And, you know, so as a, if you've studied a lot and you listen to this, it's like, I know what you're doing. I know why you're doing it. Church fathers would do these kinds of things all the time and they would make all kinds of connections here. And sometimes you read those connections and it's like, and usually you evaluate those connections based on how you feel about the application of, or the payload of what they're trying to deliver to. And if you agree with it, you say, that's kind of cool. If you don't agree with you like, boy, that's really, that's really stretching the text. And so this, this dynamic goes on. So where am I going with this? So do I still use these books, Julian? Yes. But what I'm doing is I'm trying to figure out how all of this stuff that I've been working on can relate to all of these books. I'm trying to integrate it. I'm trying to learn it. Now, I did a kind of, I post yesterday, I posted my conversation with Jess, who I had done Job with and, you know, Esther's coming up in my conversations more because, as someone noted, one thing I really love about what has developed in our YouTube channel is that there is a community here. And for me, I love that because to me, for me, that's like a church and that here we know each other. And this is part of the fun of doing these, these conversations with some of you because I get to see your face and I get to hear your voice. And sometimes I've seen your name in the comment section and now I get to talk to you and you get to talk to me. And it's, it's just really cool. And it's, it's not unlike a church in that way. And this is again something I'm learning. I'm trying to integrate this stuff. But, but Jess started talking about science and, and scripture and that's a really, really hard thing. So Esther had a big long tweet story on that. When Esther does her tweet stories, sometimes I think maybe Esther, you should just blog it, but she's right because nobody would probably click out to go to the blog. And, and especially if it's pathios with all of their darn ads, maybe do a private blog, you know, like Julian has his private blog. But, but, but then I wrote creating representations that puts the world together is larger than any of us. That none of us in the tiny little time frame we live are ever going to live long enough to put this whole thing together. I talked to Job today and I'll post that quite likely. I think he'll agree to it. None of us have time to figure all this stuff out. Faith allows us to not need to know it all. And that's really complicated and I get that, especially if one of these days I talk to Peter Bogosian and start getting more involved with some of those conversations. But, and we can be skeptical about plenty. And that's in fact what I think faith affords you because it allows you trust and a place to stand over here, which allows you to be skeptical and playful about all these other things over there. While having confidence that the one slash three, I wonder what he means there, yeah, it's Trinity, that can represent it all because that is creation itself. And this gets into the question of we're never going to piece this whole thing together. And gosh, you mathematician in England, I'm not going to out you and mention your name, but you know who you are because we didn't take our conversation. And I'm really bummed about that. And we're going to have a conversation that we put on the air because we talked about a lot of these issues and it was a good talk. And he didn't want, YouTube is a place for people with not a lot to lose. And so some of the people I talk to have stuff to lose. And so they don't want, they don't either don't want me to record the conversation or don't want me to publish the conversation. And I will certainly do that, but I hate to keep things, I hate to keep things under wraps that way. Anyway, but so what I'm doing is I'm piecing this all together. So I'm trying to take this symbolic, I'm trying to take this symbolic approach and the grammatical historical approach and put them together. So I can have a whole world and one kind of, and so the grammatical historical sometimes holds kind of a check on the symbolic. Because again, this is getting into my ongoing idea that finally the full representation, what I said there, is every layer. It's the physical layer, it's the relational layer, I'm avoiding the word spiritual because, but it's all of the layers. That's finally as real as it can be. And this is why by definition of who we are, we will never see reality. We will at least within our tiny little lifetimes, because we're simply not capable, which is why we develop hierarchies. And again, if you're listening to this, you know, boy, there's a whole lot of Peterson in there, and that's right. See, so over this year and a half that I've been studying Peterson, I've been trying to integrate it. And I've been taking bits and pieces of what he's done and I'm saying, well, that helps me over here and that helps me over there. And I've been just kind of using, I'm just kind of feeding off of him and using him to try to integrate this and figure out stuff. Now, Jordan Peterson himself is too complex for me to digest. And so it's a process that takes time and not only is it Jordan Peterson, but it's all these other people that Jordan Peterson is referencing. So I'm just trying to pull from all of this to continue to integrate and expand and sharpen and recalibrate and perfect my worldview, my vision of the world. And I know many of you are doing the same thing along with me. And so in a sense, what this whole channel is, is us doing this together. Now, a number of months ago, I did a sermon. And again, I only do the rough drafts on my channel. If you want to see the real sermons, you can jump on over to the Living Stones channel. It's the production quality isn't as good as if this production quality is good. But the production, it's just a camera, seeing me do my sermon or seeing me do my Sunday School. And in many ways, the Sunday School class is more of a rough draft. There's more of thinking on my feet, but that's interactive with the other members of the Sunday School class. And so some of you, I know, watch that. But you have Jonah as Auntie here. And I talked about that and I kind of compared Joseph Campbell's monomyth and Will Schroeder's. Every story is the same and Northrop Frye and Dan Harmon and then Star Wars and the Book of Jonah. And I tried to compare and compare, let's say, Luke Skywalker to Jonah. And because I thought there were interesting things that came out of it. So there's a little bit of literary criticism as such. And the Book of Jonah is just such a wonderful, wonderfully symbolic book. There's so much symbolism. Again, we had Schroeder and it's here an empire threatens Israel. And here you have Luke looking at the, you know, the empire and something isn't right. And that's Dan Harmon's story circle. And so, you know, I was integrating all of that stuff together. And then you get into categories for which many of you are, you've learned about. You have these, you know, life and death, consciousness, unja, consciousness, order, chaos, dry land and sea. And you have Jonah, the Jonah story and all of this. Now, one of the things that you begin to notice is that there are biblical themes. And so you have water in Genesis 1 through 9. And so you have the great sea that Genesis 1 begins with. And then God brings order out of chaos and through differentiation. And in this temple text, and I made videos about that a long, long time ago. In this temple text, God orders the world, brings habitable order. And what's interesting is that habitable order or the hillock, as it was called, is exactly the right amount of water and land. Too much water, death. Too little water, wilderness. Too much water, flood. Too little water, wilderness. In fact, those words connect with that idea. And so if one of the things that Peterson has been helpful for is, and Jonathan Peugeot, and I haven't really delved deep into Jonathan's brother's book, it was really interesting. I should probably buy a physical copy. I got the Kindle version and I kind of clicked through it. But I think the physical, especially with that book, would probably be better. So I'm much better attuned to this. And so, okay, so now I'm into these middle waters. I've got my grammatical historical head, all these books, as Julian asks. And I've got my ancient fathers. And I'm trying to figure out, okay, how can I keep all these things together? And how can I, because how can I be a faithful reader of the Bible? And how can I get this stuff right? And if I lean too much on this way, I'll have Peugeot and his orthodox Byzantines coming at me. And if I lean too much on this, I'll have all the modernists and their tanks and bombs coming after me. So I've got to keep my world in balance here. So you have these biblical themes. You've got water and land. And so you've got water and wilderness, really flood and wilderness. And these things are moving through. And just with these things, you can track the story of the Bible. And once you become better aware of these, see now, grammatical historical, it's very comfortable calling them themes. Jonathan Peugeot, it's very comfortable calling them symbolisms and that whole symbolic network. So, you know, I'm working through those things as we go. Well, let's maybe I'll, you can, let's see. Yeah, so this was for my sermon. And so then you, then I bring in some other things and you can watch the rough draft. And I haven't, I should probably this afternoon go through the regular sermon. But so then you come into the gospel of Mark. And again, as I said before, there's these four gospels. And part of what I do is say, okay, what's unique to Mark? And what's difficult is that Mark is, many believe, the source for Luke and Matthew. Because there are whole places where Matthew and Luke quote Mark. And so quite obviously, in terms of an organic process, Luke himself says, I accumulated sources. And probably one of the sources was Mark. And if you look at the tradition, Mark is associated to Peter. It's connected, it said that Mark was a disciple of Peter. And so Mark wrote down Peter's teachings and so on and so forth. And so you've got all that going. And so then I look at all the, I look at Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John. And you have, they all quote from Isaiah and they all get into that. Now, again, you can listen to last week's sermon if you're interested. Now, let's see, where are we? Now, we're not going to need that window. Let's look at this window. So this is my Logos Bible software, which you can see. And some of you will say, oh, Paul uses that. I'm going to go out and get it. And you're going to have a little bit of sticker shock because it's not cheap. I've been using Logos since 1990 or 1991. I was, I think I was like one of the first hundred users of the software. I picked it because they had a decent version of the Spanish Bible when I went away to the Dominican Republic. So I've been, I've been picking up books on with Logos for, you know, for almost 20 years or more than 20 years, almost 30 years. Oh my goodness. And what's nice with Logos is that you can have all of these texts and you could put them up and you can click between them. And if you follow my Sunday School class at all, you know that I do spend, especially in my Sunday School class, a fair amount of time talking about translations. And so over here on this side, I guess, on this side is the Greek and over here on this side is the English. And well, actually, here's the Greek text and all of the windows are linked. And so they all follow and I can jump between windows and so on and so forth. Well, Mark, as I said in my sermon, Mark starts out and Mark is a very sparse. Mark is a very sparse, I'm thinking about if I want to do some other slides. Mark is a very sparse gospel in that it's it's it's only about, you know, it's about 1100 words, 11000 words. Luke is 19000 words. So so Mark is quite a bit smaller. Matthew is also larger than this question of Q, this other source that because Matthew and Luke seem to have some things in common. And so what scholars suppose is that was another source out there that Luke got a hold of and Matthew got a hold of when they were putting their their gospel accounts together. But Mark is very, Mark is very quick and Mark has some stuff that Matthew and Luke didn't see fit to bring forward into their accounts. OK. And so when you study Mark, you pay you tend to pay a lot of attention to those things that Matthew and Luke just kind of left out. And this gives you a sense if you think about Mark as a witness, this gives you a sense of Mark's style and and where Mark is going with this. Now, all of the all of Matthew, Mark, Luke and John all reference the the the prophet Isaiah. And I'm reading out of Lexham English Bible. This is a translation that comes with the Bible software. And it's all of and again, if you watch my Sunday school classes, you'll hear me talk about this a lot. Each translation has its own way and own ideas behind it. And Lexham is is trying to render a an English kind of an English rendering of the Greek and kind of a word for word things. This is word for word style. This is an older method of translation that you'll tend to find in something like the King James Bible. So it's actually fairly useful for Bible study if you're trying to get a sense of the rendering of the Greek Greek word order is different from English word order. And English ideas of sentence structure is different from Greek ideas of sentence structure. So you can't really do it. You can't just it wouldn't make any sense. Just drop English words in for Greek words. Plus the fact that words don't really work that way either. It isn't the case that one word in English and one word in Greek mean the same thing. So that's a got to work through those issues. So in the beginning of the gospel of Jesus Christ and with just about every sentence you could go on forever in just about every we've got in the beginning. Now we're now we're hyper. Now you got Jordan Peterson's hyperlink diagram, which is dead on right. And I'll have to say I was using hyperlink long before I ever heard of Jordan Peterson because it's exactly how the Bible works is that these word associations just tie these texts together. And so in the beginning the beginning of the gospel of Jesus Christ that is as it is written by the prophet Isaiah. Behold, this is something that most like the NIV won't have behold in there. Now some of you might be looking at logos and and might be saying, well, I don't want to pay. I don't want to pay that kind of money. One thing you might take a look at is if you go to study.CalvinSeminary.edu, this is the seminary I went to and it's really nice. They offer just online. You can go to it and you can you can look at you can get a sense of of following the text. The Greek text and its relationship to the English and various English translations for free. And you just mouse over something. Frankly, if Jordan Peterson ever gets to the New Testament, it's in the Old Testament too. I don't know what they do. I don't know if they work with the Old Testament. I'd have to take a look. I haven't I haven't played with this much because this came out long after I left seminary. But but this is a much better tool than a lot of the stuff I saw Jordan Peterson using. And this is this is free online and you can just go to it and use it. And it'll give you a little breakdown of the word underneath here. And you know, it's just it's just it's just really nice if you don't have the money to spend on something like logos, which you start buying logos and it's almost an addiction. They just you know, it's just book after book after book and they don't take any wall space and you can sink. You can easily sink thousands and thousands of dollars into logos, which may or may not be worth it to you because it's it's it's pretty demanding. Now, I think I'm going to pause and take a drink. OK. With respect to Christian traditions, Orthodox, Roman Catholic, Pentecostal, Protestant, and not even denominations, but but emphases. This book by Richard Foster, Streams of Living Water, is is is good in terms of talking about the strengths of different. What does he was celebrating the great traditions of the Christian faith? It's a really nice book in terms of going through them and recognizing the sacramentalists and and the various different traditions and what they bring to the table. That's that's a good book. But this business about preaching. So so what this video is going to be doing, I'm going to give you a whole bunch of notes that I can't put in and rough draft for Sunday because I can't bring all this stuff into the pulpit because we've only got 20 minutes or 20 to 30 minutes for the sermon. And this is going to take a very long time. And what is preaching? Well, this is John Stott between two worlds. And so so what I'm going to try to do as a preacher, there's a picture of John Stott from the 70s. But what preachers do is we try to connect what's going on in your world with the ancient text and we try to bring these worlds together. And that's in a sense what what preachers do. And that's why we're we're part scholar and we're part therapist and we're part nice person. And I mean, we got all of these things because we're trying to synthesize and bring things together so that regular people can live Christian lives and and and know the Bible. And this is if you look at, let's say, the the sacramentalist, you know, known a sense what conversation if it's so many conversations lately and they're all good. I've been great conversations this week. And, you know, in a sense, if if you are a sacramentalist in the Middle Ages and and you'd say, well, how can I know God? Well, the answer would be eat his body and drink his blood and you will take God into you through the sacrament. When you get to the Middle Ages and the underpinnings beneath the the the beneath the philosophy of the world had changed. So how can I get to know God? Well, you'll get to know him through through listening and hearing and preaching. Now, here's the thing. You can very much find that in the New Testament. It's right there. And in fact, I would argue that it's being a good Protestant that I am that that's in a sense more biblical than the other answer. But I don't want to discredit the other answer. I'm almost done with this cold. This book by a friend of mine that I want Len and I have to have a conversation online. Len van der Zee, Christ, baptism in the Lord's Supper, recovering the the sacraments for evangelical worship. I don't know if that was. Len has been a guiding light in the sacramentalist faction of the Christian Reformed Church. I think this book was published by IVP. I can very much recommend it. But but this is this is a book that tries to integrate this, you know, from a Protestant perspective. Let's not lose the sacramentalist tradition. See, this is what happens to my office. I pull these books off the shelf and I put them on the floor and I don't take time to put them back. That's why my office gets so dirty. I start walking around on books. I had a Muslim friend in college at a Christian college. He was a Muslim going to Christian college and he would he would never put books on the floor. That was that was, you know, that was disrespectful to put books on the floor. You never put the Bible on the floor because I'm a materialist Protestant, secularist Protestant. I put books on the floor all the time. You can ski on the books in my office. Anyway, back to biblical themes. And putting these two worlds together and Jesus as Messiah is sort of like Jesus as champion. And, you know, when when you talk about Jesus, in a sense, wearing the mantle of David right away, the story of Davis and Goliath and the Philistines and the Romans and all of this rushes in. And so the anticipation of of Jesus is going to be that he is going to come. And he is going to be David slash Goliath. And in the Lord of the Rings movie of this vision of Sauron wielding this mace and everybody just falling. And this is what people are hungering for. They're looking for their champion to come and he's going to clean out the Romans and he's going to stop the cultural contamination and he's going to set everything right. And now what happens is that Jesus redefines these terms. And, you know, so Jordan Peterson talking about the resurrection, was it was it the Easter talks? You see, this is the thing. I remember things that are not necessarily categorized or tagged. So I say, oh, yeah, was this video right here? But, you know, he mentions in a number of places a a very obvious complaint that one might bring to reinforce their doubts and skepticism about the Bible, which is OK. So Jesus rose from the dead, you say. Well, you know what? Grandma still died. Lazarus seemed to die again. You know, yeah, resurrection is great, except you get to die twice. That doesn't seem like a great deal. So so even if I can see to you that Jesus rose from the dead. So what? People are still dying. Weird things happen. Maybe someone did rise from the dead and then float up into the sky. You know, that might if I if I really got my head around it, if I really integrated into my brain, that might shake me in some different ways. But the world seems to kind of be going on as usual. The the the laws of physics still seem to to hold and things still seem to work. And, you know, then we go to the movies and we watch the skies open and and Thanos, Thanos, Thanatos, Greek for death. Thanos comes out of the heavens with his armies and so on and so forth. And, you know, you can see my video about Verbecky and, you know, the I'd say the the ancient enchanted continuous cosmos. But Jesus rose from the dead. So what? We still die. Well, and this is something of what the Gospels are wrestling with because Jesus comes in as Messiah. And what kind of Messiahs get crucified by the Romans? I'll tell you what kind of Messiahs get crucified by the Romans. Failures and and some people like their Messiahs uncrucified and like their war heroes uncaptured because if they're captured war hero, how heroic could they be? Right. So so Jesus comes and Jesus is crucified. And, you know, you can read and he write on this because he writes a lot about this. And then the disciples start talking about Jesus rising from the dead. And and scholars were jumping. Oh, that was their fantasy. Yeah, but it's an NT Wright. If you read his huge book, The Resurrection of the Son of God, that's not their culture. That's something that the best argument for the physical resurrection of Jesus Christ is the existence of Christianity in the church. It just is. That's NT Wright's argument in two sentences. And read the whole book if you want to get the impact of the argument. It's a powerful argument because otherwise Christianity doesn't really make sense without it, given everything going on in the culture. So so then what are these Gospels and how do they work? Well, well, in some ways, well, Jesus is a superhero. But when we think about a superhero, we think about watch any of any Avengers movies or other. It's all about violence. It's all about the CGI violence. And and they're continuing to try to have to get better and better and better with staging these fights and these awesome scenes. And I feel a little bad for these creators because they kept to keep one upping themselves because, oh, we've seen we've seen that before. What more do you have for us? They have to keep giving us new stuff. We'll add more superheroes, put them all in one movie, add different kinds of superheroes. You know, we're we're an audience. Are we entertained? Gladiator. Violence is apocalyptic. Violence is apocalyptic in the limited range to the limited range of power we have. What do I mean by that? Part of the reason we are here superhero movies are violent like this is that we have a lot of difficulty representing other kinds of things. We have a lot of different kinds of power. OK, and you can have resurrections in movies, pretty common movie motif. Thank you, Jesus. You can have resurrections in movies. You can have other things in movies and Harry Potter. And that's kind of the charm of the Harry Potter series because via their magic, they represented power in other ways. You could put the room back and so on and so forth. But we have difficulty with that because this this it is so easy for us to take life and so impossible for us to give it so difficult for us to yield flourishing. I was going to make a movie about Andy Crouch's some of his books on power because he goes into this stuff a lot and it's it's it's stuff we're thinking about. But we don't have power for flourishing very much. Well, actually we do. But it's unspectacular. We use irrigation and we use fertilizer and we have therapists and we have houses and we have roads and we have electricity and we we have all this technology for flourishing. And as I've said in the past, when we when we when we colonize nature in this way with our reason, we we often have unintended side effects because nature is via technology an unwilling servant. I'm reading a biography of Frederick Douglass Douglass right now and it's a good it's a good it's a good you know it's a good refreshing of just what American slavery was about Frederick Douglass just an amazing just an amazing man. But so so we have this tremendous power to destroy the kinds of power that are used for flourishing. That's more like Elfen magic. And that's one of the things that Tolkien represents really well in Lord of the Rings because the the Elfen magic as opposed to Sauron's magic Elfen magic comes in from below. It's this tiny thin rope of Sam's that can hold both of their body weights and then when he tugs on it, it unknots itself and comes down. Okay, that's Elfen magic. Sauron's magic are orcs. Yeah. What's the difference between orcs and a beautiful rope? And so that's in Tolkien you have these things are set next to each other. It's it's Sauron cutting down the forest versus tree beard who the trees are getting a little too wild. But he's still in love with the trees and and and tree beard was was C.S. Lewis if you don't know that. But anyway, so so Jesus is the master at every level. And so he multiplies loaves and fishes. And and see now if Jesus came looking like Sauron wielding a mace, well, we would recognize that. We'd be uneasy with that. But if sees us, if Jesus came like Captain America or Iron Man or probably Captain America is the better term because Captain America is yeah, he has power but individual lives. And so you have all this angst in the Avengers about Captain America. And you know, he's going to save his friend. Is this friend buck or buck or it's Bucky. I don't remember. It's a nice world war two name. He's going to save his friend, the Winter Soldier, with his one arm, this one powerful arm and so on and so forth. So so but Jesus comes in and his power is on one hand, it's like Elfen power because it comes from below. And it's like that rope that is that is better than any rope. And it's and in a sense, what he does gives us is this way bread, which is Lembus bread. And you know, this is in Tolkien. So. The vial of gladrile see my head just goes off in these as like, shut up, you noisy consciousness, everybody. My my consciousness committees like, oh, did you mention this? Did you mention this? Did you mention this? Did you mention this? Did you mention this? Like, no, I got a stream here. Let's try not to interrupt myself. You have to begin somewhere. And so, and so here in Mark. What what we do is we begin to pull all of this stuff together. And in a sense, at the beginning of Mark here, we have the origin story. And one of the things I've been a few years ago, one of my daughters introduced me to The Secret Garden, which is a Korean K drama, which is just sappy and nostalgic and romantic and delightful. And my wife and I just love watching it together. And that's fun. And just recently, you won is now in memories of the Alhambra and this other woman. She was in another K drama that my daughter tried to get us hooked on and failed. But they've got this K drama on Netflix right now, which is memories of the Alhambra, which I thought, well, that's kind of interesting, because, of course, I've got I've got interest in Spain because, you know, I learned Spanish and worked in Spanish for a number of years and so on and so forth. But it's also kind of this augmented reality story where he puts in these these these contact lenses and starts to live inside a game. But then I don't want to give away any spoilers. Well, once you get into these alternative states of reality, things might not go as you imagine they would go. And so we're you know, my wife and my daughter, who is who is home for for Christmas break, we're just having a lot of fun with with this Netflix show. But but it's you know, it's this augmented reality. And in a sense, what we have in the in the Gospel of Mark is an augmented reality. And and so what we're going to have to be piled up my book so I don't have them for easy grabbing. I'm going to I'm going to have the grammatical, historical and the symbolic and I'm going to be working them together and and figuring out how they can come together and have every layer come together and piece my world together. And to the best that I can have a worldview that actually. Is real and is and is powerful and is emotionally healthy and is physically healthy and is spiritually healthy. Words of touch is spiritually healthy. Someone's calling me with a different kind of call. Maybe I'll pause. And this is what we see happening now in the text is right away we have wilderness. Oh, wilderness. That's that's where Israel that's where Israel goes out of out of Egypt and and a messenger. Someone comes out of the wilderness. And I walked through this in my rough draft and I I walked through it more in my sermon prepare the way a voice of one calling in the wilderness. Prepare the way of the Lord and make straight the paths. Now, now one of the words that's really important in Mark that actually starts right here is is this Greek word here. Oh, hey, I can I left the sound on so I can I have this fun little thing. It'll it'll it'll say the word in Greek for me. If these if these if these if these if these if these and the basis of this word is straight and it comes through in the in make straight paths for him. But what you notice is that one of the cool things that I can do in this Bible software is I can search this word in line and it'll show me all the usages of the word. And you can see that here and Mark starts in Mark three little little different verbal form. But then in Mark ten and now the problem is that in English this kind of gets covered over and that's why in my tradition you want seminarians learning Greek and learning Hebrew and because we're always juggling everything. We don't know our Greek and our Hebrew as well as we should or maybe as good as we could. But we're using it because we have something we can have these tools and this actually comes through in the in the King James a little bit better because you have this English word straightway straightway here and straightway there. So but but it starts make straight paths and and OK make straight paths. So it's and so John the Baptist appeared and I think the NIV gets that kind of good because it's like boom out of nowhere and he appears in the wilderness and that's important because of hopefully Jordan Peterson will get into his Biblical series and it'll be in Exodus. And I have to talk a lot about wilderness because a lot of wilderness going on and so again flood is is too much water so you can't have life wilderness is too little water so you can't have life. So you can't have life. Habitable land is water and land in proper balance. OK you got your chaos and order thing going. So John the Baptist appears baptism for repentance. I ran through all of that in my sermon. I'm not going to redo my sermon and one of the things that I'm doing in in Mark or at least trying to do because the gospel is so short instead of what you usually do when you preach is you take what what's called a pericope which is just basically a little story. So you take this one little story and then you make your little sermon about it and boop there it is and what I'm trying to do with Mark is I'm taking multiple pericope's and trying to make one sermon out of it and that's that's risky because any good preaching book will tell you your sermon should have one point. The death of most sermons are too many disconnected points and it's the same thing for a good speech but you're trying to connect two worlds and what I'd like to show with Mark is that we have lenses on it's like we put the contact lens on for memories of the Alhambra and and the symbolic layer is popping in but we don't want to lose the grammatical historical so we're going to try and have these things work together. Oops wrong button. And so Jesus comes out of the water. Now there's there's connections between the baptism baptism and flood and baptism is an ordeal. Job asked me about this baptism book and I put it back he said I can't see it anymore in your videos. I guess there it is down there. So so baptism is very interesting in terms of in terms of death and life and underwater and above water and Jesus comes out of the water and the heavens are torn open and a dove comes down and so you've got Genesis one typology typology is a world that word that Protestants use if they don't want to use symbolism. You have Genesis one typology that's that's a little dismissive I know and someone will clean it up in the comments but it just came into my head. So many thoughts come into this head. Good thing I don't say them all. So so God tears and can John has a specific word he uses for tearing and the dove comes down and God speaks when Jesus comes out of the water and you've got all of the symbolism and all of this typology going there and and what putting on the content of the Bible. Contact lenses help us help us to see it and especially in the Greek because it's more stark in the Greek because you can actually track the words and track the development of it as it goes and at once the spirit sent him out into the wilderness so it's like he's going from wilderness to flood to wilderness and the spirit goes out into the wilderness and he's there for 40 days 40 days it rains for 40 days which is the flood and Israel is out and the generation of Israel dies in the wilderness after 40 years in the wilderness. So 40 days and 40 nights again all of this stuff is coming in and it's written intentionally to evoke all of this imagery and to color it to hyperlink and to put it all together. Now so that was last week sermon well well. Well not quite the last week sermon because I went to John after John was put in prison Jesus went into Galilee proclaiming the good news or what is the good news always started with that so we got a little inclusio here a little bit of literary structure. The time has come Kairos the kingdom of heaven the kingdom of God has come near there's a biggie for you and the kingdom of heaven comes. I was talking to someone he's like well how do I find Jesus well he looks for you the kingdom of heaven comes. It comes down out of heaven and this is something that that Peterson hasn't yet fully appreciated I don't think because it's it's central to the storytelling all the way through that the kingdom comes now we're in rebellion in a sense we're always resisting the kingdom. The kingdom is coming and Jesus is coming in and he's the champion well what kind of a champion is he is he going to come in like Sauron wielding a mace that's what everyone's expecting John the Baptist says I'm not even worthy to untie his sandals and everyone says but John status wise you're way up here and we're down here and we're being baptized by you and so when Jesus comes in. In the other gospels John's like no I can't baptize you and Jesus is like well we got to fulfill scripture here dude so play your part shut up and shut up and get dipping. So. I told joke like that to distract myself. Because all the Baptist are really gonna love that joke so the reformed in the Catholics are gonna like that joke anyway. So shut up and get dipping. John you got a job to do here so Jesus comes out but what kind of a champion is he going to be is he going to be a champion like Maximus is gonna have a sword is gonna go after the Romans is gonna unseat the emperor is it gonna be a story like that well. See again our limited bandwidth those are the only stories we can think of because that's where we see power and and why why do we get so fixated on our power to destroy because. To a certain degree because again it's this material level that we're so fixated upon. And and what Jesus actually does is colonize culture in a way that is astoundingly powerful because here we are still talking about him today that is power and it's not power to pick up a sword and kill Jesus doesn't do any of that. In fact the only time someone picks up a sword to in the story to protect him Jesus undoes the violence that puts the high priest here back on. So so so who is this Jesus and how is his power manifest and we're gonna see that especially in the gospel of John which is shorter and briefer and you know to the point so what kinds of power does he have. Now this is where I'm gonna be preaching this week so this is a very this isn't even a rough draft for Sunday these are sketches baby and these are way more sketches that I can bring into the pulpit so it's either your curse the beauty of YouTube you can just turn me off and go watch somebody else cat videos. So as Jesus walked beside the sea of Galilee now one of the things that I did was I was I woke up early this morning and I took notes and I threw all my notes up on the blog encased and notes for Jesus cry havoc in Capernaum and I'll I'll put those I'll put those notes in the. I'll put those a link to those notes in the comments section is Jesus passing by the sea and we think well maybe it's pretty that's not what's going on it's the sea well what is the sea well the sea is this place that the Hebrews didn't like it see is this this realm of chaos and now the sea of Galilee is this little sea. It's not the great sea so if you look at so this is a Bible that I. I had when I was a kid and had all these maps and you know so here's my my little Bible and I always remembered as a kid here's the Mediterranean we call it the Mediterranean sea but it's the great sea why is it the great sea and I went early my videos we talked about how these guys are surrounded by sea going in any given direction. And you hit water long ways up north but just about any direction hit water so here's the great sea and all these problems with right and left if I'm looking into the camera and but the sea of Galilee well. It's a tiny little sea where's the wrong finger no no still wrong finger it's a tiny little sea right there it is tiny little sea. But he's passing by the city passing by the sea of Galilee now there's there's connections because this is this is occupied Israel this is supposed to be holy land but it's occupied Israel and it's overrun with Gentiles and Gentiles are are colonizing it and Gentiles are are owning it. I have another cool book I wonder if I can where I put that book. Put it over here that would make sense. But anyway there's the National National Geographic did some interesting did an interesting book on the. Backgrounds of. There. The Galilee was Galilee of the nations Galilee was an incredibly diverse you had you had Greek colonies you had you had all kinds of people living together and there are the Jews and so he's passing by the little sea and this little seas can have storms on it and. And so again we're going to add the symbolic layer here to the to the other layer and we're going to we're going to try and put this thing together so he's. He's walking beside the sea of Galilee and this and this is the sea so it's not the big sea but it's a little sea and so this is this is Jesus origin stories he's working the prototype and he's he's gathering his people and these are the first subscribers. On to under Jesus YouTube. He saw Simon and his brother Andrew casting a net into the lake now again see this is where this is where Hebrew well let's let's let's check it wonder if I could do it on the Calvin thing. Let's let's see how that would work. Crying in the wilderness blah blah blah blah blah let's go down walk by the sea of Galilee now notice when I put it over sea so it works quite nice. I wonder if I can exit this and get bigger screens cool all right. Now let me jump ahead. Now this works quite nicely. People say how do you have time to do this because I don't practice or prepare I just jump in and do the darn thing and that's why they're two hours long so. That's that's why a lot of people like I don't know watch a two hour video this guy happened I understand so casting it into the sea okay now on the left here I'll see I set up the King James version so. And you can see that the NIV. The NIV says Lake. And I V committee you should have gone with see let's see what the election did. Yeah into the sea like some kept it because that's important because that word is important because again see connects up with the symbolic registry and we're hyperlinked to the word. And so why does Jesus call fishermen well what are fishermen do fishermen navigate chaos and order now I'm getting Jordan Peterson ish Anya. Fishermen navigate sea and dry land and they they pull their living from the sea and they use boats and nets and they pull their living from the sea and so you can see right away we have play we have chaos and order after. And Jesus is calling fishermen why what will these guys are already along the learning curve for what he's about to do and as I walk through this text I hope it becomes clear so. So he's passing along the sea of Galilee he saw Simon and Andrew Simon's brother casting and see now the the lexicon of the sea. Bible will we're adding a word here the direct object is supplied from context in English translation so when when they do fill it in they'll let you know. Are casting into the sea that should be sure enough but casting a net into the sea casting into the sea for they were fishermen. And Jesus said to them follow me and I will and I will make you the fishers of the sea. Now okay there are things at play here and again if you watch the Freddie and Paul show Freddie loves the fishers of men thing. Because he remembers the kid has a Sunday school I will make you fishers of men I will make you fishers of people the leb wants to you know okay not men we're not going to use the old firm men for all people. And we can anthropon is the Greek word here okay so. I will make you become fishers of people now and follow me is let's check out the little note here literally come after me see this is a handy translation for that. So I use it in my Sunday school class. Come after me and I will make you and you will become fishers of people and so again right there it's the NIV would have probably glossed over that come follow me just Jesus said and I will send you out to fish for people. And I will make you fishers of people. And I will make you and you will become fishers of people and so again right there it's the NIV would have probably glossed over that come follow me just Jesus said and I will send you out to fish for people. It's pretty good and you can see if you line up the translations you can see the difficulty of what these of what translation is and every single word choice adds different color. And you want to get the same color as the text but the scholars usually for these these translations they are committees they have they have different translations we can open up a full blown paraphrase is what I do in my Sunday school class. You pull up the new living translation. Come follow me and I will show you how to fish for people that's interesting. And then for fun you could pull up the message. Which is Eugene Peterson's translation. Jesus said come with me I will make a new kind of fishermen out of you. I'll show you how to catch men and women instead of perch and bass. See Eugene Peterson full blown paraphrase that's that's just what he's doing with the book I don't have some of you will probably say David Bentley Hart's New Testament translation. If logos if logos if logos adds that I'll probably pick it up because I'm curious about it but I haven't done any I haven't taken a look at it any NT Wright didn't have a great review of David Bentley Hart's translation of the New Testament which was an interesting thing I think I pointed that out in a tweet. But anyway so we'll keep following the lexem and we'll leave the Greek over here for now. I wonder if I close. OK. Well let's let's talk about this fishers for people. Well what is that. Well this is symbolic. OK. And they usually they go to the sea this realm of chaos and they pull out fish and that's life. Now they're not going to become cannibals and go hunting people to eat them that letter level of literalism. None of us would agree with but and they're not actually going to take hooks or we're going there. So the disciples if they were if they were contemporary internet literalist they would walk around Capernaum with nets and throw them over people and Jesus would say no that's not what I meant. So you're going to be fishing for people you can be catchers of people. Well what does. Well what does that mean. Well the sea is this this place of chaos. You usually take your boat and your net and you go out and you catch people catch them for what catch them to what. Well let's let's keep reading. And immediately. Ah there's our word. So again if you go to verse 12. Oh yeah. And immediately the spirit sent him out. And again let's use the old King James straight way because the word is straight. And so straight way is again if you think kind of how words work. It's the action straight way. It's the it's the distance but shortest distance between two points. So straight way Jesus went into the desert to be tempted. Now Jesus says to them you know follow me. Come after me and I will make you become fishers of men and straight way they leave their nets. And followed him. Now why did they leave their nets. And what is the relationship between Jesus and the nets. Because they leave their nets they're not going to throw nets over people. Jesus is going to be in some ways the net. And you know this is the stuff Jonathan Pujol does all the time. Jesus is in some ways going to be the net. And what they're seeing is that Jesus is going to be a better net. Than their nets. What do you mean they're going to throw Jesus into the lake to haul out fish. Well actually later Jesus is going to do some miracles. And he's going to be a way better net than any of the nets that they're employing. Now what is the boat then. Well the boat is we're going to see a little bit later the boat is the synagogue or the boat is the church. And again if you read books like this. This is the kind of thing you read. But you might say oh pastor but this can go anywhere. But it doesn't really go anywhere. You can track it because it makes sense. Is it literary? Yes. Is it relational? Yes. But it makes sense as we go and I hope that you'll be able to see as I continue to walk it through. Okay so straightway they left their nets and followed him. And going a little further. We'll jump back to the other Greek so I can keep my eye on it. Well maybe we'll jump back to the. See straightway. Oh come on it should show it there. Let's see the software doesn't quite pull it up. Straightway they forsook their nets and followed him. And then going a little further they saw James the son of Zebedee and his John who were in the ship. Ship? Interesting. And you can do a word study on that word too and track it and so on and so forth. That's the grammatical historical now made super easy with computer software. Mending their nets. So these guys also are paying attention to their nets. See there's the nets. You can pull up those words for nets. So they're also mending their nets. Let's see how the LEB renders it. Going a little further he saw James the son of Zebedee and his brother John and they were. So another set of brothers. That is interesting. And they were in the boat mending their nets. More fishermen. And immediately straightway boom. Euthas. And they left their father Zebedee in the boat with hired men. And went after him. This Jesus must be way better than nets. Well why? Well what chaos is he going to go into? And what actually does becoming fishers of people look like? And what is the chaos that's going to be addressed? And what does that look like in real people's lives? And how does that work? So remember first they were passing by the sea of Galilee. The sea. Not the lake. The sea. Now they're transitioning and see again this and immediately he called them. Let's continue to track these. And he goes into Capernaum and straightway. So we're going straight. Galilee to Capernaum. What is Capernaum? Well Capernaum is a sea of people. Galilee is a sea of fish. And he's just recruited his fishers of people. And they are coming after him. And Jesus is going to employ the oldest method of teaching. I do you watch. I do you help. You do I help. You do I watch. And you can take the entire story of the New Testament and there it is. I do you watch. I do you help. You do I help. You do I watch. So he goes into Capernaum. Capernaum is a sea of people. And immediately boom there it is again straightway. The same word right back from making straightways. It's the Sabbath. Well what is the Sabbath? Well the Sabbath is the day of rest. That is when Jesus is one. What does God do on the Sabbath? He rests from his labor. Well what is the Sabbath they supposed to be? Well they rested from their labor. Then why are they going to the synagogue? Well there's things that are moving here. And what Sabbath is, is Shalom. What Sabbath is, is the realization of the Kingdom of God on earth. That's what Sabbath is supposed to be. Because God rests. After he finishes his creation. Now he enjoys it. Now this resting isn't just ceasing from labor. Ceasing from labor is symbolic of God feeding you. That's why when they collected manna. If they tried to collect two days of manna during the week. That doesn't work. It gets wormy. Then you collect manna for the Sabbath and it keeps fine. Well what does that mean? Well they're in the wilderness. Well God is feeding them. So what is the Sabbath? Well the Sabbath is the creation. The creation is supposed to be fully functioning creation. It's the big rock candy mountain. There's a little shout out for you. Check YouTube for big rock candy mountain. That's what it is. It's big rock candy mountain. And I know some of you musicians are going to really enjoy that one. It's big rock candy mountain. And I've got to keep an eye on time. This is going to be long. But now Sabbath isn't as it's supposed to be. John the Baptist has to come out and people are going out to be baptized. They're occupied by Romans. They're oppressed. They're under the thumb of the kingdom of God. The kingdom of heaven is not present. Something is wrong. So he goes now into Capernaum which is a sea of people. And he goes into the synagogue which is in a sense the boat. And it's the boat in the sea of the people, Galilee of the Gentiles. And it's the boat in the sea and that's the synagogue. And he's going on the Sabbath. And so the synagogue is supposed to be a... Here are the people symbolically residing within the symbolic Sabbath in that day. But okay so he goes into the synagogue to teach in the synagogue. Oh interesting. And they were amazed at his teaching. Because he was teaching like them who won who had authority. I haven't checked my notes for a little while. Let's see what's... Oh that's right. When he was baptizing he was down in Jerusalem. What is Jerusalem? Jerusalem is the place of power, is the city of the great king. But Jesus isn't ready for that. They're not ready for him yet. He's going back to Galilee of the nations. On one level this isn't surprising. Jesus was from there. And remember he was born in Bethlehem. He was under the threat of the usurping power who had been occupying the city of the great king. And so he heads out into the hinterlands. The hinterlands are not wilderness. You can live there. There is a proper balance between land and water there. But it is far from the center of power. This is where Jesus will begin. He will start. He will start to build something on a small scale where he will prototype before he takes it on a large scale. This is where he gathers his disciples. And you can look at story structures and find this playing out. He passes by the sea, the small sea, not the great sea. He starts with fishermen. Why? We don't ask that question. We believe it's incidental. It isn't incidental because of what he's about to say. So who are fishermen? They fish. But think about it in symbolic terms that Mark has been developing. He's going to be venturing opportunists, taking their life from the place where there is no human life. If you think forward, you will know the story. You will remember that there will be monsters on this sea. There will be storms on the sea that threaten their lives. They will, they don't have Leviathan there. It's little sea monsters that they're eating, not the big sea monsters that eat them. But they take fish, which are small sea monsters, and they eat them. They live on the edge of chaos, managing it, bringing life for them out of the place they live. They live in a place of death. Farmers sort of do the same thing, except they bring water into the land. The waters of chaos that come in small quantities, unlike the deadly quantities that fell for 40 days and 40 nights in Noah's flood. So there are fishermen there, and Jesus says, come after me. And immediately, straightway, they come. Come after me? Why so? If you are fishing, what are you looking for? You're looking for fish. You're also looking for life. You are taking life out of chaos. You're going to catch a friend in two places, and your friend is catching a lot, and you catch nothing. What do you do? You go by your friend because you want to catch. Jesus is fishing, is going out fishing, and they're going to catch bigger fish than the disciples have been doing. They're going to catch bigger life, and they all instinctively and intuitively know it, and so they follow him. That's exactly what he tells them. You're going to catch people, a lot bigger and more powerful than fish. Now, does this mean they will suddenly become cannibals? For the same reason they leave their nets, they don't take them to Capernaum. Of course not. Does this mean that they will take advantage of people? No. That's much more what we would imagine. In the next two stories, we will see exactly what Jesus will do. Jesus will teach them how to fish for people, but this will be Jesus' own fishing. Remember the symbolism we're working here. What is the sea? Sea is too much water. Come after me. They will come after him by following him, watching him, learning from him, doing what he does. This is the old way to learn. I do, you watch. I do, you help. You do, I help. You do, I watch. This word immediately Matthew will carry over from Mark, will press it more often than Matthew because it becomes his false straight way. And that's the straight way that I've been going through. Pay attention that Jesus replaces their nets. They have found something that is better than nets for something, for something catching something better than fish for dinner. He calls fishermen fishermen, the sea of life. They live between two worlds. They are exactly symbolically who he needs for what he is about to do. Now normally when you preach you stop at this story. That makes sense. It's one story, but they are connected. They tie to the other two because we are not talking about fish. We are talking about people and their lives. We thought we were talking about fish, but mentally we are focused on income generation. That translates fishing into our terms. Now, now we are doing other translating. Straight way they left, straight way, straight way. Take the straight, narrow way. Take the direct way towards the goal that somehow deep in your mind you know you need. First we are walking by the sea, now we are heading to Capernaum. Capernaum is the sea of people. They are not taking boats and nets. They are coming after Jesus into the sea of people. What will happen? It's the Sabbath day. Oh, this is the day when creation reaches its climax. It's restful conclusion. They go to synagogue. Synagogue is in a sense the boat in the sea of occupying Gentiles. This is where the people are, the people of God. This is more than a first draft. This is more than a rough draft. These are just notes I copied and pasted. This is the opposite of Jordan Peterson's reading at 50 times to find the right word. This is not even reading at once and putting down any word. This is where the people of God are acting like fishermen, living off the Gentiles. Like King David lived off the surrounding cousins of his empire. But not being inundated by water. And he taught them not like the scribes. He's wielding nets like no one they've ever seen with authority. He is the author of nets. He designed them. He's the maker of things. Not simply a wielder of it. That's authority. He's Tolkien wielding Middle Earth. Which means that he wields it, employs it like Tolkien employs Middle Earth. It all comes from him. So he displays mastery over in a way that recognize that he is the source, its origin, its author, its owner. But there's a demon possessed man in the synagogue. Now that's strange. What's he doing in the boat? What's he doing on the Sabbath? That's what's happened to Sabbath. That's what's happened to the boat. Chaos has intruded. The chaos monster is there. The demon is there. The serpent is there from the garden. See all these stories run together and the symbolism brings them all in. There's a sea monster in the fishing boat. You might think about the life of Pi with the tiger in the boat. How did the fisherman deal with Leviathan or an alligator? There's an alligator in the fishing boat. Well, you ignore it. You try to manage it because they can resolve it. Now if you come to Living Stones you're probably going to... I loved it in Jordan Peterson's January Q&A. He was talking about untreated schizophrenics. Well, you come to Living Stones you're probably going to see one or two of them hanging around here. And you know what you do with untreated schizophrenics that come to every one of your worship services? You know what you do with untreated schizophrenics that come to your Sunday school class and try to give answers? If you go back over my under Sunday school class you'll hear me talking to Louie or Greg sometimes. And that's because these are schizophrenics who are not taking their medication. And they're coming to Sunday school and they're playing word association games with me. It's the opposite of symbolism and trying to balance your two worlds here. Well, that's chaos baby. An untreated schizophrenic is chaos. And well, there's a demon possessed man in the synagogue on the Sabbath. There's a snake in the garden. And what's Jesus going to do? Well, normally when you have the untreated schizophrenic at church you're nice to him. You give him coffee. He has donuts for the most part. If you didn't believe people can stand up while they're sleeping, come to Living Stones and watch Greg sleep while he's standing up because he does it every week. And you'll see Greg back there. He won't talk to anybody. And like Jordan Peterson said, if you want to get to know what a schizophrenic is like, go up and start talking to one and they'll talk to you. They won't attack you probably. Used to have an untreated schizophrenic that was living in the neighborhood. His name was Gordon. He trimmed trees for a living. Used to live in the park with chainsaws and scream bloody murder all night long. That was Gordon. And I got more stories about Gordon. But, you know, this is the demon possessed man in the synagogue. And now I'm not trying to make an association between demon possession and schizophrenia and trying to say, well, demons aren't real because they didn't understand schizophrenia. And I'm not trying to say that the man was schizophrenic in the synagogue because I'm not going to reduce it to that. He very, very well may have been demon possessed. And Topher sent to me a link to a podcast, a secular podcast talking about demon possession. And, you know, when secular people actually study this, their secularity gets really nervous because when it comes to the very rare but very real elements of demon possession that we like to make movies out, people who are possessed by demons say and do things that you will not explain. And maybe I'll, if I remember it, which I probably won't, so remind me in the comment section and I'll drop a link to that podcast because it's really interesting. But symbolically now, here you have the kingdom of God and the people of God and the Sabbath and the synagogue. This is, this should be the center of kingdom of God-ness in the sea of the Gentiles. But right there in the boat is Leviathan, is the serpent from the garden, is the chaos monster, is the demon possessed man. And so now, first he's teaching, he's teaching with authority and everybody loves it. Ah, but the snake is in the garden. The demon possessed man is here. Adam and Eve found the snake. What happens when Jesus comes? If you're reading the story and you're understanding the symbolism and you're getting to this point, oh you want to see Jordan Peterson and Cizak talk? You want to see Jordan Peterson and NT Wright talk? You want to see whatever, whatever to, you want to see Donald Trump debate, um, AOC? You want to see these big showdowns? Here it is, baby. Sabbath, Capernaum, synagogue, chaos versus Jesus, nose to nose, head to head, what will happen? Ah, love the Bible. It's crazy good. So there was a man in the synagogue with an unclean spirit. Unclean. See now, next week when I talk about the leper, lepers are unclean and so now we're hyperlinking to clean and unclean and if I start going into that we'll be there a long time. But he's got an unclean spirit. So why is something unclean there in the synagogue? Now the synagogue isn't really the temple but synagogues replace temples when the temple gets destroyed and so the synagogue is kind of a provisional temple space and again this is Sabbath, this is supposed to be, this is supposed to be holy of holies, God's presence right there and this is in effect symbolically the status of God's people and this is why Jesus comes and so right there there's a man with an unclean spirit and he cries out, ah, jumps out. If you've ever seen a schizophrenic let go, let go, boy I'll tell you, it's something to behold. You read this story, you've had that experience, yeah, ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha. Life can be pretty wild at Livingstone someday. There's a reason God sent me here and I'm 6'4 and 230 pounds because Greg is only about 5'9 and maybe 160 so there are times when you know and Gordon's never brought his chainsaws to church and I've never had to get in Louis' face but Greg will usually run if I confront him but there's a man in the synagogue with an unclean spirit and he cries out saying, leave us alone. This is my synagogue, Jesus the Nazarene. What's a Nazarene? He's not only a Nazarene but he's also consecrated. You have come to destroy us. Ah, what is the Gospel of Mark? Gospel of Mark is apocalypse. The Gospel of Mark is the veil is off baby, the gloves are off, this is it and the man knows it, he's been, well he's been managed and he's been managing and so you know the Kingdom of Light and the Kingdom of Darkness, they've just kind of been living with each other and they're both kind of making their way, neither can kind of get the upper hand and it's all kind of right here. Read C.S. Lewis' screw tape letters for a wonderful... Jesus comes and it's like bright, it's Gandalf, it's in Theodens, it's in Theodens' hall and Gandalf comes in, Sauron knows him and Gandalf pulls it off. And it's bright. Ah, love it. I know who you are, the Holy One of God and Jesus rebuked him saying, be silent, come out and you can hear Gandalf says, you did not have me, you will not have him. And Theoden is released because remember this isn't a demon here, this is a man possessed, this is an image bearer of God who has been enslaved and so what is Jesus coming to do? What does the hero do? Now again, what you would imagine in a superhero story is, well here's the enemy, I'm going to take out my sword, I'm going to cut his head off. That's easy compared to this. You're going to liberate a man from a power. Now, I would love it if, I've prayed for Greg, I would love it if God would release him from his schizophrenia. I've worked with the guy Greg lives with for years. I've known Greg longer than I've known Daniel. I've known Greg 15, 16 years, Greg for a while lived in our shed. I can go long ways with Greg and my stories with Greg. Even if Greg took medication, he would be better but he won't because there's nothing wrong with him I tried how many different ways to get Greg treatment for his schizophrenia because for a while he was on I know his sisters, I know the family and I want to see Greg released from his schizophrenia but he won't have it and he won't have it and so I have him living with a guy who's about my size and former kickboxer and you know, Greg is crazy but he's not stupid he shorts and he looks at me, he runs he doesn't take me on and he doesn't take the guy he's living with on he runs and Greg's a very dangerous man but again, he's the alligator in the boat and so, well here we are this is what we're doing and sometimes people come to surf and they're like, is he safe? I say, no not really well pastor what do you mean? Well I keep my eye on him and you know, we haven't had an incident yet and you know if he gets that he'll warn you if he gets out of line because he'll start yelling and then you know, Doug once who wasn't a big guy but he was an immigrant and Doug chased him out just have a man step up and get in his face it's easier to run because Greg doesn't want to that's how Greg has managed to stay out of jail all these years because he'd rather run and hide than stand and fight and if you've got that kind of mental illness this is the Haitians in the water if you listen to the sermon after convulsing him and crying out in a loud voice the unclean spirit came out of him and they were all amazed so that they began to discuss with one another saying what is this? he can preach? and he sends the unclean spirit out now some of you are going to wait in and say well you're a reformed pastor so you don't have the anointing and you don't pray for healing I pray for healing all the time Peter Bogosian writes a manual for creating atheists and the guys up there in Bethel write a manual for doing healing and I've read some of that manual and sometimes I use their things and so on and so forth and if you're saying pastor Paul you don't have enough faith if I came to your church I'd do it I want you to come to Living Stones and I want you to cast the schizophrenia out of Greg and if you do that I will bless you and so will all the rest of us and I'm not saying people aren't healed I'm saying miracles are miracles for a reason but here Jesus comes in and the veil is off and Gandalf the white is there and Theoden is released and everyone's like Shazam! wow! I've never seen anything like this why? why did everybody know Jesus? why did Jesus arise? oh these were just stories you do this stuff you get people's attention the first day if one day at Living Stones Greg's out there and he's doing something and I say in the name of Jesus Greg let's use a demonic frame be clean or be healed or be released if I exercised schizophrenia out of Greg I'd have a line a mile long out the door of people with their schizophrenic family and friends saying pastor can you pray for me? can you pray for my friend? can you pray for my son? my friend lives across the country if you can only heal him and my Lord Jesus did that and I believe it does happen read again I had such a great conversation with a dude mathematician in England you know who you are we're going to talk online you can cover your face and disguise your voice if you want but you got good ideas we got to talk but I don't have that book in print I have it on Kindle but why can't I think of his name? book on miracles two volumes excellent New Testament scholar Kiener Craig Kiener I've mentioned it before he's released and you know this is what happens and so you have Benny Hinn and you have faith healers and you have revival you have all this stuff going in and so many people they wheel in and they wheel out and so skeptics say ah see but sometimes they're healed I believe that and I know a lot more healings that happen without the sawdust and the tent and the lights and the cameras with just you and your pastor praying and I believe that because I've seen it and okay the amazing Randy can give me a million dollars or he won't but I believe it there's no talking me out of it because I've seen it with my eyes and I've heard it with my ears and I know people that I would trust with every cent I have in the world and I know that a lot of my children have told me so and I believe them completely because they are brilliant rational people and I can send you to their churches actually when I do try to send people to their churches they usually don't go anyway but God moves in 10,000 places and he so often moves in the small and insignificant back to the story a new teaching with authority even he commands he's Tolkien even he commands he even commands the unclean spirits and they obey him then went out everywhere in the whole region surrounding region of Galilee he's invaded the sea of people and he's pulling life out of the sea of chaos and they've seen it oh but we're not done and well what verse are we at 29 and oh look at there's the word right there there it is right there and again even the LEB doesn't pick it up come on people does the KJV pick it up and they're like straight white you know straight right boom right there they went right from there and then they went to Peter's house and so they departed from the synagogue and they came to the house of Simon and Andrew with James and John who's got his four with him see we haven't forgotten that that's why you link these stories together now Simon's mother-in-law was lying down suffering with a fever for how long we don't know and at once he told and at once he told and at once he told there it is again they told her they told him about her and he came and raised her up by her hand and the fever left her he touched her and the fever left her now the unclean spirit well that's God Satan good evil black white but the fever the fever's just sickness they didn't associate the demon possession with illness but this is just illness this is lack of shalom from the mother-in-law and boom she's healed what is he doing he's fishing people well what does this fishing look like he's bringing life out of chaos and illness is going away and it's happening boom boom boom straight way making straight paths and the fever left her well what does one do when one is served by this you turn around and serve what does Jesus say the greatest among you is the servant of all and so when you're restored what does being restored look like it means being a servant it means being the least it means going to the people who have no status in this world that stories will never be told it means it means seeing life come out of the chaos of our cities and seas of wilderness and this is what he does this is what his servants do not as dramatic like this often but quietly bit by bit humbly this is my favorite part now when it was the time now when it was evening when the sun had set ah can't forget my blog because I got some good stuff in there that if I don't write it down I don't remember I'm holding you for the big conclusion Leviathan is working on a level that the rest of us don't know and don't there's an untreated schizophrenic in church there's an alcoholic in church there's a man in church you tolerate, manage, watch make peace with but you can't resolve there's a bad marriage in church there's chaos in the church there's a gossip in the church there's a bitter spirit in the church there's all kinds of mess in the church and you can't resolve it you can't exercise it you live with the problem by sort of managing it but you can't resolve it so you keep praying that nothing bad happens you're really in big off and so it was Daniel attacking Maury Leviathan is working on a level that the rest of you don't know and don't see now he speaks he's been enjoying the boat and the vulnerable fishermen in the boat everyone in the boat has been imagining they were managing him now he has revealed to have been managing them he's been in the driver's seat he's been biding his time with them biding not bidding but unable to tip it over. He has now come into the boat and is upsetting the balance and Leviathan will now speak. This is apocalypse, this is revelation, this is the curtain coming off, this is Gandalf the White revealing himself and Saruman must yield, but Saruman is still going to make his play. Then into the house of the four he had called, house of the two, the other two are probably relatives. They're going to see why they left their nets. They too had been living with a demon in the house. In this case it was a fever of the mother-in-law. Straightway he took them. Fishing is good, but healing mom is way better. No amount of fish can equal healing. The fever leaves. Now it's evening and the sun is set. Why is Mark telling us the time? He hasn't told us the time much. Symbolically we have the sea, we have wilderness, now the sun is setting, darkness is over the world. Remember we're back in Genesis 1, we've never lost Genesis 1. What happens? Well he got confronted in the synagogue by the demon-possessed man and Jesus won that battle and he kicked, he kicked the butt of the fever and that went, now darkness is descending. What will happen? Will the darkness take him? Read the gospel of John. Look how much the gospel of John deals with darkness. He hasn't told us much about the rest of the passage. Why is this so important? Jesus has been walking along the sea. He's scoping it out. He's going to raid it. He raided the synagogue. He raided the fever. Now this is when all the gloves are off and Jesus comes out. Night has fallen and he is going to show who he really is. This is the climax of the story. Now when it was evening, when the sun had set, they began bringing him all who were sick and those who were demon-possessed. It's like, you can flip it, it's like zombie time and all of them come at Jesus and what's he going to do? Can Jesus take the whole thing on? There's this scene in the matrix when Neo is fighting all of the agents and they're all coming after him more, more, more and he's laying them down and it's when Thor comes in Infinity Wars and his friends are losing and Thor comes in and he just starts wasting them and it's like darkness has come. Bring it on people. Bring me everyone with a fever. Bring me everyone who's as demon possession. Bring me all your gossip and your worry and your malities. Bring it all to me. I will take the whole thing on. The whole town was gathered together at the door and you almost have the sense I get an inversion of lot in Sodom. With the town they're going to rape but the angels come in blind. This Jesus, he doesn't just blind them and lead lot and his family out. This Jesus takes them on. And he healed many who were sick with various diseases and expelled many demons. Some passages say all. That's the point. And he did not permit the demons to speak. Not only am I going to beat you, you won't even get a word in because I have a mission and my mission is kind of like Memories of Alhambra because people are going to watch this and they're going to think but they're not going to know the full magnitude and it needs to be that way. I need to be cloaked. Gandalf the Grey needs to walk around. Would you deprive an old man of his walking stick? I'm just the son of man. Son of God you see. Jesus needs to bide his time because he is invading Satan's kingdom and now in this little town in Galilee, he's just stretching. He's just warming up. He's showing his disciples you want to know what kind of fishing you're going to be doing. You want to know the net. You want to know the boat. I'm going to show you greater things will you do. Then you'll see me do. We think well what does that mean? This is the story. Now you need the symbolism. You need the words. They all work together. Sometimes people talk to me about healing and I say I want to see that. I want to see it. I want to see I want to see your faith healer go into the hospital and empty the hospital. I want to see it shut down. I want to see the schizophrenics released. I want to see the bipolar stable. I want to see the lame walk. I want to see the deaf hear. I want to see the blind see. I want to see I want to see the crippled dance. I want to see the mentally ill whole. I want to see the poor no longer struggling with their poverty but what is poverty? Oh, I want to see the poor no longer struggling I want to see the poor no longer struggling with their poverty but what is poverty? Oh, put on the put on the contact lenses. It has way more to do than money although money's not disconnected. This is the story. Jesus is the superhero and he comes in and he lays waste but again he doesn't nuke Capernaum. He doesn't kill people. That's what we do because we're so bad at it. We when we have a person we can't get along with we kill him. That's what they do to Jesus. He just doesn't kill people. He heals them. He restores them. He makes them new. This is what Mark is saying. Well, there's my early rough draft and almost two hours so I have no idea how this video is going to fly but again all my videos are all my videos are me just processing and this week I don't have a lot of time to make videos and I'm at the early part of working in Mark and when I start working on a book the early parts are important because that's where I kind of orient you know the dozen or so sermons that I'll be preaching out of Mark and so I've got to get the narrative set again I'm thinking homiletically. I've got to get the narrative set for the congregation and so I've got to get a sense of Mark and I've got to feel it and I've got to integrate it and so I've got to integrate this stuff and I've got to integrate all this work I'm doing with Jordan Peterson stuff and what I'm learning from Jonathan Pigeot and on and on and on and on and so now I'm getting into Mark and you know connect it with Marvel so that people can have an understanding of how this connects with their world and the religious stories of our world that are in the movie theaters the movie theaters have long ago replaced the pulpits and Netflix is doing the same thing and so so you have to work with that. I don't have time to go home so yeah this is not a video kind of like any other video that I've done but this is one that I've done let me know what you think in the comment section.