https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=-g2vKtVwBSg

 Hi, this is Paul and I am here today with Phil. Phil is the host for John and myself while we are in London during our European estuary tour and I thought it would be cool to have a randos interview with Phil and Phil said well Let's do it tonight. So our tomorrow night and I said or tonight because that was this morning It's just been a big day. So Phil, why don't we begin by telling us a little bit about yourself? Yeah, so my wife and I host this house is the Something we do. We both have jobs Sarah Philosophy PhD I work in for a property developer but I'm I'm interested in using houses to to host people. I think that's that it's probably been a uniting thread in how I've Yeah, I was thinking like there has been a coherence that has if I was to say well What do you believe like about the what's my metaphysics? I mean part of it is there's a coherence that seems to have brought me to a like a passion for Utilizing the domestic to do something. So that's what I do. But they are working backwards. I've met you And yeah last night at the Oak Hill stuff Finding other people this rabbit Warren of Algorithmic provocations where ended up at the bearded freezian Bearded freezian Yeah, so I guess yeah, Jamie Peter PVK pipeline is it partly why I'm here And then yeah, it's just I mean it's lovely to host people. I guess I'm Yeah, we could work all the way back. I mean, I'm very happy to like okay. Well your father Sinsetting. Yeah, your father. I just met your dad which is it was here tonight That's right. That's right. They usually don't meet people's father right before the randos conversation so tell me a little bit about growing up and Did you grow up here in the UK? So they're both daughters and I was born in Birmingham Where you've been well, I didn't get the Birmingham Born in Birmingham and then we spent much of my upbringing in Malaysia well, my parents were connected with with OMF and I Did some of my schooling out there and then we came back Your parents slowed down a little bit your parents were connected with who? overseas missionary fellowship overseas missionary fellowship, okay, and Yeah, if I like to zoom there it's it feels like a theme recurs so it's interesting that Lebrie and he is Schaefer and China in land mission are also kind of there Speaking into a thread. But yeah, I was there went to Chifu in Malaysia and I do I like There's definitely bits in my life where there has always been weird people Going at great cost to tell stories in weird places like and it like I feel like the some of my angst of like What it is to exist in? I don't know London or whatever like is set against this this background of a quite an enchanted Like growing up in the jungle and quite an enchanted like just being brought up by people who'd like Were totally sold out to go and be weird Far away like for something. So I think That's that as much as anything. So that was that was a season in my life, which was which was formative and and In various aesthetic ways magical and and so forth Come back to my secondary education in London. No, not in London in England in The so your parents were doctors so they were doing medical mission work overseas They were doctors. Okay in a university hospital Okay, okay. Yeah, and which is mission work Yeah, yeah, I think there are there are specific missionary hospitals and this I think that's right. There's interesting ways to Put a lot of a lot of the people that I talked to had parents who were maybe went to church now and then You had parents who were very committed Christians. Yeah, your parents were committed enough to take In a sense turn their back on the potential for lucrative jobs in the West and dedicate themselves to Helping people who needed help in distant corners of the world Yeah this interesting to This is she the the therapeutic dimension of the year podcast interview. I know I think there's there's a gift in what they have invested in terms of what they have Sacrificed and demonstrated that has put into me a sense of the plausibility. So yes. Well, I would say so because You know we map we Our parents map themselves on to us. We don't even you know, we don't do that consciously they just map on to us and then that shapes your world and that shapes your world in terms of This is normal that the Christian life is one of sacrifice for the sake of others And these are the institutions and the practices and the ways that we live out this faith and you were a part of that that's the Those are the assumptions that you grew up with I mean I know in some ways I was the same way me and my parents were in many ways inner city missions My father could have gone to other churches that would have been more normal but they stayed in Patterson and they did that and that's a That's a deeply formative thing in terms of religion growing up and then of course I went and did overseas missions myself So that's that's not a small part of the story for you that you Those are sort of your assumptions about life and faith and the Christian life and you you take that in at a very young age now, okay, so now you're coming back to You're coming back to the UK to London for secondary school or to Birmingham. Yes I yeah back to England I did secondary school in Birmingham and then in a boarding school at a boarding school. Yeah, tell me about that Well to boarding school in Malaysia boarding school in Birmingham and I've never not done boarding school but well that like Harry Potter basically I Yeah, that was I guess that's also formative and I guess Yeah, I so you were you're living in I mean a big part of this is so as As I described to some people the way that this tour sort of rolled out. It's as if John Van Dock and I took a calendar and threw it at a bunch of people and said fill it and Phil stepped in here and said they can come and stay with me and for the the people who are sort of piecing together London that's like because obviously getting space to sleep and live in London isn't the cheapest place in England and But we didn't know anything about this and then via Phil's email we begin to learn that this is in fact an intentional community and so You living in intentional community now is not likely disconnected with the fact that You lived in boarding schools and you lived in community growing up Yeah A couple of those I Think so there's a few one is living in intentional community and living on purpose and I think there's something like whatever it like There's so there's one thing that I have kind of come to think about my upbringing and then are now is that my parents having made an intentional decision to to cross land and sea to be somewhere and To be sent by the church and to have a narrative around that is a is a peculiar luxury I think in terms of my ability then to articulate The experience of dislocation and then relocation and then there's there's a whole kind of body of literature around third culture kids And yes of being there and being not there. Yes. The thing is I think everyone is dislocated to an equivalent extent They just don't have the kind of story To tell that so someone who was born in Liverpool and whose father's job takes them to Southampton They several ties like I mean we've just said in London like you can like there's people who move to Bromley from here And I are that's they might as well have moved to kind of Mozambique like the the the the distance is enough that you lose all ties and but by virtue of having a a form of sending and intention Does is is a luxury and I think what I want is to be able to enfranchise other people to To consider what it has been to be dislocated and then to minister to a kind of almost hegemonically dislocated set of people by Rerouting them and saying there is a gift of place. There is stewardship of place There is there's something about being placed and then if you have the luxury of being permanent or semi permanent Then that's a gift that you steward and you can give away So Sarah and I and I can tell the story of this house find ourselves in a luxurious position in a High-velocity city to have had like this little eddy of Relative stability and to steward that as I had it stewarded for me by by Tony and and the gift of that So there's there's the intentionality side of things In terms of boarding school and let me pause on the intentionality thing because I think that's a really good point One of the one of the points that Peterson Jordan Peterson likes to make about suffering is that Sort of turning from prey to predator, which is a turn from let's say Receiving into intentionality and pursuit changes the valence of the Not necessarily just suffering but the the challenge sometimes the trauma and the point you just made about John Verbeke Lux likes to talk about domicide the point you just made about domicide and that Domicide is widespread right now in the world Mm-hmm, and it's widespread for a lot of people It's clear for people. Let's say who are the children of divorce People over the children of divorce suffer domicide because as Andrew roots as this this this Ontological foundation of their life is disrupted and they are going to experience domicide People who are living rootless lives their grandparents live here. They live here. They move around a lot There's a lot of people on the channel that have talked about that experience. They suffer from domicide Some many of us would sort of have an idyllic imagination of being rooted in one place of Staying in that one place and living our whole life in one place and you've sort of taken this and said well We're back at it. Whoops and this was We're talking about intentionality and intentional community and And what's that and domicide and domicide So I think I think I landed the plane on on the point that I was going to make and then you were going from I mean the fact that you pursued intentional community and in a sense, that's a way to address domicide in sort of a Petersonian way from from turning from being just the recipient of domicide to intentionally turning towards intentional communal living Is that am I am I? Is that the point you wanted to make? Yeah, I mean, I think I feel the world I mean one feels one's calling where one feels the world's pain and I feel the world's pain in that I'm able to articulate It and I think for many people they have de facto domicide. They just have no way of they've lost home roots community but for no Grand cause or no one said you're doing this what a cost How can we support you and and and so forth? it's just well, you know the bank moved us to the next city and and that that is modernity and and there's a sort of and yeah, I think if you're able to if you're able to name it then you're able to grieve it and then if you're able to kind of apprehend it then you can subvert it and and Redeem it right I I think it has been a sequence of accidents of circumstance including kind of kind of bumping into Tony and kind of developing a life here that we currently have this this form of an ability to be go root deep here and and in whatever ways we can kind of Export it through the guest room or and through like yeah There's a sort of hierarchy of permanence in that Sarah and I here for the The long haul yeah, and the other people who live here are here for the season They're here and you're here for the weekend. Well, we'll talk to me about Tony and how you got into this place Yeah, I guess there's a there's a there's a there's this boarding school I'm okay and and so then I mean it's interesting that there's certain plausibility structure about sharing space and like what What some people feel is okay, so there's boarding school and then I go up to Nottingham to study architecture and in terms of the Securitas route I I go up to Nottingham having Having spent some time in London working for an architect Then starting my bachelor's finding finding a great deal of tension between what Architecture is in practice what it is in first year and What it is as an academic subject and what the prospects are and then also that intention with like my sense of Like so go up to Nottingham find myself in in a church. So Trent Vineyard Church at Nottingham Is a phenomenal vision for the city vision of church Maxillism vision like If there are any refugees in this city they're on us like let's do this Let us do free shops let us buy out all of the railway arches and like upcycle furniture and like really Be aggressive in a sort of sense of churches infrastructure like that really lodged in my sense of the possible of like Having kind of floated through a form of kind of evangelicalism. I then come across something that's like we must really take responsibility For changing society in a not a kind of totalitarian way but in a like super high-energy way and that intention with a sort of The sort of The strangeness of Architectural education I then drop out of architecture because I think it didn't hang together I think I found myself Disintegrated by those things intention and this this I think I began my podcast addiction Like I listened to everything Robbelle and Driscoll and like any of those from 2005 I definitely had that definitely had a sense that ideas matter and And that you could do something that was catalytic through church But it didn't hang together so but I also found a breeze podcast or the breeze a lot of audio content from them alluding to this proto monastic space where ideas were wrestled with and there was something about being amongst the cabbages where you You you you came in touch with the real real So when I yeah, it's halfway through that I drop out I go and spend two terms English library And that was very very healing or like very reintegrating and I think like a whole set of things from the candles that we had this evening as a Theological mainstay to like it just there's a whole kit of parts that I think would be has really honed in terms of how it stewards what is Essentially a domestic space to do High high functioning Holding and containing of a diversity of broken people at various stages into Meaning making and and and stuff so that I then do that that I get back to not taking the finish and then and then So this is then 2009 I come down to London with a kind of my prayer Is to like how can I take how can I find what I found there in the city? And it was entirely by accident that I met Tony At the back of church and Tony Tony's yeah, this is Tony's house but and he was a Like I was listening into your thing on simple people Like and and he he did you see a C's and then that was it and and he He was He was aggressively non-academic and I think that was very helpful for me And other things but like he he DIY did a lot of this house He he bought this house when such houses could be built and he like having done What such houses could be bought like this probably at a reasonable price. You've got you've got There's a lot of there's a lot of gentrification in London I think that's what you meant to say. He bought this house when it could be built, but When it could be bought. Yes, exactly. Um, yeah, I think I mean one of the questions I'd love to sort of in terms of you guys scaling estuary and you thinking about People like the the people who are finding Jordan Peterson and then coming to some sort of realization all the stuff with like Tom Holland in the coming dark age like stuff like that literal dark age because electricity is gonna be too expensive for Electricity is gonna be too expensive for the English to light their homes at night What is it to generate community? And then what is it to seed houses? Under these conditions that sort of sneak under the radar It was a like the best time to do it was I don't know in the 70s when London was depopulating You could pick up a house like this for 90 grand and now they're kind of a million or two million But so there was a sort of like but I just don't think it was that calculated I think he was someone who was sold out for like just blessing discipling kind of in an old-school way quite disciplinary and old-school navigators, but like wickedly funny and like with a kind of like And and also like a vulnerable streak I found him like and he was about half your height I think he'd come up to your middle And Yeah, I mean and so he was a bachelor all his life and then yeah, this this is the house that he from the 90s for about 30 years basically lived as one of 12 guys that lived in this house and I I ended up in in here at a point where he was He was developing Alzheimer's and And Yeah, I mean he was he was a complicated person but like he just sort of given himself away and and kind of in no high-minded like Let's calculate a theology of intentional community Which I think I'm prone to do like had just the person in front of him like he was very much more the like not loving the idea of community, but loving right the person in front of him and and Yeah, and it I think some of the rhythms of the house bear testimony to something that has been iterated and That works and so we are then the inheritors. So like I I'm able to boast in this house without boasting in my great genius of but like it's something that has a has a good enoughness and a kind of like it can it can accommodate quite a quite a variety of Weird people in weird life stages and we just Keep it going tweak it Say what's the question? Was a good it was a good run Well, I wanted to know who Tony was and you gave a nice you gave a nice picture of him and how We did it we did an estuary meeting at a church tonight and One of the topics that was in the group that I was participating in was not you know, unsurprisingly You know a group of guys who are talking about consumption of podcasts and substance of YouTube videos this search for truth but we noticed that a lot of this search for truth is just sort of up here in the air and It sounds like Tony was not working up here in the area. He had all his models. He had all his theories You know, there's there's a fair number of people Around this little corner of the internet that just think and think and think and think and talk and talk and talk and talk It's unlike Tony was the kind of guy who he's just gonna do and then you can you can begin to work out the protocols the rhythms their rituals the liturgies in the process of doing because Right there you have The actual laboratory whereas just trying to think all this and maybe apply and then think some more No, you're gonna do and do and do and you're going to develop those those liturgies and those ways of living together and then after he developed Alzheimer's you sort of step in and are the curator of In some sense the monastic tradition. I Mean, there's not an order. There's not an order of Tony sitting around this house somewhere in a book Here's the order of Tony The order this is this is much more of an oral tradition Well talk to me about some of the practices that that the house has that that sort of keeps the house together I Mean you have prayer in the morning 730 prayer, correct Yeah It's optional. I don't know that that's what keeps the house together in a Code of like I think there's there's been a lot of prayer undergirds what this house is But yeah The house tries to be quite ordinary and like or least at least I'm I'm I'm keen for rootedness. Generally the domestic generally like people who like I There's so many of my peers who do not are not afforded this Like they live in a similar house it's just cut up into four flats and there's something in the just that social code of like you're like the well one the kind of The leader who would break through the barriers and and instigate Living at scale and then just the plausibility that that doesn't end in cult carnage and like And otherwise and and that and that I think is way outside of some people's sense of the possible and So this there's that so we inherit this rhythm from Tony and some of what I think We have I think I think there's ways of doing houses like why I'm does houses and other people do houses where it is a Ministry and it's a program and and there's some houses like the Brie where it's therapy and it's subsidized and it's kind of Much needed and I like I bless why I'm to do what why I'm doesn't be Libri to do like I have derived huge benefits from from both in there like extensively from the Brie But it doesn't scale to the million houses that everyone else lives in right it's this exceptional case. And how do you? without being nostalgic for some kind of return Twitter form of like the Golden Age where we sort of Everyone was a trad wife and everyone had this like kind of whatever it was But there was something in what we have here in the architecture of what we have here that bears tribute to some sort of Resilience from the 1800s where they lived relationally And I want for that fabric to be enlivened to do a rhythm of life within that that doesn't have to be subsidized and doesn't have to be Full-time but it actually gives the possibility that you could raise a family be students Whatever it is have jobs that operate in the real world But you're you're enabled and also you don't need to be like full Benedict option Like there's something about we're in the city before the city were of the city We're a mix of people on a spectrum of belief and unbelief Sarah and I steward it and try to facilitate something in which it's more than the sum of its parts But it doesn't the barrier to entry isn't a doctrinal basis its participation And vulnerability and then the the measure of its success Well is up for question, but but it's it we've tried to decouple Spiritual religious like presenting from Participation in being towards the house and allowing Like the intensity of that to set up Full stack conversations about where you're actually at in life and you so it's shared rooms So it's six bedrooms one of which is a bedroom at one the guest room and then it's two people in all the other rooms We cook on a rotor so like Two people cook for the whole week, they're responsible for feeding ten people every day they're responsible for stocking the inventory and there's a there's a level of responsibility for others and also the ability to curate a Household at this scale for feasts for like it's your you are then it's it's and I think so Tony taught foreign language students to cook a roast beef like he like he had a coded thing and like he He was very but like that same thing like without a sort of fascination for roast beef per se is a bit like what like the side effects of it were it it raised people to have a sense of houses as being for others and you as like I Was interesting last night thinking about the cello and competence and I like a competence talking about Kristi Maier's talk The at the event at Oak Hill Thinking about Christian competencies or like tacit knowledge as a sort of it you build into your body to know how to do it but like Yeah, I had a question that I didn't quite know what to do with I still know what to do with how you how you do that without elitism or whatever, but like there's a there's a There's there's all sorts of practical things that Are to do with household management that I think are not not spiritual and are not not forms of creating part of the infrastructure at the cellular level of activated households which do the doing of Resisting Empire where otherwise we're all ordering uber eats like the telos of where we go Technologically is becoming more and more atomic more and more dependent on the blob and forming the skill base of resilient Interdependence has has some really Otherwise kind of on the face of it mundane things But it's how do you cook and stew at a household of ten people and if you can take that for granted Then you can you can build all sorts of other intermediate scaled resistant infrastructure So unglamorously and without any sense that we've arrived like I just think more people should do that we just have a head start because We've got like this is what we've inherited which I can do that. Yeah Do do the people who come in here to live now? You mentioned that they don't have let's say a confessional foundation that you know other let's say Mennonite intentional communities We have Julian who lives, you know, he's a hutterite. You have the Bruderhoff I mean, so the Mennonites have pursued intentional communities quite a bit. You don't have a A Doctrine or code or it isn't specifically religious those who come into the house What's their motivation? What what's why are that why are they coming in if it's not religiously motivated Well To some extent you could ask you could ask them although this is a serious question because I yes they We tend to recruit by word of mouth. I Tend to have to put people off coming as it were I tend to try to discourage people against the the rosy tinted sense of Being in communities going to be lots of lovely people and they're all going to be exactly What it is the Everyone who comes to the house Has to write has to write an application and the analogy I would use is if we were a house for recovering alcoholics It would be straightforward what success looks like right and why? What a is and what B is and how you get made to be and how the house helps you get there? Hmm But we're not a house for alcoholics necessarily. We are a house for a diversity of people At to a great benefit The rent is cheaper than it might otherwise be sure there's no mortgage on the house like essentially we are this sort of year of Jubilee standing outside of the market because Like there's no there's nothing leveraged on this plot of land. And so I mean you could push the rent right down But there's much to maintain and repair and otherwise so It's a cheap rent So then the question the burden of proof has to be on them to say why why do they why do they Deserve to be here as it were. Yeah, and within the recruitment process We tried well, we don't have a beauty contest. So we don't have multiple people applying for one place at a time One person will apply and then they need to write what is essentially a proto relational covenant Which is this is why this is what my a is this is what beers and this is why the nine other people and The kind of facility of the house helps me get from A to B hmm, and and then that is they say like I'm trying to like Look, it's it's it's fairly rudimentary. I'm trying to achieve this season of study and I'm also recovering from This past season of X and actually doing in this context of community Provides me with this and I'm excited to exploit positively this season at this house in these ways And then it's reciprocal in that there's nine other people who've said I'm here with these vulnerabilities Or these hopes and dreams right and that's there's a like like it's like a one pager It's not a it's and and that is that's the basis of There the code of how they're kind of the user guide to me of like why I'm here how I'm how how you can challenge me like it's I don't I so I haven't really engaged the Protocol of the the thing but there's there's something about protocols where you break the ice for people you short-circuit to giving permission to ask hard questions Which otherwise you have to secure to see kind of do a little dance beforehand and that little dance could cost for six months and so I think that that has been an accelerator for people to Own the house exploit the house like I often use exploit in a put like we've got this Ferrari of a house And I just want people to write it really fast like it's sort of don't want it gathering dust in there in the in the garage. So So there's a fit to the relational covenant people write for themselves and the rhythm of life which has a lot of ostensibly pragmatic stuff But which I think Is the is the stable base on which you accelerate? Yeah forms of forms of intimacy and forms of kind of Catalytic effectiveness in terms of what what people go from this place to go and do Hmm so your You'd like to see others take up this challenge and and pursue you it could be you Well, well, you know It sounds like though. This isn't this isn't this isn't a small thing to take up. I Mean you're going to I mean Tony started it You've sort of maintained the tradition of Tony Someone who starts this on their own is going to have to I mean, you know, maybe someone who let's say has lived here has Internalized the practices understood the dynamics they could potentially go out and start another one someplace else having learned what they've learned here, but someone watching this video on the basis of the 30 40 minutes that we've been talking that's pretty thin soup to start something new there's I mean, it's it's sort of Devastating that the bar for entry is a million pounds If you're a YouTube viewer Whatever it is. Yeah, if you're if you're living in well, if you're living in a major city It's you have the liability that the cost to get into a house is very high but you also have the the opportunity that there could be potentially a good number of people who Especially in the early years could your rent wouldn't be as low, but maybe you can begin to pare down that mortgage On the other side if you live in an area, which is much lower lower cost of purchasing a purchasing house You can get into a house But then you might not have the same demands of people But you could you know there could be other things if it's in more of a rural section more rural area You could do you know you could do farming together you could do or you could do a whole bunch of other things I mean there have been many They've been many attempts at pursuing communal living in the whole varieties of ways and but but you have seen yourself the You have seen yourself the the benefits of it now, you're also doing this as a married person That's Different from everyone else in the house is single, correct? Yep Until well until recently there was there was another married couple. Okay What are what are those dynamics like? Yes, interesting there's so briefly to the bit you were saying Before of people's and various things there is there are there's the skills of leading it There's the financial aspect and then there's the kind of location and what the house Fabric is and there is a sort of there are those three things to solve for and you have to get those three ducks in A row. Yep To the point of that and then to the second question of the married couple So for five years Sarah and I have done it like this with another married couple here who? Have gone to do a different house in Cambridge Also another communal is living house. Okay in a in a smaller and different shaped way. I Think this house of ten people works really well with two couples and six singles But I'm sure there is a whole variety of Family arrangements, etc Like so Lebrie has families and kids and single workers as a sort of some of part like more than some of parts Hosting a set of students and I think there's there's some but I wonder yeah, I I Don't know. I'm right now dear YouTube viewer there is There is this vacancy of the couple who have vacated and and there is this like I guess my My question at this junction which is what I'm like have a rando conversation to kind of try to think through or try to Picket that question is what how do you recruit for if the North Star is trying to? export a sense of the plausibility and Viability of this rhythm of life at the point at time where we have a vacancy What does it mean? I still feel young and Underexperienced in so many ways, but then also we've done this we've been around the block a few times I feel like we would have the capacity to much more asymmetrically pour into someone and send them to like and to start to you know in what is what is very navigator sort of like that sort of discipleship of like but like Not very programmed and I like there has to be like I don't quite know what This house 2.0 looks like because it's so weird and so exceptional And then to that kind of Trinity of needing needing leaders needing cash needing the house itself There are many empty nested boomers who are kind of Stewarding from fabric. Yeah, like as an appreciating asset as the the diligent thing to do as a kind of An aging Christian couple to to to do so that your then millennial offspring can get a foot on the housing ladder by by Liquifying that at the appropriate time to help them but in the meantime, there's a lot of space and there's all that joy and coherence and like like So we like it's so like I would pay to find people like you to come and stay with us I have such a deficit of people of a certain generation Like I just like it was it was Almost I mean in many ways to do with who Tony was but also just how other he was by age and how How how much he shaped what my sense of what it is to age and how it is to to be of that generation And what what it gave me something to think well I could be that what's the route to get there like without that So I just don't know how to get how to bring in that intergenerationality and the frees on of of that and make it Plausible that it's not only possible for it to be peaceful but for it to be fruitful because yeah many people I mean many people have been inoculated against Community housing by student housing and and the sort of the horror of kind of having to make it up on the spot with Like desperately immature people and then you kind of at the end of your student experience kind of recover and sweat and never do it again and like Kind of batten down the hatches to be kind of atomic with your own dishwasher on your own washing machine And it's something where kind of nothing touches me And so just chipping away at that and then trying to make bridges to Particularly intergenerationality Is is what I want to do Export to to bait the hook of something because just like I don't know there's plenty of like Weird millennial projects doing weird crypto funded Co-house hacker houses. I'm sure the bay area is absolutely thick with like people doing Very stratified demographically forms of like Short-term Intensity, but it's that kind of The durability of the steady state and the intergenerationality Which I don't know the Brueglerhof do but how do you how do you do it? virally and disruptively and Peacemeal and accumulatively in the city Starting in a kind of messy space. Yeah And then how do we use the space to build a new kind of a new kind of a new kind of a new kind of a new kind of a Pillar that they we're going to build And then we're actually going to use what we have here to see that and some of what we have is deep stability And like phenomenal like network support from The navs who I don't know what they're now like that has is such a diverse weird thing That it seems it seems hard to but It is it's a load of hugely generous sacrificial people coming alongside if I was to say, how do you do this house? Have someone that you're accountable to. I think most community houses are like, no, no, we're gonna reinvent the wheel. And then like you, one, you create a demographic strata and you kind of raise the ladder up after you. And partly you're like, the precisely the sort of entrepreneurial vision that makes it happen kind of sets it up to either eat itself and become a cult or kind of dissolve at a point where it isn't passing anything on like it sort of becomes a bit hermetic is my sense. And so it has been a fundamental blessing as a diagram to have like degrees of disinterested people to write through to people who are kind of intimately care for us as people who situate this as not a cult. And I think the guest room also helps it not be a cult. Weirder people than me come and stay and check my weirdness. Are you calling John Van Donk and myself weird? I've probably drifted us from the original question. Well, I think it was a good, I think it was a good, I'd like to return to this, but it's getting late and I am not at my sharpest after this very long day. But I think the topic is really good and really interesting. I don't know what your bandwidth is. I might be able to upload this tonight and get it out there because I would like to, I think it's something I've not explored at all on my channel, even though we do have, I mean, Julian is a, he's an original rando and he is out there and he will pick up on this video. I know Julian, who's the Hutterite. And your vision here is interesting, I don't know. In Grand Rapids, there was a, when I was in college or before I came to college, there was an intentional Christian community that I was still going when I was in college. I visited it once and I had some friends who lived in it. And I think it was in some way similar to this because it didn't have, it wasn't, it didn't pursue it as here, as sort of like a religious order. It was, I think it was similar to what you've described. I know another, I knew another house in Grand Rapids where that was more of an individual sort of mentoring man to get their lives in order and get up and get going. So I, you know, this has been very interesting and I think you've got an interesting vision. And I like the fact that you are interested in encouraging the vision to multiply and for other people to try it. And you've got, you've obviously got some ideas about boomers and multi-generational because you're right. And especially in a world right now where Job in the Netherlands called these things that are being built Netflix boxes, where, you know, it's, you've got a kitchen, a bedroom and a little room in which you are for the most part just gonna watch Netflix. And I can see, I mean, I can sense that this particular community sort of has a light touch. You're not, you know, we are going to be down here for prayer at 7.30. We are going to, you know, it's not heavily programmed. It's a light touch. And I think that's really good and probably needed. So, but my voice is almost gone. I have been talking all day and my energy is almost gone. And I don't know how long this battery, this battery is hanging in there. We filled the, I filled the card before which I didn't think I'd ever do, but this video takes a lot more space than I thought. But no, I really like this and I really like this idea. And you know, John, it was funny because when we got here the other night, John was like, oh, this is really cool. I wanna, you know, I wanna spend some more time here and our schedule is really full, but you know, I'm going to see Justin tomorrow. And John's like, well, I'll stay here. And then I can kind of get a sense of this place. And I would like to bring John into this conversation because I think John didn't wanna be in this conversation because I think he wanted to go to bed. But I would like to bring John into this conversation because I think John will continue to ask questions. I think, I suspect that for, especially for couples who decide that they want to pursue something like this. I mean, obviously both, both parties have to be deeply committed to it because living in a situation like this as a single is different than living in a situation like a married couple, because a married couple not only has one and then two, but the relationship between them, which also requires maintenance and attention and. And space, it needs a good space. And I think, I mean, I'm interested in the architecture of how you really want to let you go to bed, but I really wanna talk about it. But I don't take lightly that there is something around, there's a order of magnitude difference in terms of how you as two bodies, but one unit. Like two wills, two voices, two like the, I mean, the JVP to PVK pipeline I like came for the JVP, stay for the marriage crisis stuff. And I really think that there's something about like dating in captivity. And there's also something about like, like what it is to household formation is I think, like plausible forms of household formation is also an exit from the like the Cheetos basement. Like, and giving a pattern book of steps that are like not totally wild, but also kind of antidotes to like essentially becoming like an Uber Eats couple in a Netflix box kind of subsisting on babels like megastructure that somehow, and I put it to the church to some extent to say, well, then like institutionally invest in plausible ways of de-risking household formation by kind of like, it would be possible for the pension fund of some institution to take on a form of compassion. Well, it doesn't have to be compassionate, just sympathetic to like, if we could show that we're cash positive and that relationally, we don't like, I don't know. You're stable, you don't blow up. This house under its current formation has lasted five years, which outlasts any number of other household formations in its own messy way, as it were, but wanting to create pathways for people to merely take lodgers at a more, like a steadily more ambitious scale is something that I wonder that there is room for the church's institute to use its intermediate cloud to provide that. That infrastructure. I think you're really onto something. I think you're really onto something. I really like it, it's really cool. I'll prod John. So maybe we can find, yeah, we won't have, we don't have a lot of time. We might find some time again tomorrow morning. I have to find my way to Justin Briarley's house. So I'll figure that out, shouldn't be too hard. But anyway, so let's land the plane here. And maybe this is something that we can pick up again and continue to pursue. Sound good? All right. Thanks, Phil.