https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=DlDqWZv0afg

 All right, I am starting early because I know some people are gonna probably need a little bit of extra time to get into the studio and I'm gonna set up a few extra things that I usually do just because this is gonna be a little bit more complicated. So there we go. I got the live stream set up here and this other monitor. So let me explain a little bit. Good morning Elijah. Let me explain a little bit about what I decided to do with this. I actually made a spreadsheet of all the pitches that I could discern and there are way more good pitches than I could possibly put on. I had this idea early in the morning when I woke up and I was thinking, okay, I gotta do the Friday live stream. What shall I do this week? One of the things that I want to do is a women's only live stream, women's only except for me. That might be behind the membership section but that's gonna take some getting together because there are some very familiar women that many of you know and then there are some other women that are sort of behind the scenes. You know, Kate is around. Kate has popped up on one live stream. Emily is fairly new to the corner but she made her own channel and a great introduction. Part of why I decided to do this is because after Chris and waves of obsession sort of made a wave in the corner with his video and an excellent video it was, of course Christian Baxter sort of jumped in and others have come in. Part of what I like and want, you know, some of you have known that I've always had this very ambivalent relationship with money and this and that very much comes from experience in Christian ministry which there's no con like the religious con. The religious con is in some ways easier and more destructive than other cons and so I'm pretty sensitive with respect to money but now I've started the membership channel and I just have to make peace with that money is an element of this always and that's exactly the way it is with church but one of the things about church and money is also very interesting but one of the things about church that I've noticed over the years is that you don't really need money to play. If you have money you can use money to play but if you don't have money there are other currencies that you can use and sometimes one of the biggest currencies are attention, good, you're on your laptop, orthodox boomer grandma, boy did you run away with the voting. Yeah, 37 votes, a whole bunch of comments from corner regulars. Oh, I got to drop the link. Oh gosh. Oh boy, what a big oversight. See, this is why I wanted to start early. I knew I'd forget something. Here's the link. I'm going to drop it in the section here. I think I'm also going to put it in the notes. Oh, great. And then I have to get back to this video. I have to get to this video. I have to go to it on YouTube. I know this is boring. I was going to actually steal some of Grim Grizz's branding and play the branding because I knew I'd probably have to do some things in the background. And shoot. Okay. All right. Yes, you click on that orthodox boomer grandma. Yes, indeed, you click on that. Well, Christian Baxter is in. He's in a little early. I have to find this video. And I'm going to drop the link in my pinned comment too. Let's see. Let's make sure I can still edit it. Yes, I can. There we go. All right. Just amended the comment. On the other video, I will go back to this video. YouTube studio. Content live. You and YouTube. There we are. Okay. All right. Good. All right. I think I mostly set up. I should probably put the... I'm going to pin this so it can be found. Okay. All right. I think I am set up. Yes, orthodox boomer grandma. You'll have to... Once you get into the studio, you'll have to mute the browser window that you're watching this on. Now, for a bunch like Christian, you can listen from the studio. You can listen from backstage, and that's fine. But it's a little complex getting into StreamYard at first. Alexander Union. Okay. That is a lovely name. Oh, we just learned Anselman's real name. We learned Anselman's real name. Oh, I am so excited. Anselman is going to be like the big mystery of the corner. I mean, who is Anselman? I made it all the way to Scotland. I made it all the way to Scotland and didn't meet Anselman in person. That was Alexander Selman. Way to tease the world, Anselman. Way to tease the world. Okay. Still haven't seen you in here yet, Alexandra. I know there's a ton of people that are super excited to meet you and hear your story. I don't have... You know, I wish I had... I wish I had... Oh, there she is. She's made it in. She's cleaning her glasses. That's right, Cassandra. I was here for this historic moment. So this arose because I woke up a little bit early and I was thinking about... I was just thinking about the future and I was thinking, okay, what do I do for the Friday live stream? And I'm always bothered with the time crunch that I... I don't have enough time, attention and energy to give all the randos they deserve. And I'm always frustrated that the Internet doesn't give the randos they deserve. I'll bring you in here in a minute, Alexandra. You're going to... StreamYard has a place that you can make sure that your mic... Your mic's clearly working. You can make sure your mic is working. You're muted right now. There you go. You're unmuted. I can't hear you yet. Once I bring you into the studio, I'll hear you. But... So I'm always... I'm always have the dilemma with the randos conversations because I would... I just find people... People are interesting. People are super interesting. People are the most interesting thing around. I'm going to add a very male thing to say. Oh, we've got a couple of private chats here. Oh, you're hearing double. OK, so yeah, Christian will help you in there. So mute. You got it? Good. Good. She's all set. So... So my times... The times are that I have... That I have here. You can see them in the comment section. I'm going to add a screen. We're going to add an entire screen. There it is. So... Ortho Boomer grandma running a trailer park. I mean, how is this not going to win? How is this not going to win? So she clearly won. She clearly won the comments. And Christian Baxter. Pseudo-Boeathiest threatened to unsubscribe if Christian didn't get on the channel. So yeah, got to keep pseudo-Boeathiest in the world. And then come into the forest. Very interesting. Got a lot of votes. He got...come into the forest got 20 votes. Nate, David. I don't know David's...if that bus suit teal, but he had a very interesting comment. He was next. Nate actually got the second highest number of votes. Christian got the third highest. But Nate... It's kind of cheating because Nate already has a channel and a following. And I looked for a... I looked for... It was a very early video. It was a very early video that Nate had done where he basically did his own self-Randos conversation. We told the story about himself, his father. It was a super interesting video. And so after I saw that video, I just didn't really feel the need to do a Rando's conversation. I just wanted to do a Rando's conversation with Nate because I felt like I knew him. And now a bunch of you...Christian has been doing this. Christian Backstor has been doing this with his own channel. Emily on Twitter, she's Food Truck Emily and I got the story from that. So I find people just super interesting. And so then obviously YouTube just sort of hijacks that. And...oh did I step on Grim Grizz's live stream? Was he live streaming? I hope not. One of the things if we do...there's the tension out over how much to organize the corner. That's a real tension right here. Sorry, Grizz. I didn't mean to step on you. I don't know why Google didn't tell me you were live streaming. I probably would have been watching. So anyway... Oh where was I going with this? He made me...oh gosh. Grim Grizz plays his best little Scandinavian girl. Woosh, woosh. Here we are. We're wooshing. The dilemma that we have in the corner is the more we organize it... It's the whole chaos order thing. It's the whole keeping the fringes chaotic thing. It grows to a point where we need a level of organization so I don't step on Grizz's live stream. But then we're going to...the expected things will happen the more we organize. I know this has actually been at the heart of a lot of the chatter that goes on usually around Jacob's channel in terms of my leadership, etc. My...the wisdom I have gained by watching church plants and other things try to grow where you're trying to really grow a movement is you only scaffold institution as necessary. And now sometimes you have to scaffold a little bit more to make the movement grow. It's a really touchy thing and it's a chaos and order thing that to keep the living organism flourishing, it's a real balance. And I see this with medicine all the time. I see this with spiritual growth in people. You know there's often the situation where I'm working with someone and they're growing spiritually. People grow spiritually, they don't grow evenly spiritually. There's spurts and starts and most discipleship programs think that, well, these are the things that they need to know. And sometimes that's right, but sometimes that's wrong. So usually it's a conversation with people and you just...you have to do a lot of listening. And a lot of it's sort of just in time stuff. Alright, I'm going to get...I'm going to actually start the show and I'm going to bring in...oh, pre-game...I'm PV Cape! Oh, I'm so sorry, Grizz! I'm so sorry. I'm so sorry. Even...I'm so sorry. If I had known that I would not have started early, but I'm really excited to get going and I want to get as many people in as possible. So I thought, well, I'll just jump in the studio a little bit early and get things set up and sort of have a pre-game. What I should have done was I should have just been streaming Grizz's pre-game show on the channel. Well, this is the first time and the first time we do this, we never quite know what to do. So maybe next time I'll have to organize a little bit better and have Grizz in there. And do some organizing for us. Alright, well, how...where are we? Let's see where we're at right now. We have four minutes. I'm going to...before the big reveal, because I know it's going to be a big reveal because I know a ton of you, a bunch of you said she needs to have her own full Rando's conversation. And that certainly might happen. But I also know the way this corner works that once someone sort of comes into the corner, they're going to appear on...they're going to have a convo on Grizz. They're going to go over to Karen. They're going to be on Transfigured. Chad is going to be hounding them. No, it's not Claire. So we'll see how this goes. But the beauty... You know, what I've always wanted...again, this deals with my frustration...is another video that I'm thinking about making today is a little bit of a video explaining why I don't go for interviewing high status celebrity people. It's because I do that sometimes. I do make exceptions. But sometimes when I make exceptions, I regret having made the exception. Because what I really...what I really want is to see what kind of relationship there can be. So, all right. Well, we're three minutes. So I'm first just going to read the pitch. Because, boy, this pitch worked, Alexandra. She writes...her thing is at orthodoxboomergrandma3561. I'm going to have to look that up. I'm going to read it. This story has everything! It has a romance thread. It has a business side. It has...this pitch was the pitch of pitches, especially for this corner. We want interested folks to come visit our place. We have two RVs right now. We are currently trying to get permits to build a small RV place. Our eventual goal is a small orthodox community of a few who are serious about gaining ceaseless, noetic prayer and theosis. Bam! Wow! Yeah, I bet need some savings throws. Okay, get ready, Alexandra. I'm bringing you in. And here she is. Oh, you got to unmute. Good morning. God bless you. Good morning. God bless you. Confessions of a controlholic. Just in case we don't get my whole story in here. This is the book, which is being edited by an orthodox monastic publisher. The title is always up for change, but Confessions of a Controlholic will stay. The colon after it might be Chasing Healing. Chasing Healing. Because that's what I've been doing since I was 15. And here's my wonderful orthodox boomer grandpa. I told him I needed to come and sit next to me to give me bravery and things. Let's see, which side is he? This way? Okay, there he is. There he is. Welcome. Yeah, that's Elias Union. He is the Chandler. And he's been doing the candle business up here in the 8,000 square foot warehouse since 1998. The year I had my first biological kid, but not with him. The other subtitle of my book used to be, Don't Destroy Your Second Marriage Too, because I destroyed my first marriage. That was a long time ago. But anyway, he found me and talked me out of becoming a nun. He was ready to retire anyway from the diaconate. We're here in Sonora at St. Susanna Orthodox Christian Church. That's a little bit of the later history. How we got together was crazy. And like you said, it ended up to be a romance. First, I just ghosted him for like 12 weeks and told him to leave me alone and got the bishop involved and told him to tell him to leave me alone. But he needed a wife because his matushka had passed away. And you know, widowers who have a wonderful marriage, they get married again rather quickly, some of them. Yes, they do. He needed a wife to help keep him alive, basically, because he didn't know how to cook. Not that I know how to cook. I didn't even know how to do the laundry. Especially widowers of a certain age, we used to always tease my...actually we've said, you know, if my mother had died first, I'd tell my father, you go to my sister's house now. You go there now. And then we'd have to put a fence around him to keep the women away, because of course there's tons of widows at that area. And then you have a man who has had a wonderful first marriage. Oh, it's brutal. But we only have 20 minutes, and where I'd love to have two hours, we have to get going. So Alexandra, tell me about...you said you were raised Roman Catholic. Talk to me about that. Okay, and you can stay, honey, or not. And just make sure we get enough time for me to do shameless plugs for our print mount icon business that we only recently started, and our mainly church prayer candle business. But we also make...I guess I'm doing the plug now, and we make molded candles. Okay, since you're doing the pitch, how can people find you? Okay, the pitch would be...okay, so unionofallicons.com is our Shopify website, which we're working really hard. My husband believes in stocking inventory, and we're not doing custom orders yet, and we're running out of inventory. We're making icons by a wonderful priest who reposed last year, Father Luke Dingman. My husband came into orthodoxy when all those 700 or 800 people in the Santa Cruz mountains went from the Wee Kirk Independent Protestant Church into orthodoxy together, like on a group. So Father Luke Dingman became an iconographer. This is his last judgment behind me, which is very popular these days. It's used as a link or a thumbnail on...even Jonathan Pajot had it as a thumbnail, so I went up there and said, hey, you know, I've got the rights to this, you know, you should have me on, or come visit me. Yeah, why hasn't Pajot had you on? Well, see, we are very below the radar. I mean, I don't have a real blessing. On my channel, all I do is make videos not of myself. I make videos of our dogs, the candles being made, the icons being made, because I am the biggest ham in the whole world, and I struggle a lot with vainglory and pride. So he has kept me reigned in. I did do one other interview with Young Penitent, so go sign up to Young Penitent, you guys. He's an Orthodox guy, middle-aged, he used to be a rapper, he's doing some new music now, he'd be a good person for you to also have on. So anyway, back to my story, I guess, because we're here for the stories, and you're just brimming with them. I am, you know, we grew up in Berkeley, Kensington, I didn't realize that I was sort of privileged at the time, but my parents were doing very well as chemists. But when Vatican II hit, my father was brokenhearted, because he had wanted to be a priest in the 50s, very traditional, Latin Catholic, he knew Latin fluently, he was always reading his Brevery and everything. And his heart broke when the modernization happened. And then my mom threw him out of the house for, he had mental illness. They're both deceased now, so I feel like they're up there, and I can talk about them freely, you know, I love them. I love them more the longer they're reposed, which is very interesting. In Orthodoxy, we pray for the reposed a lot, and it's really changed how I think about my parents, and I forget them. And I was a brat. But so they fell away into Berkeley intellectual culture, music, but basically hedonism. So they were too old to be hippies, really, so they were very educated, high cultured jazz people into art, and you know, we always had black jazz musicians at my mom's house after. So the 70s got very rough. I don't think our parents knew that sex, drugs and rock and roll was pouring into the high schools from the Haight-Ashbury. All under their noses, and I mean, they had no idea. So I started to emulate my parents, basically, I figured, you know, we were very upset about the divorce. They never told us why they were divorcing. We just came home one day and had no dad. So it's very brutal. Yeah, it took me like 20 or 30 years after that for my second shrink, I think, to tell me, you know, you had a really crappy childhood. I thought it was normal. So I had a lot of fun being a bad girl. I embraced sex, drugs, rock and roll, starting at 15. I went to Every Single Day on the Green by Bill Graham. We had bottles of Jack Daniels in our high school lockers. My girlfriend and I were stealing people's pharmaceuticals out of their medicine cabinets. You know, we'd drive up to their house and say, oh, our car overheated. Can we use your bathroom? This is at 15. Yeah. And they'd let us in and we'd rifle through their medicine cabinets to find barbiturates. I could have been Karen Anne Quinlan probably six times. Look her up. And many people don't know that, but people who are our age know it. I could have been. I almost I missed getting picked up in a car by Edmund Kemper. My friend and I were standing at the bus stop in Berkeley to go to ballet in whatever year she died. And she got in his car and I said no. Wow. Yeah. I only remembered that like three years ago. So it was all sort of repressed. I'm going to speed this up because these are speed rando conversations. So talk to me about, OK, so you can be rebellious in high school. Did you go to college? So then I was smart enough to get into college, luckily. And that really saved me because I developed intellectual interest in things. And I decided because I got straight A's in psychology that I become a clinical psychologist and pursue a career. Because my mother told me the most important thing in life is intellectual satisfaction. That's all she knew because she was doing that. Then I she led me into a well, so yeah, college. I was pretty much non-religious at all. Then I became a little new agey crystals and LSD and lots of, you know, really good assets and stuff like that. And then my mom led me into a Hindu meditation cult in the early 80s. It was Swami Muktananda who had died. His, the person that took on after him was a female guru. And so my mom went to India. I tried to move to India, but luckily God stopped me after I had a lot of Kundalini awakening, out of body experiences, demonic visions, so many things. They're all in the book. And one day in 1994, there was a big scandal in the cult. And I had just been on my face on the floor begging God to save me out of this cult. And I heard myself literally saying, I need a safe religion. I need a savior. And as soon as I said, I need a savior, I took it back instantly. Yeah, that's the scary part. I don't need a savior, me, you know, I'm fine. But three months later, my brother almost died in a hospital in Oakland, Kaiser, and I ended up at his bedside and I met Christ. So he remembered that I had asked him and he came. And then I just, yeah, I was Protestant for a lot of years, went to every church in the county, loved it. I have so many friends, but it started to get a little dry for me and I wanted to go deeper in prayer. So I went and started researching my Roman Catholic roots and got into St. John of the Cross, St. Teresa of Avila. But, you know, for a long time, I mixed the Hindu guru group with Jesus and I got confirmed as a Catholic while I was in the cult. So later, I, after St. Francis, after Pope Francis got elected, I just had like a shiver go up my spine and I said, no, something's wrong here. I mean, we've been to Rome in 2012. I loved Pope Benedict because I was a rad, tragic, you know, I had covering everything because basically what also helped me was I moved to the mountains here in Sonora and met a mountain man and got married and had a normal life. I became a red person instead of a blue person. So that helped a lot to become more conservative and family oriented. I raised four stepdaughters, not very well, and had two boys. I've repented to all my stepdaughters many times, you know. So then Roman Catholicism just started to look a little crazy, as we know. And then I just started reading church history and found Orthodoxy online. There wasn't that much in 2014, but I visited my local church and met the deacon and all the wonderful people up here. And yeah, I got baptized pretty quickly there 2014. And then just a couple of years later, got married. And now he says if he reposes before me, I can still go be a nun if I want. But now that we live in the 8,000 square foot warehouse where we built a place to live and we are waiting permits to see if we can have a very small RV place. And you know, we can have people that are just off the road. We're right on the road to Yosemite. So we're going to have four spots and maybe a few trailers, but we have two RVs now if anyone wants to come visit. I am just very much into prayer and studying the saints and trying to do the Jesus prayer ceaselessly and go to church as often as possible together. And so that's like brings you a little bit up to the present. And I just try to let God rule over me because I need a lot of ruling over because I'm unruly. Well, that was definitely a speed rando you put into and as a number of comments are saying, this is a life story. This is a life story needs two hours at least. And that's true for many people and especially when you get to be about our age, you have a lot. And you've had a full life. Everybody has a book too. I mean, I was ballerina. I worked at the National Institutes of Health. I toured Europe with the singing choir. Yeah, I mean, I had a great life. I had and I have a great life because I was chasing healing and I was always searching for everything beautiful, good and true, except for the self-destructive part, you know, that was in there. So, yeah, everybody, I think has a book. I had a lot of big ideas here before COVID. Like we built out this place. We have a flotation tank, which I'm not really advertising and we're certainly not doing anything public. Like we were going to become a health spa. No more. I dropped my license. I dropped my clinical license because I got old all of a sudden. COVID aged me and I just said, I can't be that much out there, you know, as far as a business in terms of healing. I just want it to be prayer and God, whoever God brings. But yeah, we built out this whole 2500 square foot living space. It does have a ballroom that Paul, you could come and give a talk in. We can have retreats. I just need help. Oh, crossover potential here. You can come here and we have a 700 square foot ballroom. It's got Murphy beds in it so we can get out of it if we need to. But yeah, and the two RVs are fully equipped. So anytime you want to come and stay, there's a luxury 40 foot diesel pusher you can come stay in, Paul. Wow. Wow. So I've been thinking I have to do in 2018, I did a thing. My sister has sort of an Airbnb in New England. Yeah. And so I did basically two days with about a dozen people there. And we just sat and talked the whole time. It was awesome. I could do something like that by you. I mean, just have a limited number of people and some people would want to camp and we'll have to, we'll have to, I'll have to keep thinking about this. You could do it right here. Now I have to plug the new monastery. So St. Silouan, the Athenite monastery, had two monks that I was really good friends with. They both died. They both reposed last year and it's the Russian Orthodox Church outside of Russia has given it over to this wonderful nun named Mother Catherine. And things are happening over there. And she's going to be transformed and she's very much interested in outreach to the community. She's going to do some aquaponics and have a garden and training young people. We might use our wood shop over here where we cut the icon boards to help young adults learn skills. So you should come up just to visit that too. And I don't know if I left anything out, but there's a lot going on in this little corner of Tuolumne County, believe it or not. Well Yosemite is one of my favorite places on earth. I should do it when my son Jared gets married. My sister will probably come out. You remind me a lot of my sister. And I should bring my sister up there and have you and my sister meet each other because I think that would be super interesting. And you know, I think Jonathan Pageau might be coming up here soon for something. I'm not privy to what it is, but he knows somebody that knows somebody. And so I go on his streams once in a while and try to invite him to come up. Because we do have an encaustic beeswax art studio. Maybe Jonathan and I could come up there and do something together. Yes, but then you might have too many people. See, I made this encaustic thing of Father Sarah from Rhodes in my little art studio just for fun. So that was part of the initial thing was to have all these activities and people. And then we just really withdrew during COVID and it made me just not want to be as public. But you know how God takes the seed and then you have to let it die and crucify your intellect and let it go in the ground and then let God bring up what he wants to bring up. So before we've only got three more minutes before the next speed rando. So I have to ask you a question. Tell me what you've learned about living fast and living slow. My husband might have an opinion on that. So living fast, you don't even know you have a noose when you're living fast. So Hesychia, chasing stillness and at least just slowing down. That's why we do have the float tank and the infrared sauna and we have a prayer cave. I want people who come here to at least get a taste of stillness because going slow forces you to see the truth, the very ugly truths about yourself. I didn't know what repentance was until I really became orthodox and then found out it's a way of life. And so I think going slower is better for people to be able to actually process what's going on and maybe make better choices if they're stuck in addictions and things like that. So yeah. Good. Wonderful. All right. We've got two minutes. Closing thoughts. You and your husband. Well, my husband is so great. I'm just thankful because I had pestered you before to be a rando and I don't watch all your videos. Really? There's so few. I don't watch. So I'm a moderator. I am a moderator on Church of the Eternal Logos with David Harris. So he's good orthodox content and I follow a lot of Father Peter Hears, Orthodox ethos content. That's helped us a lot. But my husband is just the sweetest, wisest person that I know. So maybe he can give an ending prayer. You could just do a prayer. You can do a prayer. Thank you Lord for blessing us today with this talk. It's very enlightening and that it might touch a few people. Amen. Amen. I can think of a few better ways to land the plane here. Alexandra Union, unionofallicons.com Yeah. And my email is doctor.alexandra.union at Gmail. We're public because we have a business. People dropped by. Yesterday we had some Caltrans guys drop by because they heard about us and they came in. One of them was a wonderful born again Christian just talking nonstop about how Christ saved him from addiction and everything. And we just hit it off. So anybody can stop by. So if you look up San Jose candle on Google, it'll map you right to us. Right off highway 120 to Yosemite, Paul. And I hope we do get to meet in person. It will be very important to me to meet you. San Jose candle. Beautiful. 120. That's one of my routes to Yosemite, at least during the summer. We'll be seeing you. All right. Wonderful. Thank you both so much. Thank you. God bless everybody. God bless you. All right. Christian Baxter, you're up next. Boy, I don't know if I'm going to be able to make it through this speed random. My heart is just getting pulled all over the place. But you're you you have you have made your way into the corner. And I think what part of what you have done is exemplified. There are a lot of people who, you know, I want to get into the corner by getting a Rando's conversation. And that that makes me a bottleneck because I can only have so many. And you basically made your way in here and you've shared your story on your channel. You started a channel. So let's let's do a little Rando stuff because your story is on your channel a little bit. Tell me about the home you were raised in. I was raised in a mostly in the in the very rural country in Arkansas and a town of 350 people went to a public school of 300. The whole town is a school. County, but I was. You're you're you're breaking up in and out. The bane of speed Rando's is going to be technical issues. Can you hear me now? Oh, even better, much better. Can you hear me? I hear you. Dang it. No, I hear you. I can't hear you. Oh, that's a problem. Oh, the technical glitch. Can you hear me now? I hear you fine. Can you hear me? I still can't hear me. All right. I'm going to come back in this. Oh, off he goes. Now I have to fill airtime. Where's my branding? I got I need. Oh, man. I was so I've I've really got a I've really got a lot of work to do. I'm going to go back to the airtime. I'm going to go back to the airtime. I'm going to go back to the airtime. I'm going to go back to the airtime. So I've really got a I've really got to steal some branding from I get some favorite branding. I was thinking this morning that, you know, Grimm Grizz always gives these savings throws against mind control. And the most mind control thing he does is the branding. So all right, Christian's back. So yes, grew up little town Arkansas. Yeah, I was born in Fort Worth and moved to Nashville when I was five, lived there till for two years. I'm pretty good of this urban thing. And my mom was always trying to she was raised in Nashville, trying to keep a little bit of sophistication in the household. She didn't like the word ain't my dad. My dad was raised on the farm that we moved to. So we were surrounded by 400 acres. We didn't have much, but we had a ton of land. And so that was my, you know, world. And, you know, grew up birthday parties were four wheelers and, you know, a lot that everybody hunted. But I was this weird kid who liked sci fi and fantasy and read. And but I didn't feel like I could like express that in my context because nobody else really understood it that well. And that really ties into coming into this space. Ultimately, is that part of me? Why things like Peugeot's had such deep meaning, your synthesis of ideas and theology. OK, so you eventually became a worship pastor. Yeah, yeah, that was I was about 16 and I had a I call it a mystical experience now, like a call. It was I share about it in my one of my videos and. And, you know, it wasn't something I wanted to do. My dad was also kind of had done some lay bivocational and some full time ministry. Grandparents had been in ministry. I wasn't really wanting that with my life. It wasn't a fun ministry as it existed. Wasn't fun to me in a way, in a way, you know, wasn't it was. In the culture that I was in, but this whole modern Christian music thing was bubbling up around that time. And I had a lot of attraction to that. And that that's where I kind of was like, oh, well, this is what I want to do with. That's how I feel connected to this world. And so even at like 17, this in this I live in it, I grew up in a town that was like 10 minutes from a town of about 10,000, 15,000. And so there was like a new church, very young, a very small church that was trying to bring that in. And they were like, I was one of two people in the whole town that did that stuff. They had me come in. And a big part of my story is that you got. I'm so young, but here I am, like trying to like lead people. But I didn't know how to deal. There was this always this theme of hiding things in my life, like hiding how I really felt about. I was like, you know, sciencey, you know, imaginary, fantastical things. And then even secrets about, you know, just lusty things that, you know, and guilt and all that. And so I'm like going to lead adults on a Sunday morning, you know, some group of 10 or 12 people. But I didn't know how to like reconcile the hiding part of me, but also wanting to do this for God part of me. And that just like. That remained that remained part of my life. I went to college, I got a degree in biblical studies. I wanted to take like I wasn't interested in like historical music. I wanted to understand. How to take like understanding of the Bible and mix that with what was going on in the culture. And so that's so I still I got a ministry degree, but I was still just doing like a lot of the music. And then, you know, got married to my high school sweetheart, which is another big part of the story because she was raised Lutheran Missouri Synod. Her her mom, her mom was raised Catholic. She was Catholic till she was five. And this is her. My wife's uncle is an archbishop in the Catholic Church. Her her aunts, her nuns, one of her aunts left her broker vows and became Greek Orthodox. And so Thanksgiving, when I started going to Thanksgiving at my girlfriend's house, it was I'm a Baptist kid. And this was like, what is this place? And so I get married and I started having conversations with my in-laws about liturgy and about paedobaptism and about why these things hold meaning to them. And here I am, you know, still just like strumming along. And and then in 2012, our church, I got on staff at a church in 08 and then went full time. It was actually the church that I served at when I was in high school. And then I went to college and kind of stopped and they came back and I was doing itinerant stuff, camps and what I actually and I need to apologize to everyone for interrupting the last the last one, the last episode. But I actually spent a summer in Sonora doing a camp up in the mountains from where they were. Yeah, yeah. So I did I did ministry that didn't camps in Florida and then all over. But I was always in my hometown coming back to this same church. It's kind of eclectic, had a little bit of care for like the historical. And in 2012, we hired a Presbyterian pastor and he was like, hey, you want to bring in some like actual liturgy into these contemporary services? And I was like, yeah, I'm right there. I'm like, I was primed for it in so many ways because this relationship that I had with my in-laws and trusting their faith and their life and their example and how these things held a certain kind of meaning that I was trying to understand. So incorporated that in go back to the part where I was a hider and I was hiding this part of my life and ended up destroying me. So I had this love for ministry, for the church, for worship. But what I loved about the last conversation was Audrey Aubrey Audrey, who was on the last Alexander. Sorry. When she said it's the. She said, chasing healing like I did not know how to heal. I didn't know how to. And a big part of my convictions is like. Confession, you know, this office of confession, the sacrament of confession. Versus. Admitting to God that you're a sinner. There's this huge gap in in the in in Christian Protestantism. It's like, well, I've admitted that I'm a sinner, but there's not really that's that's all that you're responsible for. But, you know, that doesn't kill you. That doesn't kill you as a human. It might kill you in some form of soteriology, but it doesn't kill you as a person. And so. You know, I broke the trust of my marriage and in the trust of the church that I was serving, the trust of my community. And I lost my reputation, my job, my, you know, my career, everything I've been doing since I was about 15, 16 years old. I was 30, about 31. And so that's. That's where I met Jordan Peterson, and that's where I met you. And and that's why it's like. My heart was racing to get on here. And I, you know, we've talked on Twitter a little bit and different things like you're not Jesus and you know that. But there's like there's a reality to the woman who was sick, who wanted to reach out and touch Christ and sort of meet you all like it's. It's in this digital way is is reaching out and touching a world that existed in my head for about six or seven years. That's what this and that's what this is. And yeah, and I'm watching the other videos and stuff. You know, my my marriage was reconciled. Families were reconciled. We were reconciled back to the church. And then over time, my career was a career was rebuilt. Music was healed in my heart because it had broken. And then I'm kind of in this stage now where there's. Ministry starting to kind of be rehealed after seven. Getting professional ministry. Is. It's a particularly. It. You know, it gets you into spaces that can mess up your own faith and your own discipleship. And, you know, your story, I've obviously known others with similar stories and. It's. There's a there's a there's a whole there's a there's a there's sort of a completeness to professional ministry. And so then when you don't it. It really incentivizes the hiding. And because you I mean, everyone has to play. Everyone has to put on a mask to do something. If you're working at an airport and you're working in a restaurant, you're working in a restaurant. If you're working at an airport and you're working for the airline and the airline has just, you know, messed up, you know, a few thousand people's travel itineraries and the customer service person puts on a mask. Oh, can I help you? And they've had people screaming at them all day. They got to keep wearing that mask in ministry. You keep wearing a mask. You know, it isn't it isn't incidental that, you know, you look at, say, Native American religion, you know, a lot of them has to do with mass. Yeah. And especially, I think, in some evangelical places over the last in this last chapter of culture where authenticity is has this value. So then you start putting on a weird mask of authenticity, which just accelerates the dualism. And it's a it's a really it's a really difficult thing. So, yeah, I but I'm really glad that I mean, it sounds like you had a tough bump, but the story wasn't terminal. Yeah, it was a it was a major car wreck and it took a it's I'm still healing. We're I love what she said on the last video, like the journey of healing. I mean, this is another step of healing. I'm not old. I mean, I won't none of us are ultimately healed, you know, but. Not in this world, not in this world. Well, we we have limited time. So tell me tell me how your interaction with this little corner, because you've certainly made an effort to get in, how that has been a part of your healing, because, you know, when all of these debates over sort of what's happening, that we kind of put this little corner as a label on top of it because we don't really know quite what to call it. But I do get the sense that for many people, this is a space of healing and this is a part of their healing. So talk to me about how this was a part of healing for you. So, for one, you're a pastor. And by the way, your podcast with Base Camp, you were so lucid. I could I saw Tim Keller in extended with Charles Taylor, Tim Keller with Jordan Peterson, with then with instead of like normal embodied church, the digital church, man, you're going to have when you when you finally hang up the collar, you know, so to speak. I wanted I just want to encourage you. I just think you obviously have had lots of opportunities, but like you're going to take like that conversation, the least you'll be able to take that and keep going. But this corner, she's still one. You're a pastor first. And I even heard you talk about on that podcast, like your motives for staying where you're at and your commitments to that. And you talk about going slow, even at the end of the last rando you just did. And you and I'm in a situation with that now. But this going slow. So you as a pastor, you're you I hear pastor things. I spent time as a pastor. I hear pastor things. That's that's how it was like. There's Jordan Peterson, psychologist, and I can take there. But then for you, it was the pastor thing that that made so much sense to me. I was watching debates and listening to apologetics and I've read Lewis and all these things as a younger man. When you were doing that your whole life as well. So that engagement, it's like eight years of input or seven years of input. This is the way I can explain it. It's like, yeah, like all these people spread out over the United States and spread all over the world have been they've been in university inside of their heads for eight, five, six, seven years. And it's like, OK, you can't you can't just stay there. It has it's gonna come out. This is the you know, I patron Saint Jordan Peterson. This is the seeds planted and this is the heart. The harvest is starting to come is starting to come out. Yeah, that's my experience with this. Well, and it takes time. And, you know, mentioning Keller because before I did what I did with Jordan Peterson, I did what I did with Keller. And, you know, I see CW's in there and he says, you know, he's right that I still have to I still should make a video on my on my experience with Keller. Part of it is one of the things as we talked about before you get used to as a pastor is wearing a mask. Yeah. And when you're on YouTube, you also have to wear a mask because I can I can you know, I can tell, you know, even with you presenting your story, you know, you have to be really careful because your wife didn't, you know, sign up for YouTube and children. And I mean, so you still have to wear a mask. And so, you know, and I actually visited Tim Keller in 2006. But when I visited him, I hadn't yet done the deep dive. And it was about three months after that, I did a huge dive into Keller and I spent about I spent about six years listening to two, three hours of Tim Keller a day. I mean, so I did the Jordan Peterson thing with Tim Keller before there was Peterson. Yeah. And so Peterson wasn't my first dive. And so Peterson Peterson's been interesting, too. But then, of course, YouTube is a whole different thing. And that changed everything. Oh, we got one more minute. So do you have anything? I don't have that nice. I should take that. You know, do you have anything else that you want to say? I want to say thanks. Thank you. Thank you for, you know, just making yourself available. You still are looking out how making your not not trying to send the status hierarchy too quickly. So thank you. Yeah. Well, thank you, Christian. And the name of your YouTube channel is Christian Baxter underscore UT. So if you want to find Christian, he's making videos. He's making a lot of videos. You're making a good number of videos. They're very transparent. They're very authentic. They're very him. It's been. Oh, that's right. Upcycling. And now for something from the Freddie. You upcycle. Great idea. That's what I can do. My brand and Freddie would love it. So thank you, Christian, so much for coming on. And next is now is coming to the forest, I believe. And here he is. Thank you, Christian. Zach. Yeah. Zach, you had quite a you had quite a quite a good pitch, too, which got I think the fourth number, the fourth highest number of votes. So yeah, discover this little corner because I was searching for anyone who talked about Kierkegaard and knew what they were talking about. I don't really feel equipped to talk about Kierkegaard. Kierkegaard is is really complex. Yeah, it's super complex. Oh, yeah. So I when people want to talk Kierkegaard with me, it's like I don't even want to pretend with Kierkegaard. So yeah, found your video which described Christian and Kierkegaard and couldn't stop watching you work in Sweden. Yeah. Focused on equipping Christians to find purpose and transform culture. Very familiar with Tom Holland, young man working very directly with things you talk about. So OK. Well, thank you, Zach. Yeah, thank you. First of all, can you hear me well? I hear you just fine. Perfect. So yeah, thanks, Paul, for having me on. Well, I was actually I was honestly just thinking about trying to get onto one of the randos like two days ago. I thought about it. And so then you posted this and it was perfect timing. Good. And your pitch was your pitch was great. You obviously got a lot of attention. People were interested. Tell me, you say you're from the Midwest. So tell me about the home you grew up in. Yeah, yeah. So I'm from Minnesota. I come from a pretty like a relatively small town in Minnesota. I was raised atheist, as it says there. So my I was raised by a young single mother who had a really difficult teenage dumb. She had a difficult life as a teenager. At a young age, she was kind of forced out of the house and she had turned her back on God and turned her back on the church. She got into a lot of things that she shouldn't have drugs, gang activities, stuff like that, and was pregnant with me at the age of 17. And so my story is very, very intricately tied to that, of course. Yes. So she had me when she was 18, left my biological father when I was just a year old. And so most of my childhood was just us two. We spent some time homeless that I actually don't remember anything of. So everything I know is just from stories from her. But so it would be moving from friends' couches and staying in kind of abandoned houses and kind of bad parts of town up until I was around like five or six. And then we really got some stability. So she moved to the town where my grandparents were living in because my grandpa was very, very sick and he was close to dying. So she was going to see them. And then after after he passed away, we were going to move to Alaska and never see anyone ever again that we knew. So that was that was the plan. But that's not the way it worked out. She met my now stepdad, who is also an atheist. They were both very young. He was just coming out of the army. And he stepped in and he really filled a role as a dad in my life. So it doesn't feel like I was fatherless. I can remember a time before him, but he's really filled in that role very admirably, very, very well. So I just think of him as my dad. We're very, very close. They ended up getting married. But so they were atheists. I was raised atheist until I had a friend invite me to come to a church camp with him when I was 11 years old. My parents were fine with it because it's a week off. So then I get to go with and there I met God. And it was I I can't explain it so much beyond I just at that point kind of had a tacit knowledge of God that he was real and that this Christian thing in some way was real. As an 11 year old, I didn't know what that meant, but I started to go to church and I started to go to church with my grandparents. My grandpa would live. He fought cancer for a long time, seven years. And that last year that he was alive, I was going to church with him and my grandma. And they were Christians. They were praying very actively for all of their children to be able to meet God. And a year into me being a Christian, my grandpa's health was on a very, very steep decline. And there was just a lot of problems in the family around that time. But the night before he passed away, my mom had a dream where God came to her and revealed himself to her who he is and that he loves her and that the things that have been difficult in her life were, you know, it's like. Yeah, just that he was there even through those things and that this was going to be the last night that she had to be able to spend with her dad. And so she woke up and she didn't doubt it. She called all the family. She got everyone together. We all went to the hospital and that was his last night, my grandpa's. But my grandpa, who had spent his years praying for his family to meet God, did get to see my mom, all of her siblings all meet God. And they're all at different points in their relationships. Yeah. But that was that was my my own testimony and my parents testimony for how they met God. And it's a very key part of my life because past that point, nothing was really the same. My dad was called into the ministry. So he's he went after a couple of years. He started studying. He's gotten a master's in divinity. Now he's working as a chaplain with the army. My mom, yeah, she experienced so much healing. She is able to actually be around her family. She's able to be around her mom who she really couldn't be around before because of her background. And she's of course, she's not perfect, but she's in such a better place. And she's she's very actively involved in helping people who are in difficult situations, stuff like that. So God really transformed our entire lives. I'm not a Calvinist, but I believe very strongly that this was not something that any of us could have done. Wow. Yeah. That's that's wonderful. That's amazing. Yeah. So how how on earth did you get to Sweden? Yeah, interesting, interesting. Really, basically, it's in Minnesota. Everyone is Scandinavian, basically. If you have if your family background is any number of generations, you have some Scandinavian in you. So my family background, much of them moved from Sweden and Finland 150 years ago. So I've always had Scandinavia on my mind. The area of Minnesota that I'm in is very Lutheran culturally. You're either a Lutheran, an atheist or charismatic. And that's kind of the assumption. And so Sweden's always been on my mind. And it got to put the Scandinavian countries in my heart, I'm sure. After high school, I went into university and I was studying, but I was studying something that I just didn't have very much passion for. And I don't know if you're familiar with the organization, YWAM, Youth with Commissions. Oh, yeah. There's a bunch of YWAMers around here. Yeah, absolutely. So I thought I would do a DTS and then go right back to school. And when I thought about doing it, I didn't have any other thoughts besides Sweden. And I've always kind of worked strong off intuition. And so I just kind of knew Sweden and I looked at all the bases there for YWAM to do the DTS. And I saw one and I was like, yeah, that's the one. And I applied, I got accepted, I went and I felt at home and I kind of knew I'm actually not going back to school right now. And so I went over, I did that. And that was a really transformative thing for me. You were talking in the last one about discipleship and you briefly mentioned it. But that's that's such an important part of my walk is being able to because I wasn't raised Christian and so I didn't know all the stories. I didn't know all the things. So I was kind of like learning what it means to be a Christian as I went. And so that process of discipleship, learning from people who have lived the faith for a long time and know what it's about, helping me along. That was a really big thing for me. So that's how I'm in Sweden. I stayed there. I'm working there. And yeah. So so one of our most famous Y Whammers is Jess in the corner. I don't know if you've he always talks about the Book of Job. So I love the Book of Job. So if you if you if you go to Grail Country or on my channel, check the back catalog. Jess also has his own channel is, you know, but there are a bunch of Y Whammers. Youth with a mission. That's what Y Wham stands for. Yeah, person. One person said youth without money, without any money. That's also true. Kansas City, Kansas City, Job Jess. That's right. So you might want to look him up. So tell me what you're doing in Sweden. Yeah, a lot generally. But the thing that sticks out the most, we have something at our base called a school of biblical worldview. And that's what I'm working with right now. And the point is based. So I really strongly prescribed to the idea that a religion is not this kind of a whole set of propositions that you just have to believe. And then that's now you're a Christian. Now you're this. But it's much more about the way that you live your life and kind of what you keep talking about this with Jordan Peterson. So I really agree with that. And so an important part of being a Christian is understanding the way that the Bible and Christianity actually affects your life and beyond just like vote red or vote blue or whatever it is. So that's really the focus of the school. It's to look at what the Bible says and how it affects every aspect of our life vocationally, existentially in terms of the Great Commission and stuff like that. I would I would synthesize it in that way. So that's what I'm working with right now. And obviously, your channel is a great wealth of resource for me with that. Well, if you're if you come late, yeah, there's a huge back catalog. So there's yeah, there's a ton of stuff. Well, what have what have your you're you're you're fairly late to this little game. What what have your impressions been by it? And why? Why? I mean, you didn't the the the the common story is Jordan Peterson, Peugeot, Vervicki, VanderKlay. That's the common story. But you came through Kierkegaard. So what what caught your attention about what's going on here in this little corner? Yeah. So, like I said, I found that video of yours. And I actually I also like to listen to Jordan Cooper a lot. And so I'm sure that the algorithm saw some connection there. I would describe myself as a bit of a pietist Lutheran in some way. I come from a Lutheran culture, but I am so shaped by the charismatic evangelical environment that I really met God in. And I've seen too much of God in this kind of charismatic environment to just throw it away. So I just can't I can't just go to some like confessional box kind of out of that. I've just experienced too much. But so I like Jordan Cooper a lot. And so I saw that you had an interview with him and Vervicki also. And I noticed that when I just looked at your channel, because it's kind of rare for people to talk about Kierkegaard specifically. And I don't want to focus too much on that, but to talk about Kierkegaard without kind of confusing what he is saying with what his I can't remember the word. His pseudonyms are saying kind of. So many people it's just like, oh, he says you're either this or this and all those things. And they can't really separate the pseudonyms from the person. And so I was I was I found your video and I was thinking, OK, this guy seems to know what he's talking about. But I really have no idea what he was about. And so I did a big deep dive and just you had a lot of really interesting looking videos. And I was into Jordan Peterson a little bit back in 2018. I didn't watch so much, but I used to read a lot of Solzhenitsyn. And he talked about Solzhenitsyn a lot and Dostoevsky. And I love them. And so I was following along for that. But I never got so into the clean your room stuff. Yeah. But so I just saw that you were talking about Jordan Peterson and Kierkegaard. And those things were interesting enough for me to give a listen to. And you read everything you talk about really captured me. OK, what now you've lived in Sweden for five years as someone who didn't grow up there. And I know having been a foreign missionary that that kind of cultural that kind of cultural movement affords you a certain kind of knowledge. You can see America through different eyes because you've now lived out that you can see the Swedes through different eyes. What have you learned in this cultural interchange? What have you picked up or what are some of what have how has that affected you? Yeah, I think the number one thing that it's affected me in is and I'll be processing this as I'm talking, but very much being able to see America from an outside perspective and understand that there's a wide variety of what a Christian actually can believe. And so becoming a Christian as a as a preteen in a very evangelical church, I kind of grew up with a bit of a the assumption that you have to be like a Ronald Reagan type vote red small government guy. Otherwise, you're not a Christian. And that was I wasn't really fully convinced by that. And so I think one of the biggest things for me was being able to go to a different culture in a different context and see the way that the church operates in that culture in that context and how alive it is. Because youth of the mission is very international. I spent a lot of time with Swedes, but I've spent a lot of time with Ethiopians and South Americans and Koreans and everything. And so that was kind of maybe one of the biggest things for me, actually, is seeing the richness of culture being able to unite around something like the gospel and understanding that there's a lot of things that aren't actually gospel truth in that way that we kind of take to be. So that was one of the biggest things. And I just think it affords so much possibility to see your culture sort of from an outside perspective. Because I learned Swedish. And so I see all the Swedish media, I can read everything that Swedes write about America. The way that they talk and so I can see it sort of from that inside perspective. And I think that just helps me to understand my own background better. Yeah. Okay, well we've only got four minutes left and I've pestered you. Anything you want to ask me about or anything you wanted to say? Ooh, I wasn't prepared for that because I know you like to talk about people's stories. So I was ready with that. Well, another bit of your story you want to share. I mean, anything I don't want to give you. No, no. I don't have anything specific else like that. But let me just think for a second. So one thing that I think is really interesting is that you seem to be very willing and able to listen to people of any kind of a background, any kind of perspective. You have people on your channel who are Orthodox, Catholic, everything. And yet you're also a confessional Dutch Reformed pastor and you're able to have these conversations and you're able to kind of accept people into this space and talk through it all. How do you kind of do that in a good way? Yeah, that's quite a task. There's a lot there. And how do you have a conversation with someone, a meaningful conversation when you don't even necessarily have the same fundamental view of the world? I don't know. I, one of the things that, one of the reasons my wife married me, my wife's brother is a, he was a diesel mechanic. He was a truck driver. He was a very different person than that, at least to my wife saw me to be when we first met. And she was surprised how quickly I could kind of get into his world and relate to him and build a connection with him. I think I, I think I grew this by virtue of who my father was because my father could do this and his father could do this. So this generation of pastors, I think it also helped that I grew up in Northern New Jersey in an area which was just multi everything. And so a predominantly African American community. So I've, I've always lived, I sort of grew up in a space where I was culture shifting all the time. Yeah. And I enjoy that. So I love, I love meeting new people and sort of carving out a little, a little mapping of them in my brain and try to think through that map and get to know them. And, and then talking to them is sort of like, okay, I quickly get a little map of them. And now when I have a conversation, I want to try out and see I get the map right. So then I keep correcting that map. So it's, it's, it's all this kind of stuff. So I really enjoyed doing that. So, Yeah. And that's, that's, that's what I do. And then of course, the internet and YouTube, I didn't really discover YouTube. I didn't discover much of what YouTube was until Jordan Peterson. And then things started to click. And then when I started making videos and stuff starts coming the other way in YouTube, and then we start having conversations and then, then this whole network of conversations begins to develop. That, that really excited me because, because again, I'm not gonna like we're almost out of time. Yeah. I don't have enough time to spend with you that you deserve. And, but the thought that, well, and that's why I did this thing. Now all kinds of people are going to see this and some people are going to say, I want him on my channel. So that, that has happened with a number of people, even if I just had to highlight them on Twitter or on my channel, then some of the other channels are going to see this. And some of the other channels pick up. And as a pastor, that's the way churches knit themselves together. So, Yeah. Well, Zach, we are, we are out of time, but I thank you so much for writing a great pitch. Thank you. And if anybody wants to get in contact with you, what's the best way? Um, you can go email. I'll, I'll say it quickly. So Z M W H O A M I at gmail.com. Okay. Okay. There it is. So if anybody wants to get Zach on and continue this story, or at least connect him with Jess, well, there, there will be. So thank you much, Zach. No, thank you. Absolutely. David. Oh, you're muted. Boom. There we go. You, you had another great pitch. Thank you. I'm just, I'm just trying to, I'm just trying to find it here. And you've been a, you've been a regular commenter for a while because I get to, I get to recognize certain, um, certain YouTube accounts via the comment section, because I'm a pretty religious comment reader. So why don't you tell me a little bit about yourself? Uh, so I think the most applicable information is I grew up atheist Catholic in Windsor, Ontario, right across from Detroit. Um, and, uh, my dad believed that religion was necessary to keep us all from murdering each other. Um, it served a very important role in, in that way. Um, and then, um, I became a Christian in my first year at the University of Windsor. So I became a Christian at the same time. I felt everyone else was leaving. Um, I was kind of like, Oh, this is really, where's everyone going? Like, I thought this was really interesting. Um, and very quickly after becoming a Christian, I, people were kind of asking me to become a leader within the church. Um, and I didn't know what denomination I wanted to be a part of. So I was originally part of the Christian Missionary Alliance Church, but then someone invited me to Pentecostal Church, but it was on a different day. Great. I'll go to those two. And then there was a Presbyterian, my girlfriend was Presbyterian for a while. So, okay, I'll do that as well. And then, uh, I became part of a messianic group that met in a room they rented at a Holiday Inn, like one of the conference rooms. And by the end of it, I think at one time there was four, maybe five different groups that I was going, like, I was just, I loved it so much. I would have gone every single day if there was a program running every single day. Wow. So, uh, I very quickly became very interested in messianic Christianity. Okay, GrimGrizz wants you to explain what messianic groups are. Yeah, so I am, I don't refer to myself as a messianic Jew. Uh, you might come across groups like, uh, Jews for Jesus or anything like that. I am not Jewish in any way. Basically, what happened was I learned about Passover. Um, I, so because I grew up Catholic, I wanted to do a Holy, Holy Thursday, right? Where we would do that in the Catholic Church. We had our liturgy and we would go through the Last Supper. And we used to meet on Thursdays for my college and career group. It's part of the church I was involved with. And, um, so I said, we should do like a Passover. And my pastor said, well, if you figure out what it is, you can put it on. I'll let you do it. I think. Smart pastor. Yeah. I've, I've realized how intelligent he was where he said it serves two purposes. One, you empower people for what they're passionate about. And number two, you get them to shut up about saying, this is what you should do. Exactly. Oh, that's what you think should happen. Be my guest. My guest. And I took him up on it and someone in the church knew someone who was part of a, a group that was practicing this kind of thing, meeting on Saturdays, doing all the Jewish feasts and stuff. And so, um, I met up with them. I did as much research as I could. And that was 20 years ago and I've celebrated Passover every single year. Um, and, uh, for a while I got brought into churches to do them, uh, to do like a Passover meal, uh, because as soon as I saw it, I was like, oh, this is clearly. There are so many things that are being referred to. Yes. And that Christians have no idea what any of this stuff is about when you're just given a little piece of bread and a little, little jello shot of Kool-Aid. Um, it's just, it's just not the same thing. Um, but as I got more and more into it, I, this is this part of what I think. I think I started asking completely different questions, uh, from other people that I knew that were Christian because they're, they're addressing this Protestant evangelicalism and I'm asking questions through, uh, understanding Judaism. Yes. And so they're doing all this deconstructing based on how the church currently is and I would go to churches, but everyone would think I was weird because I was practicing things very differently, understanding things primarily through a, like a full biblical perspective, right? Yep. Yeah. Um, and then at one point, um, I, I go off to Bible college to become a pastor, but while, while there, I want to, um, I want to, um, just be a lay pastor. I kind of come to the conclusion by the end of my time at school that there was big problems with the structure where, like I went to a church and someone asked me to teach an adult Sunday school. And I taught to, I talked to one of the elders and an elder said to me in these words, well, we pay Brad and we want to get our money's worth. So as an elder said that to me, it kind of became, and I just, I found out about house churches, I started asking more and more questions about, okay, what did early Christianity look like? Cause, cause even, even churches asking me to come in to do presentations around Easter for Passover, um, like I started realizing, wait, Passover isn't like church Easter, it wasn't a pastor at the front, it was a father with his family. And started thinking more and more about the structure of church and to what extent I felt, I felt the structure itself was a problem. And then also the messianic thing added this completely different dimension, which is I would get brought into a church. I'd be halfway through Bible college, just doing my BA and I would do this presentation and someone with 20 degrees, uh, with his M. Div and his master, like all these different things they would say to me. I didn't know any of that. Yep. And I was like, this is crazy because I'm focusing on this thing that isn't, I mean, the time I went to Bible college, no one was talking about, I mean, you had to get really fringe to be talking about second temple literature, right? To be talking about rabbinic material or anything else. That's changed. Yes, absolutely. It's changed. Even my university, it's changed as well. Cause cause second temple Judaism has become sort of, it's become a really hot thing in new Testament studies. Absolutely. Absolutely. And for me, I'm like, finally, cause I, I've been really interested in all these traditions for 20 years. Yeah. And it seems like over really the last five years, people have become really fascinated. Yeah. Um, then because I got into lay ministry, I work a day job and my day job is such. That once I understand what I'm doing, I can pop in the earbuds and listen to whatever I want while I'm working. And so I basically need an infinite amount of information to listen to. Yep. Okay. That's the profile of someone who listens to a lot of YouTube. Yeah. Yeah. So there were parts where I was like, what can I become interested in now? Cause I ran out of things and I would, I would constantly be looking into this other stuff. So what, how did you find, how did you find the corner? Yeah. So, um, I kind of mentioned this in my little blurb, someone sent me, cause I'm just outside of Toronto somewhat like, I know someone who Jordan Peterson was their counselor. Yep. So before anything was happening, um, with him, someone sent me his TVO stuff. I was watching his lectures before anything was like when it was just, uh, just with what us Canadians were finding out about him. Okay. Yep. Yeah. And his TVO stuff is interesting. Those are fun videos. That's right. That's right. And again, if you are looking for hours upon hours of things to watch, Jordan Peterson is ready to help. That's right. That's right. And, um, and particularly when you're into interpretations that other people have not heard of, I was very interested in psychology long before that. Um, I kind of was just watching different conversations and I mean, one of the things I was hungry for were people that actually understood what he was talking about because I was very frustrated when I talked to Jacob, I think I even mentioned this, that, um, I was frustrated by when people would talk to him and had never talked to him before. Yes. Yes. Then I'm just like, if you understand how he's addressing things, he's not difficult to follow, but if you, if you've never come across it, it's just, I mean, Pajot talks about the same kind of stuff. So I wanted to, I started listening to other people talking and trying to see, is anyone else picking up what I'm getting from this? And like, Pajot, of course, immediately became of interest to me because I was like, oh, at the time, I think the way I said it was, uh, this is like if Jordan Peterson was actually a Christian, um, cause he's like, he's kind of a, he's not really, um, so I got into some of the symbolic stuff and, uh, because of understanding things like Passover, symbolic understanding of stuff is, is really where it's at. So that's how I kind of stumbled across a couple of things. I think I watched a, uh, Chris Pacow video that was condensing stuff. And I had a conversation and then I, from there, I saw Emily Verdun, the verd, uh, what's it called? Oh yeah. Mud Hut. Yeah. So I kind of started a friendship with her. We've got some art going on in your background there. So yeah, yeah. I actually here, I'll show you one. The, I started doing visual art and the first thing I did was, you know, her, her picture of Jonah, I made it into a carving. So that's cool. Yeah. So that's very cool. And then I, I changed some things. So I don't know how clear that is, but yeah, um, started doing stuff like that. And, um, so I connected with her. I talked with Chris. Um, I talked about Passover a little bit and that angered Jacob and then Jacob wanted to have a conversation with me. If you ever want Jacob's attention, he wears his buttons on the outside. Just push them. He'll come. I didn't do it. And yeah, it wasn't intentional. Um, but so then I connected with Jacob and we've had a couple of conversations and, um, he was really open about it. And, uh, so I've had a couple of conversations with him at this point. And, um, then like, uh, I'm now invited to host a conversation on judges with someone with, uh, with Jason, almond tree. Um, and, uh, yeah. So it was like, who else, who else wants to have these conversations with me? Who else is interested in this kind of stuff? Um, and when I go to a church, it, it, it's very difficult. I'll talk to people and it's very difficult to find people that are interested in these topics. And, um, yeah. So I kind of searching for that kind of a thing to define. I think, so I did a video this week on, you know, auto didactics, you know, Sam sort of Sam Tiedemann sort of, you know, when he said that, where they're, they're part of, I know a bunch of people like you came into our local Jordan Peterson meetup when we started. And right there, I thought, usually we have the problem of churn on YouTube because you need again, a near infinite amount. YouTube tends to provide that. What that means is you're going to churn through stuff. And after you're churning on YouTube a while, the, the shallowness of YouTube itself, because of the rituals of YouTube means you're going to churn all the faster. And, and actually the resolution of that are people. Yeah. And that's part of, again, the reason why my vision of my vision, which has sort of manifest itself in what some people call the corner is the, the end of churn is people because, you know, even it was so interesting because Verveke with his last conversation with Peterson talked about his, you know, he's made a lifetime commitment to his partner, which is sort of like marriage, but he doesn't use that word. Yeah. But, you know, he, you know, I hear people say, well, I wouldn't want to live forever because I'd get bored. But here's the funny thing about people. Um, you know, you can, to a degree, sort of hit a plateau with people. They sort of become Mac. Um, they sort of become mapped territory, but what at least we've seen in our lifetimes with something like marriage is that I've, you know, lived, I've lived, I've been married to my wife 36 years. We've known each other 38 years. Right. And because we're both changing, you know, there, there still is mystery and we're even mining our childhood sometimes. And so it's, that's the, that's the, in part, I think part of the image of God and people is that they're bottomless and that many of our representations are not. And so I actually think, I've thought many times that this little corner is actually the telos of YouTube. Because YouTube bottoms out and, and once we get beyond YouTube into the people and into the community, you're in far deeper waters. Yeah, no, absolutely. Absolutely. And I think like, um, a lot of people are also external processors where you talk through your thinking and so what good is it to absorb information as a product? Yes. It should be absorbed as a conversation. Yes. And where does the rubber hit the road? So I think in my little blurb, I also mentioned I'm kind of leading a house church. Well, how that happened was I had seen all of Peterson's biblical series and, uh, COVID hit, and I was part of a artist community of actors and stuff. And my, my community of actors weren't really not doing well during COVID. Right. Lockdown. Their community was doing shows, seeing each other through this particular context. And now no one can perform. And, and it's not just, we can't perform. We, we can't see each other, which is how we play, how we hang out where our community primarily is. And so my wife and I were leading these kind of, um, we did script readings, we did game nights, and then I kind of said to everyone, cause I was understanding some of the situations that people were going through, through my understanding of Genesis, I kind of said to them, realizing that this could actually be something that non-Christians were interested in. What if we put no pressure on belief? And I had a piece, a big enough piece of property that we could have campfires. What if we meet together and I don't care what you think about this story, but we're going to treat the story as we're going to take it seriously and we're going to try to understand ourselves through the book of Genesis. And I got a group of 12 people of which only my wife and I were Christians to say, yes, yes, I want to do that. Um, and we were kind of surprised by it because they knew we were Christians. They were, I mean, they're artistic people. They were open to having conversations, but I, I did not for a second believe that we could get a group of our friends to be meeting every single week to talk through the Bible. Isn't that funny? I mean, churches, churches are doing, and this is part of the Peterson thing too, because if there is a hunger, there's, there's a lot of question about the Bible that's out there, but this format and structure and how church goes about it just puts up this wall and you can get through that wall. Yeah. When you're talking, it was so interesting though, because when you're talking with people around like in their forties and fifties and everything else, um, when you're having conversations with them, but they grew up completely non-churched. It's also, uh, I describe it as like the first time I saw Casablanca, you're just like, oh, that's what that's from. Oh, that's what that's from. Oh, that's what that's from. Right. Yep. Um, they love, they started seeing it everywhere in their, in their own favorite movies that they didn't know were quoting things because, and that actually became part of my pitch is that we all understood it's not just, we're going to understand, understand ourselves through this story that everyone understood themselves through this story. So you're going to feel more a part of a much larger conversation. Um, and that started at the beginning of COVID and we're still doing it or a couple of months into COVID, I guess. Awesome. Um, well, David, I, and I knew this, I was going to have this frustration. I would love to keep talking to you, but the, uh, the format of this is we're going from one to another. So how can people find you David? If you want to be found. Yeah. If people want to contact me, uh, my email is david.j.boozatil, uh, based on, you can see my name right there. Uh, J is in the letter J at gmail.com. Uh, I got a YouTube channel. It has basically nothing on it. It has a conversation I have with Emily and a video essay that took too much time. So I stopped making, uh, essays. So they want to find me on there. All right. Very good. Thank you. Yeah. It was great talking to you, Paul. All right. Great talking to you. Uh, this guy doesn't need much introduction and, and in some ways to do a rando's conversation with, so, so did you take that video down Nate, where you had? I did not. I did not take it down. Um, if it got taken down, I wasn't aware of it. So, so, okay. Well, where shall we begin? Shall we begin with your story? Because we've never done that. Now I want to refill my brain. So if you start talking, I'm going to refill this thing. So, okay. Go. All right. So I, that video that you're talking about kind of came about by accident. Um, Sherry and James court, TDS, and I were doing our, our series on, um, on the hierarchy of heaven and earth. I did this hurting and Sherry couldn't make it. So it was just James and I, and it's like, well, they want to just like reschedule or do you want to, and James, so James was like, I know I want to hear your story. So I let James, so James kind of like, you know, asked me questions and got me started talking. Um, and so that's how that came about. Um, uh, but to make a, let's, I'll just kind of like start at the beginning. So I'm born to, I am hearing you, so keep talking. Yeah, no problem. I'm born to parents who come out of the Jesus movement. So like, if you imagine like, uh, like the, Nate's beginnings as being like very similar to Jesus revolution, you'll, you'll not be very far off. In fact, I spent the first six months of my life in a, in a Jesus people commune. Um, and, and then my parents like eventually like got their own place. Um, and when I was a very young child, uh, my parents kind of continued on that sort of like, you know, um, evangelical charismatic, uh, path with a hippie, uh, overtones, um, for most of the early years of my life. Um, I don't remember, like, I think we did like a lot of house churches, aren't that cause I don't actually have any early childhood memories of church, um, at all. And then my parents ended up getting divorced because my dad was gay. So it wasn't, you know, the marriage was kind of like doomed to failure from the beginning, uh, because my dad was a closeted homosexual and, uh, I can remember actually, I can remember actually do have a memory of my dad telling me that he was gay because the way he told, we were actually, so my mom kind of like had a kind of a breakdown because this has really destroyed her. So she was like, she agreed to let like my, she agreed to let my grandparents take me for a while while she kind of like sorted herself out. I, although my younger sister, Elizabeth stayed with her. So it was just me that went to go stay with my grandparents. I was really close to my grandfather. And so I think that's like part of, part of that was part of the reason why. And we're driving, we're driving to Westport, Washington, which is where my grandparents lived at the time from Longview, which is where we had been living. And, uh, we, I can remember, we're like right next to the drug store in Westport. I think it's a surfing shop now, but at that time it was a drug store. And my dad says, it says to me, he's like, yeah, I'm like, he's like, do you understand like me and your mom are splitting up? And I said, no, he's like, well, I like boys more than girls. And I'm like, so do I. Like that doesn't, how does that, you know, cause I'm five and, uh, so I didn't understand at all. And so I lived with my grandparents for the next five years. Like I was, so I split my childhood between my mom and my grandparents. And so really I don't remember going to church until I live with my mom, because my grandparents were very much like, let's see, my grandmother was there. Neither of them were atheists. Like they're like, just, they were just nuns, right? They were just spiritual, but not religious. My grandmother like was, uh, was raised Christian scientists, but like, she loved to watch like the, what was the Michael Landon show where he was an angel? Oh, um, touched by an angel. No, that was later. She liked that one too though. Touched by an angel was later. In heaven, something heaven can wait or something like that. No, that was, no, that was a movie. That was a movie. It was, but yeah, highway to heaven was a highway to heaven. There it is. There it is. Highway to heaven. So yeah, she liked, like, like that. And she also loved touch by an angel, which came out later. And so, and she like, she believed in God. Like I would, I would hear her singing all fly away in the kitchen when she was cooking like all the time. So like not atheist for sure. But just not church people. They were just like, they, yeah. Um, and my grandfather was like, he didn't truly talk about what he believed very much, but he was also like, he was clearly not an atheist and American Christian folk religion pretty much. Yeah. And he, but he did have one thing about my grandfather that was interesting is that he did, he did have a very negative opinion of church people. Cause he thought, you know, judgmental blah, blah, blah kind of thing. Cause he was this like blue. I mean, he was a chef and like being a chef in those days was still very much a blue collar profession and he was very much a blue collar guy. And so he just kind of like, I mean, he was a blue collar guy from Oklahoma, um, who worked as a chef all of his life. And he, he, the one exception to his negative talk about church people, he has, he had a very favorable view of Catholics. And the reason he had a very favorable view of Catholics is because when he had was stricken with polio as a child and he was cared for in a Catholic hospital. And he always had like positive things to say about that because of that experience. He also really supported the, like he get, he would actually go to the union gospel mission a lot. And like he would actually, he would give money to the union gospel mission. He would go to the unit. So he was not anti-religious at all because he would give money to the union gospel mission, he would go to the new union gospel mission. He would find, he would find guys at the union gospel mission who work, who had experience working as cooks and get them jobs as line cooks and try to help them. Like he didn't bring these people into our house. He would bring these people into our house. Like these guys, like met at the union gospel mission. He was trying to get them sober up and get a job as a line cook. So, um, so it was not, uh, it was certainly not an, it was not an a religious upbringing, even though it was a non church upbringing. Um, like, so we have to accelerate this because we're on regular. You got it. You asked me college. College. Okay. So I went to the evergreen state college out of high school and I went to the, I went to the evergreen state college because I was a progressive young man and I wanted to study great books. I knew I wanted to study great books. Even though I was progressive young man, actually the book that I read that convinced me that I wanted to study great books was actually closing of the American mind. So by Alan blooming. Yeah. So, um, I decided I'm going to study great books. And so I was trying to decide between various great books colleges, but then I found out that evergreen had a great books program that they were offering the year that I was going to be entering. So it's like, uh, I can figure this out later in the longterm and I can just go to evergreen for the first year. And that's sort of like, it's inexpensive. It's close to home. I can come and visit my grandparents on the weekends, all that kind of thing. So I went to the evergreen state college ended up transferring to Thomas Aquinas college later on, because I eventually became not a progressive as soon as I, as soon as I was, as soon as I got to evergreen, like I was like, in fact, I put up pictures of Richard Nixon on my dorm. Yeah. I'm very contrarian in case you haven't noticed. Yeah. So a lot of people confuse that for progressive though. Right. Right. Right. Yeah. Well, I was no, like, I mean, I was like, it was very much like, I was very, I was super into the history of the civil rights movement when I was in high school. And I was very much like pacifist pro civil disobedience. Like I really was like, I had a lot of progressive views, but, but, but my progressive views were more of a progressive view of the civil rights movement. But, but, but my progressive views were more of a progressivism that was from an era before, like I was, I was into a progressivism that was really like more of the progressivism of the sixties and seventies and by the late eighties, when I'm going into college, it's starting to morph into something entirely different. Well, that's, you know, I'm, you know, I, I'm in some ways part of the same thing because I was born out of the progressivism from the sixties and seventies. And, and once the woke turn started to happen, it was like, Whoa, this is, this is not what the sixties and seventies signed up for at all. And woke started at places like Evergreen and UC Santa Cruz, where my wife graduated from in the late eighties, the mid to late eighties, like that's kind of like, was ground zero of what became woke. Now your brother-in-law who we very much would, would have really I was hoping. Yeah. I should have lobbied harder. We haven't made it to the best part yet. What was he saying? I don't know what he thinks the best part. Yeah. Where I met him. So you want me to, I can tell about, I can talk about that. Yeah. Let's, let's like, let's talk about Slack. How I met Slack. Okay. So I met Slack because I, I took a job as the sales manager for a computer store, in the town that I still live in. And I would love to see you as a sales manager in a computer store. Cause there was, cause that was the era of the computer store. I mean, right. Yeah. Yeah. Well, this was actually like 2007. Okay. So we, or the golden age of it wasn't the golden age of the computer store, but like there were enough people that like wanted custom builds and something better quality that we could do enough business and repair. Repair was a big part of our, so it was like sales and repair. That's right. Right. And my computer doesn't work. People who want some more handhold, who wanted more handholding than to just go to the big stock box store and that's who our clientele was. Yeah, absolutely. So oddly enough, some college professors that were like really smart in their field, but clueless about computers. Like I did computer support for a group of therapists for a while. They were totally dumb with computers. It was amazing to watch, but anyway, go on. I'm sorry. So anyway, he's one of our counter technicians. So he's one of our counter technicians and it's like, I always like he, I always thought he was really funny, but he ends up like we're playing world of Warcraft together. He ends up like talking to my sister in world, like in game and world of Warcraft. Well, they end up, they, they like this, this is kind of like after he's, he quit because he quit, uh, and without having another job lined up, cause he was like really frustrated with a bunch of stuff and so he ended up quitting, but he ends up dating my sister and, uh, they ended up getting married. Now I, now I have a niece, um, who is adorable and full of energy. And yeah, I was the one who got to tell them their dad was gone. I've got bad news for you. And then people are just, you know, well, we can, we can, we can send it out to this forensic recovery service, but it's going to cost you like $10,000, you know, and it's like, no one wants their data that much. Oh, okay. So that, that's, that's hugely helpful. Cause slack has become a fixture in certain in the hive mind in certain channels like Grim Grizz there. So, um, so that makes sense, but we only have six more minutes. We there's gotta be some more stuff. What do you want to know? What do you want to know? Okay. Well, I know that you started watching me because of my conversation with Grim Grizz. How did you first find that? Okay. So I found you through like everybody else through your conversation with Jordan Peterson. And then I watched like one of your like commentary videos and I didn't hate it, but I wasn't like super excited about it. I didn't though. I didn't hate it. I mean, I'm just like, I honestly, I didn't hate it, but I wasn't super excited to buy it either, but then I, I happened to get fed your conversation with the first Randall's conversation. I was fed was the one that you have with Grim. And that like got my attention. Like that was like, this is, this is very interesting. What, what is he, and then I started watching the Randall's conversations like pretty religiously and then everything else. Okay. Well, how did grail country start? Grail country started because I had a, so I, you, you posted on your channel a conversation between Michael Leidy and, um, uh, um, what's the name? Uh, Dr. Michael DeFuscia. Talking about his book on Owen Barfield. And I had been reading Barfield for a while. I made some comments that Michael thought was, were very interesting. Um, we ended up having a conversations. Um, and then we have a conversation about radical orthodoxy with Julian and Michael just keeps, Michael keeps bugging me and saying, like, you always have such interesting things, interesting things to say, you're always reading such interesting things, you really should have a channel, you really should have a channel. And then finally, after hearing this about 30 or 40 times, at least I say, okay, I'll do it, but you have to do it with me. And I also want Sherry. So that was, that's, that's how it came about. So what have you, so what is grail country about if you're going to explain it to someone who's never been there? Grail country is about trying to work toward things together. Ultimately, it's cause it's like, it's the, the grail is a quest, right? It's a journey. It's like, you have to, it's something that you have to seek. Um, and it's elusive. So, um, and it requires, uh, it's best sought with traveling companions. Although ultimately you have to make the final legs of the journey. And now you have also gotten deep into estuary. People might not know just how deep into there is, there is developing behind estuary, some, um, some structure. And, uh, so why, what, how did, why did estuary capture your interest? Because I could see it as an actual evolution of what was already going on. Like to me, that was evident. Like what TLC is to me is it's, it's already a, it's just gigantic asynchronous estuary. And the idea of taking what was going on in the, these online spaces and then trying to have similar kinds of quality dialogue and conversations on the ground seemed to be a natural step. So I immediately saw its potential and volunteered to be the group. Okay. Where, uh, uh, uh, uh, uh. Oh my gentlemen. There he is. Hello corner people. Finally. You get to see him and he's looking like, uh, emperor Palpatine. So interesting thing about Slack, especially given his, his association with Grimm is that Slack used to work not for, but at the NSA. It's an interesting distinction. Very much at as in physically present, not as in directly employed by. There is no agency. We want what's best for you. Oh, oh, I can't handle it. I can't handle it. Um, I have provided laughter. My work here is done. All right, Slack. Well, one of these days, one of these days, I really should have lobby harder for him. Oh, so we got two minutes, Nate. Um, you get two minutes on the speed rando. Anything. I mean, you get more, I mean, part of the thing about hierarchies is, is certain people get more access to me than other people. And, you know, dates, like, you know, I have made on often. And of course, yeah, the only reason I put myself up is just to check it off the list that it actually like happened. So, but now you're going to say, but that was a speed randos. I wasn't the real, no, I won't say that. No, I won't say that. It's good enough, but, um, well, uh, I'll have to, cause I was looking on your channel. I forgot that it was exactly the context of that talk, but I remember watching that. And that was super helpful for me because I mean, part of the reason I do the randos conversation is because I do want to know the people and you have to learn their stories to get to know them. So if people want a longer version, they can find it on like Karen, Karen talked to me on the meaning code too. Oh yeah. Okay. And so like there's one with me and Karen on the meaning code. And I'm pretty sure that James has that up on his James Quartez. He's has our conversation up on his channel as well, which is the rooster screw. So, okay. Yep. All right. Well, wonderful. Yeah. And, um, we, I'm going to bring in, this is, this is a guy, Nate, that actually, um, has he ever been on your channel? I know. We have another very interesting guy. So thank you, Nate. Thanks for coming on. Um, this, this guy has been sending me emails for quite a while. He doesn't, he doesn't, uh, he doesn't abuse it at all, but then whenever he sends me one, it's like, Oh, cause he always comes at me with some really interesting ideas and interesting background. So you're going to have to pronounce your name for the camera. I can't hear you. Uh-oh. Uh-oh. He's been in the, do you hear me now? I hear you now. Dude, it was only from this. So, okay. Okay. No, the reason wasn't any farther away. Uh, I am really uncomfortable saying my name for English speakers because I spent six months in France a decade ago and I'm so used to it. People just can't pronounce it, but here we go. Alty. Acu Jrvi. Wow. I'll just, uh, we'll just, we'll just take that little snippet and, um, and maybe, maybe Grim Grizz will put that, you know, into a clip and you'll be please don't, please don't. Memorialized on, um, as branding in, uh, Grim Grizz lands. So Alty, um, tell, tell us a little bit about yourself. Okay. So where should I start? Uh, yeah, I've been, uh, following you, I think from 2018 or 2017. Yeah. You were very early. Yeah. I found you quite early. Hey, originally my, uh, reason why I started following you and, uh, YouTube from U S has anyways, was to try to understand that what on earth is wrong with the U S, uh, Christendom. Um, well, electing Trump as their president terribly wrong with you. I'm saying what I need to know what it is. So that's why I've been following you and, uh, many other channels originally. Hey, I'm trying to understand what's wrong with you people. Well, did you figure it out? Uh, we won't know anything about Trump is just a hole that everyone goes in and few come out. So, yeah, let's not, let's not go there. Let's not go there. Um, but you're still here. Yeah, I'm still here, but you're not, are you still there for all the other channels you started watching? Uh, not, not all, not all, but I still follow Pajot. I've found a Glenn Schiffner with, that's really interesting channel. Uh, I have doubled into the one of the Randos channels few years ago. Oh, but sadly I haven't had enough time to follow you. The, this wonderful, uh, community that he's in the chat had very, uh, more intensely. Okay. Uh, so I'm just going to pull up what you, you, you, you had, you had a mission impossible pitch because you said, if, if I am not selected this, uh, this pitch will self-destruct at the, um, at the beginning of the, um, so, so, okay, you're, you're clearly a Christian. Um, uh, are you Protestant or Lutheran or something else? Yeah. So I'm Pentecostal from birth. So my mother has been- You came out of the womb speaking in tongues? Uh, no, I, he started speaking in tongues when I was 18. So I'm a late- You're a late bloomer. Late bloomer in that. Had, uh, but on theological, theologically, I'm actually quite Lutheran because, uh, Finland is a majority Lutheran country and, uh, we, it's such, it's just, she seeps in, seeps in him. Uh, I'm actually quite liking Jordan B. Cooper's, uh, videos because it's nice to hear young conservative Lutheran, who is actually, he, uh, he committed to his, both his confession and his faith, which in a majority Lutheran country with the cultural split between the conservatism and liberalism and everything is really, well, it makes the situation much more, well, different, let's say. And Jordan B. Cooper is, I mean, there aren't a lot of that on the, on the internet. I mean, Lutherans, um, they're kind of, I don't know what's going on with the Lutheran church, but there's not, not all that they're, they're very, given the size of the church, they're very underrepresented in places you would expect them to be. So that's sort of why Jordan B. Cooper is pretty important in that space. Yeah. It might be something to do with the fact that they are very, uh, what is it? Uh, sacramental. Yes. They are quite sacramental. Yeah. How, and, uh, they don't do much, uh, the, or the, what is it? Uh, evangelization is not on the, the type of evangelization is not what they do is not on the forefront and, uh, and not of the same variety that you see that produces YouTube channels. So those are perhaps the reasons. Well, I'm looking for, I, in the back of my mind, you had a mission for this and you often have a lot of really interesting, you point me to a lot of interesting things when you email me. Uh, here's the pitch. Follow the channel since 2018 to better understand us culture. And you clarified that how to Randall's conversation around Easter, 2020, a, um, married two children, lifelong Christian Pentecostal flavor. Um, I would like to talk about is my, um, recent observation that even TLC Laura, oh yeah, this is why I really wanted to talk to you because this gets into verveky's Hermes. Have you followed any of that? Unfortunately, no, I haven't had time to, who, uh, who follow on verveky for quite some time. I looked 26 episodes of his original, uh, series. His, and I have, have watched him, uh, collaborate with other people, but his own content, I haven't had time to watch. So this hermese conversation with Jordan Peterson recently, where he mentioned that an archetypal presence came in and introduced himself as Hermes and that very much connects with, um, and I loved your little comment here. Um, there's, um, there has been talk about school spirit, et cetera, which is all well and good. And has expanded my understanding of the supernatural, but ignores the truly serpent that supernatural like spirits that can show the seer their future. My father died two months ago and I had to revisit my, um, uh, tribal, um, and family history, which have a stark reminder of the realm of these spirits. Yeah. You got my interest. Let's go. Okay. So, uh, well, uh, one of the things that just a, he is some, uh, the last month, which brought this up to that, that I should be talking to you about this was, uh, seeing the one clip from, uh, cosmic skeptic and, uh, Shapiro. They were on speak, uh, where were they? Unbelievable. They were on unbelievable. Yes. Yeah. The one conversation there where, which nobody recommended for you because it's not a good conversation. But there was a clip where Alex made a case that on the, um, morality of the Bible on slavery in the old Testament. But the thing, what really caught my attention was that he said that God has, uh, made the laws for bidding imaginary crimes like witchcraft. I was like, what? Excuse me. There are so much wrong with that idea, starting from the fact that if, if there is a supernatural God who has given us the Bible, then clearly there is a supernatural realm and witchcraft is not an imaginary crime. So you are, you're really confused with that idea there. Right. And then the other part, uh, there was few, I don't, I think it was from Glenn Schiffner's videos. He has had these, uh, comments on from, uh, public atheists that actually even a supernatural intervention would not make them believe because they would actually think that it's more plausible that they have gone mad than some supernatural being comes and, uh, talks to them. Right. That would be more plausible. And there I thought you have not enough imagination. You don't have enough imagination what these things can do. And just to, and the example I wish to give, and this is a very well known phenomena, uh, but how should I tell it? Uh, it's called, it has few names. It has one name is Etiainen, which means something from afar. Or it, and then our local in a mine village, it's called Eelusmias, which means a forerunner. Huh. And say, what happens? It, what happened to my, uh, once to my uncle when he was a child, his cousin comes to him and says that, where is your father? I saw him coming from the, uh, town by his bias. He was already coming back with his bicycle. And he had a gas bottle with him. He had bought it. And my uncle said, no, he's still, he hasn't come back yet. He hasn't come back. Oh, his cousin went away. He, I thought he already did. He came here half an hour later. My grandfather comes with a bicycle and he has the gas bottle at the back of his bicycle and it's making noise, which the, uh, cousin had heard. So people see things that happen after it. Then, uh, there was a, a well known, uh, there was a case that was, uh, in our local newspaper, uh, few, I think it was only a few years ago. It was from a, uh, a recently, a deceased, uh, person who was a well known, uh, story collector. And, uh, they asked him a very simple question. Were people in the olden days afraid of these forerunners that they saw? And he gave a really simple explanation, uh, answer. Of course they weren't afraid of them because you didn't know that you were seeing a forerunner. Because what you would see is somebody is coming, you hear, or you see someone coming, and then at the last moment, when you are supposed to meet them, you realize there's no one there and you are surprised what's happening. You think you have seen, uh, seen things, just imagined things, but then in the next hour, the very same thing will happen. And this is a, this is so well known that in a local newspaper, when people can be asked, uh, where people afraid of these things, and he had this, his story about a well respected couple, uh, had heard in the winter, these many times these happen in winter because it's easier to know that there was actually nothing there. They heard two people were skiing over the lake, frozen lake. They heard the sound of skiing. They even heard that people came to their, her, uh, in the front of their house and they, he pulled up their skis and put them on the, by the wall. Cuck, you could hear that sound. No one there. Then they went, what, didn't we just hear two people coming here? Who are they? Where are they? No ski tracks anywhere. No one has come. Then an hour later, two people, their neighbors come over the lake. When these, uh, professors or these public atheists say that there is nothing that a spirit, a supernatural being can do to make me believe that I have not gone mad. They, it's because they, he think that this is all delusion. Yeah. Everything supernatural is just within here. But these kinds of things don't happen when in your head, you cannot see the future, at least if you are a materialist, that should not be a possibility. And yeah. You know, CS Lewis begins miracles with the same story says the only person that I know who's claims to have seen a ghost doesn't believe in ghosts. Actually, Malcolm and Simone on their channel this morning, Simone was talking about this, that people have an astounding capacity for complete self-contradiction without any qualms about it. And, um, you know, I've seen that so often in, in life where they, these things happen, they said, this would never change me. And it's like, yeah, it might not because, but that doesn't say that what you're experiencing isn't real. It just tells me that you're stubborn. I mean, that's just, and people are, people are committed to what they're committed to, and if they've staked a lot of reputation on these things aren't real, then. So, but at the same time, people, life is strange, weird things happen. And, and we try to create systems to sort of explain it all. But our systems are our systems and they, they, they fall short one way or another. So, but I think this, I mean, this whole area is a constant for human beings. And what got weird is, so the enlightenment sort of tries to put a, a line through reality and says, well, this is, here's the Overton window for public discourse. And with some reason, but you know, what's funny is that people sometimes will dismiss Pentecostals because they'll say, well, you know, God can come in and say anything. And the Pentecostals are the ones that come up and say, well, God gave me this dream or God told me this. I said, yeah. And they live with it without any problem. They all sort of understand, you know, somebody in church was God told me to do this and it's like, okay. I can't say that God didn't tell you to do that, but if God tells me to do it, then maybe we'll talk about it. Um, so it's, it doesn't really change the world the way people expect it will change the world. Yeah, that, that's, that is also true. That's, uh, the, there's one thing to have on some understanding or some knowledge of the supernatural, but it's a completely different thing that will that actually turn what, what will that actually do to the person and their beliefs and also their, the way they live. Because I know people who know that these kinds of things exist, but it, it doesn't make them very Christian or they don't, it doesn't make people faith heads. Well, and, and you see that in the Bible, you see the disciples of Peter, let's use Peter, Peter sees Jesus do more miracles than anyone else. And in the garden of Gethsemane, he crumples and by the fireside during Jesus' trial, he crumples. And I mean, Jesus sort of flatly confronts the disciples on this many times. And so this week I've got the, you know, stilling the storm on the lake, you know, they're all freaking out in the boat and Jesus gets up and says, you know, tells the storm to shut up and he looks at his disciples and is like, what you've watched me do the most astounding things and you're freaking out here in the boat. And, but that's us. That's how we are. So where miracles don't do to us what we think they should. Yeah. But I would like to add one other thing. And we still, I think have a minute. Yeah. There is also this question of what, what makes us believe and especially on the, if people are engaging in Apollo, Apologia, how do you actually pronounce it? Well, that's close enough. Poor Grim is really having trouble with Christian's channel since he put Apologia as the title, the go on. Yeah. Yeah. So Apologia, we have this idea that people will come to faith through perhaps Apologia. Then there is the popular atheist idea that people come to. Historically, people have been brought to the faith by the sword or some other coercion. But I know for a fact that the reason that actually made my ancestors to come to become really Christian and actually stopped trying to work with these spirits to, who to follow these spirits that create these phenomena. It was actually the idea Christ Victor. What is the? Yes. Christus Victor. Yes. Christus Victor. Yes. Because, and that's actually, it's part of the Pentecostal liturgy that we say that God has already won all the works of the devil. Yes. We don't have written dogmas very much, but we do have some liturgy and that is really part of it. Yes. God has already won on Satan and his everything that he has. So the priests who served in Lapland, they wrote in the 17th century that the reason why the locals are still holding on to their drums, their fetishes, their spells is because they are afraid that they need the protection of these spirits. Right. But it was when they found the protection in Christ, then they could leave behind the sorcery, the witchcraft, the spirits that you cannot trust. Yes. And that story has been repeated throughout Christian history. You see it in places in the world where, let's say, animism remains that part of why people flee to Christ is they finally want an end to living in the chaos of the spirit world, because those spirits are not, they are not your friends and they will use you. And so that's why people come to Christ, because I just need protection. And so that's a very, very common and it's historical. It goes on. The ortho boomer grandma made the point that there are three formal exorcisms at the monastery before an orthodox baptism. And when we were doing baptisms with the Haitians, they were thrashing in the water. And I first saw it, I was like, what's this about? And I talked to someone who knew a little bit more and he was saying, well, the spirits are in the water and baptism is an exorcism. And so they're drowning the spirits out of the people. And so, well, Alti, I'm going to keep, I shouldn't, it's not fair to have you be on late. There's somebody else that I'm going to bring out in a second here. But any last things you want to say? You don't have a channel or anything like that. So you have nothing you have to pitch. You're just a civilian, right? I have a blog in Finnish. Oh, OK. Hey, Akujarvi.net. You can use Google Translate. It will do decent job these days. OK, so it's just my surname dot net without the accent. OK, well, thank you, Alti. Really appreciate this. I'm going to bring in this guy because this guy has been hanging out backstage, even though in my selection, I didn't pick him. But I'm just going to I'm just going to bring you on just for just for sheer doggy. Oh, you're really loud. Oh, sorry about that. I'm in Los Angeles. This car is going left and right out here. OK, and because you're you call my you know what? This corner is severely lacking the loose thoughts of a 27 year old ex evangelical missionary, now Anglican wedding DJ who lives in a box truck on the street of Los Angeles. Well, there you go. We're lacking in this. Yeah, yeah. I've seen anyone else cover this small little niche yet. In short, I think DJing once I got the symbolic lens from Pajow, I've been a DJ my whole life. And once I got the symbolic lens and I started to look at like record a record B, I'm blending between them. There's like a sweet spot in the middle. It totally just transformed like what I think about DJing. And so I've been on that journey for a long time. I started when I was 13. I was doing in high school. I was like I didn't go to any of my own high school dances. I did all of them and all the neighboring high schools, you know, and all the churches. You know, I was raised in a four square church, which is very interesting because now I'm actually here in Los Angeles at the Angeles Temple, which is I mean, I don't go there, but I live, you know, live on the street in a box truck, a block from the origin of four square church here in Echo Park. And so I've grown up DJing for lots of four square churches, DJing for Young Life, DJing for youth groups. I just like my hometown's DJ. I did it all the time everywhere. And I started to kind of, you know, out of high school. Well, OK, so right out of high school, I joined the Christian Missionary Alliance and moved to Paris and I was in Paris for about a year and some change. This was during the midst of the Syrian refugee crisis. And I was doing documentary work to help with the humanitarian relief at the midst of all of that. And the whole time, I'm thinking like I was expecting to get this kind of like bigger spiritual kind of picture of Christianity because it's like I'm going from my little small town where I was doing all this for square. I don't know. I was really involved like I was in Young Life. I was in a one. I don't know if you've heard of a one. But when I went when I went to the conference, one of my main things I was hoping for is like, please let me find somebody who grew up in a one and as is as weird as I am, because I want to just turns you into a freak man. Like, it's really just when you go to school and you're like, well, yeah, what do you do on Sundays? Well, I go and recite Bible verses in exchange for candy. And I'm up to like this much candy now. And then we got like a one of games. It's like a whole different world. And then at the conference, like sitting around Grim Gris campfire, it's like two guys were like, oh, yeah, I went to a one a couple of times. It's like, yeah, my parents were cubby directors. We were in it, man. We were in it to win it. So like I have so much love and so much appreciation for like the evangelical evangelical world that I came from. But kind of at the same time, this guy says I dominated a lot of crowns off and everything. Yeah. So I went into the Christian Missionary Alliance after high school. You know, I'd left the DJing thing kind of by the wayside. I mean, I was like, OK, time to have an official job to do something real. And luckily, I was able to like have helped my have my hometown and my home high school like help fundraise for the mission trip. It was like twenty thousand dollars or something like that. We're all saving up. We're all going. And I get out there to Paris and like the experience was really sorry. There's the. Hopefully, it doesn't get too loud. There's some typical L.A. business going on. Hold on. I'll let him pass. Oh, good. It's going the other way. I was I don't know what to say. It may be unfair of me to expect this like higher level of spirituality from a mission track from a mission trip. But the church that I was a part of there and no shame to them, like I still love them all, I still keep in contact with them, but I still had this like I was very intellectual and I think we were at a Trinitarian church at Paris was our home church and I was going to all these bases and like the one on one conversations and the stories I was getting in this documentary work. It was very cool and impactful and stuff, but there was still this like kind of intellectual chasm, you know, nothing and nothing in Foursquare is very theology based. It's all very relational. It's all very pastoral. It's very mundane, I guess you could say. And right as I get back from the mission trip, I'm like, screw it. I'm going back to DJing. I got a trailer. I moved down to Los Angeles. This is not five years ago. I moved down to Los Angeles. And after a couple of years of working at Best Buy, I met Stanley from the office. At Best Buy, I helped get give him his TV, get it all set up. And I set up a TV for Andrew Dice Clay, the Dice man. I know he's like, what do you want to do here in L.A. kid? I'm like, well, I want to be a DJ. He's like, you know what you got to do? You got to put a camera on your head. Call yourself camera dad. You're going to be the number one DJ in the world, kid. He's like giving me DJ advice. I'm like, OK, OK. Well, eventually what had happened was I got into a music thing, right? So like it's an Echo Park. I it was a giant warehouse when I started renting it out. And this is like early 2020. I'm like, OK, music venue. Here's how we're going to do the DJ thing. I have always been not wanting to participate in the normal hierarchy of like the DJ world. And obviously, I'm a Christian. And so like clubs is a very such a thing. You don't want to really just spend your life doing. But if I could add in a little tiny point about the Jonathan Pazzo thing, it's like I remember one time Jonathan was talking about how his quest for creativity led him ultimately to the church and how making icons is his way to participate in the literal church, but using his like this artistic, physical means. Well, I clearly like got this whole different lens on wedding DJing, because it's one of the several types of things that I do for. I do youth groups and girls kind of stuff like that. But I'm like, oh, my gosh, like when I'm DJing for a wedding, I see the wedding is not about me or anything. But there is a moment in time where if I don't do my job right, these this union is not, you know, there's a very important thing that happens on the dance floor that night. You know what I mean? It is where everything comes together, everything gels. The first dance, the, you know, the mother, son, the father, daughter. These are these are rituals, you know, when you start talking about this ritual thing, my eyes were open. It's like, oh, my God, I'm like the I'm the shaman. Like I'm the shaman at this wedding, like bringing this evoking the evoking, you know, and I have to know the right songs. And it's very cultural and it's very contextual. You know, I've DJed several weddings like outside of the US. And that was very eye opening to me to there to see like, what is the norm and what's the standard here and how do I still provide the service that I need to do, but still bring all these people together. So back in the L.A., I'm at the venue and COVID happens. COVID, I got my venue. I signed my lease like a month before COVID happened. I'm like, here we go. I want to be outside of the system. I'm going to make my own venue. I'm going to DJ. It's going to be a whole going to be lovely. It's going to be sweet. A month later, COVID happens in Los Angeles, the lockdown in Los Angeles. It was hard. It was Gestapo, man. It was harder here than it was anywhere else. So I am fighting tooth and nail for the first like four months to try to just allow myself to have a show. Obviously, I get shut down pretty quickly. I revert back to doing private shows. And so I'm doing like, you know, look in both ways, sneaking 10 people in the door and we're doing like a karaoke night for like a someone's birthday party or something like that. But obviously, because of COVID, I was never able to get the venue off the ground, really. It just kind of like fizzled out. And it came to a point about a year and a half ago. I'm like three months behind on rent. I haven't done a profitable show in who knows how long. And my car gets smashed as it's sitting on the side of the. And I'm like, oh, that's that's lovely. Oh, and oh, you don't have insurance. That's awesome. Cool. And I only have liability. Great. Love that for me. So I'm back in the venue. I have no idea what to do. And a second time, my car gets smashed. So now it was in drivable condition. Now, at this point, the hatch is pulling off. It was like a Honda, like a newer Honda hatch has been falling off. It's like lumping its way down the road. And I'm like, oh, and you don't have insurance. I just couldn't get any worse, possibly. Finally, the third crash happens. By the way, if you want to have your if you have a car and you need to get it like cashed out for insurance purposes, park it on Alvarado Street. Someone will hit it eventually. Finally, the last guy hits the car and he has insurance. And I'm like, yes, that's my lucky day. Like I was excited that finally someone hit my car because I'm just hoping someone would hate it who has insurance. So finally, this guy has insurance. I get a twelve thousand dollar check, which is insane, because I bought the car for like ten thousand dollars. It was at the peak of the chip shortage when used cars were going way up in value. So I'm like, no, this is the best thing ever. I got $1000. And that is when I made maybe the best decision, maybe the worst decision ever. I flew back home to Washington state. So I'm from the Pacific Northwest. I'm from a very small town in the northwest of Forrest. My grandparents own 36 acres of land up there. And there's only one house, a single story Sears mail order, like located home on the top of the mountain. I'm not 36 acres. It's where I was born. It's where I was raised. I came into the city sometime in my later childhood and high school and stuff. But that Forrest is, you know, it's my main it's my main place. And my whole idea was to take my my this where the truck comes in. So take my music venue idea. And I realized the problem was that I was stuck in Los Angeles. There was nearby counties even that I could have been doing shows in. But I couldn't. The truck was, you know, our venue was stayed put in Los Angeles. So I basically came home with my $12,000 check at the venue collapse. I just like got my stuff out of there, stuck it in the storage unit. I got my check and I'm back home in Washington and I'm here to buy a truck. And I'm like, OK, venue on wheels. No longer will I ever be shut down from government regulations or whatever. I'm going to get a truck and I'm going to put all the speakers on the truck. And it's going to be like I pulled down the drawbridge and there's the there's the show right there. Right. And so the first place that I visited because I hadn't seen them in a while with my grandparents, which they're the ones who live on that big 36 acres of property in this. I was just picturing getting one on like Facebook marketplace or off rep or something. It's just cars are generally cheaper in Washington than they are in California. But but I go and visit my grandparents and Papa's like, hey, what do you ever ever seen in a while? What do you what's your up to? And I'm like, well, I'm here and I'm looking for a late 80s Ford F 700 diesel box truck with a manual transmission. And this is where my life changed. He goes, oh, OK, I think there was one right over there. I think your uncle left it here about 20 years ago. And I say, what are you talking about? He hands me a machete and I go like 20 yards this way with a compass. And there it is like I call the woody mammoth. It's it's this giant, giant box truck that apparently my uncle had parked it there 20 years ago and like it was living there the whole time. I was living there watching me grow up from the forest, just waiting to be uncovered one day. So I uncovered the woody man. And I had that name still in Los Angeles. I'm like, I'm going to have a truck and I'm going to call it the woody mammoth. It was just a premonition. It just came to me. I don't know where the name came from. And then when I hacked down the forest and I saw it, I'm like, oh, it's real. It was a total symbolic moment or something like that. I don't know. Like I thought of woody mammoth. Then I found this giant mammoth in the woods. And it looks like one, too, with the way that the box truck is and all that stuff. And so then this is a year and a half ago at this point. I spent the next year and a half living out of my grandparents or my living out of my parents attic, a Harry Potter style, just like kicking myself because I did not know how to fix this truck. I didn't know I was not a diesel tech. I was not a you know, the forest is very cruel to vehicles. It was a it was a total rust bucket. Luckily, the engine still ran, but it needed a whole new rear axle. It needed to get pulled out of the forest in the first place. New wheels, new tires, new brakes. I had to spend the next year and a half basically fixing this truck up with zero prior knowledge. You know what I mean? And and every single week, I thought it was just going to be one more week. It's just going to be one more week. And slowly throughout that year and a half, like I lost friendships and stuff. I lost opportunities here in Los Angeles. The time I thought was going to be a one or two week trip. I just go to Washington, come and then keep going with the whole DJ thing. But that is not how things found out. I spent a year and a half back home, totally just like having this existential crisis. Am I ever going to make it back to Los Angeles? Should I even be DJing? What's the point? Is DJing even worth pursuing in 2024? Is there anything worth it? And one day right before Christmas this year, I start the truck and it keeps running and then nothing is hindering the vehicle's continued operation. So I slam the gas pedal in second gear and I had down I-5 all the way down. I'm like, please keep going. Don't stop. Don't stop. No fast, go no cost. Two hundred dollars. I'm just going, going, going. And and then right right around Christmas time, I made it back here. I went straight to my church. So that's a little tiny piece of it is like I kind of stopped going to church when when I got back from the mission trip and I was just kind of like burnt out on Christianity and I was kind of kind of frustrated, honestly, that nothing that happens during that trip basically was like spiritually deep or anything like that. There was no theology. There was no I guess I was kind of thinking of it like, oh, I'm basically going to Bible college, but not really. I'm just going on this mission trip and it just didn't have that whatever for me. But one of the one of the guys who was on my video team back there, he's an older guy named Josh. He he texted me one time and he was like, dude, I know it's been a while since either of us has been to church. I know that whole experience in Paris was kind of weird and stuff. And, you know, I mean, think of what time it was at that time, like Syrian refugee crisis. This is like 2015, 2016. I was such a modernist there when I lived in Paris. I hated everything old and I'm so complete opposite right now. Like I wanted to spend all my time in the modern area. I was so modern. I was very techie. I was very, you know, just not ancient, not medieval at all. And he texted me, he's like, dude, I think you should try going to an Anglican church. And this is before a page. Oh, you can talk to me about liturgy or anything like that. He just said, we found one out in Louisiana. We love going to it. And I can't really explain why, but you should go try it. And so I go in Los Angeles, Instagram, and I just find like the coolest looking Anglican church. I show up and the very first service I go to, it's the husband and wife pastor couple. And they're saying at their service, they're like, hey, guys, stick around at the end of service. We have a little announcement to make. And the announcement they make is it's been a lovely seven years with you guys, but we are leaving this church. And so my very first service at Anglican service, the pastors are basically saying, we're leaving. Here's a bunch of chaos. You guys got to deal with. We're going to have an interim pastor. We're going to have all stuff. And I'm just like, this is what I was raised in. This is like not what I was raised in, but this was what I was born for. I know how to serve at church. I know how to help out with stuff. I know how to pick up chairs, you know, six stacks high. This is my game, man. Bring me in. So I immediately like sucked myself into that church. And it's been my home church ever since the whole back in Washington. It was very painful to not have them in my life. But now I'm back in the church and things are moving steadily. I mean, I got the truck, the woody mammoth. I'm working on creating like a show. I kind of think of like the have you ever seen like the medieval image of a passion play? It's like a big, like a big car moving through the town. Hold on. OK, got five percent. I got five percent battery, Paul. So we're going to we're going to bring this thing all the way to the end here. The passion play is like this medieval idea that you have this wagon traveling from village to village with like some sort of a show. OK, I don't know. He's the symbol of crazy. Symbolism happens. Symbolism happens. That's right. That's right. Remember? Yeah, you have managed to talk for 20 minutes without interruption. You win the speed randos convo challenge. Awesome. Thank you. Thank you. I could have I could have logged off and just there. The whole thing with the woody mammoth and everything else. I love you say that name, the woody mammoth. It's a famous it's going to be a famous truck one day. Well, so thank you. Thank you, Trevor. Thank you. Absolutely. So so this is this is the after show. And so I just dropped the links and others can come in. And I know President Foxman didn't didn't get a slot. Neil didn't get a lot. There's a bunch of you. Sorry, not everybody could get a slot. I turned down Vendon because he gets as many slots as he wants. So, yeah, I'm going to go to the bathroom. I'm going to turn off my camera. But you got Luke take over to run this show. OK. Man, I this was is my audio working first with my headphones. Yeah, you're good. OK. Trevor, if you don't mind, can you just mute yourself so the background noise goes away for a second? Yeah, no, no, I'm good. And by the way, guys, I have a 4% battery. So if I just go blank, that's that's the end of it for me. All right. Sounds good. So this was this was. This was awesome. I think this idea of PBK was pretty cool. Because I don't know, it brings in. There we go. Wow. That was wild. Because it brings in people from all all the different edges of the corner. You know, it's really it kind of reminds me of the Van Donk PBK conversation of the overlap between TLC and estuary. And who really watches Paul, Paul's videos and what's going on? Because for something like this, he's going to get a much wider swath than like the hardcore TLC dorks. So so I don't know. It was fascinating to listen to and lots of great stories. I think it's a cool it's a cool way to integrate people. Yeah, agreed. It was awesome. Yeah, I didn't I didn't actually pitch just because I'm so bad at selling myself. I couldn't. Yeah, you know, it's these things are always better to listen to anyway than to be the center of attention. Now here I am. Well, yeah, there's a look. Well, I mean, this is that. That's true. That's true. This is to play and hang out. I think this is this is where like the friendship culture part of TLC is cool, you know, because like Nate's more well known, but he's never had a random slot. But like a lot of these people thing about and like I was trying to tell I don't know, I wrote in the comments and Paul says this a lot, too. But but he says it. And certain many people see it that, you know, people don't see God because they don't look low enough. And we think of status, we think of hierarchy, you know, people out Peugeot or Vervey or Jordan B Cooper. The money is this people, the randos, the little. What's happened? I heard a lot. Sorry, it's my noises. I'll shut my. I you know, John, John's not real clear on how the Internet works, so he's just going to, you know, give us a Social Security number and his banking stuff while he's talking on the phone. And, you know, we're all just going to read his account. That's what's going to happen. So and we got Chad Chad, you know, gosh, I so, you know, I so want to I got to I got to find a way to have Chad come out and retire my bathroom because it's like here I know this awesome Tyler and yeah, I just maybe I'll maybe I'll maybe I'll convince my wife that I should just tell her I'm going to I'm going to buy Chad a plane ticket and we're going to pay him to do my bathroom because I know he'll do the right thing. So that's what I that's what I got to do. So all right. Well, Neil, now Allen's Allen's randos convo is coming out this Saturday. So some of you who are members have already seen it. Others haven't. Neil, Neil's becoming a more familiar face in the corner. A little bit. My kids actually just got home. So I'm going to head out. All right. Paul, I had lunch with my dad today and he's like exactly like you. Really? And I like you being in this little corner has kind of like been really instrumental in healing my relationship with my dad. So I just wanted to say thank you. Oh, thank you. And I really appreciate all that you do. So anyway, all right. Take care, Neil. No, President Foxman, I've been seeing your name around more and more. Tell us a little bit about yourself. Yeah, I'm just kind of trying to get out of the lurker stuff. So I've been trying to engage. I turned 23 last September, and so I decided like I'm going to take a year and make YouTube videos. So at least once a week. And then that's just my thing. And I do I've been doing random stuff like trying to combine philosophy and video games and trying to just mess around and do something creative. So, yeah. Is that the name of your channel, President Foxman? Yes. Yeah. OK. All right. So if you want to check out Noah's channel, President Foxman, you can check him out now. Vindonk had something he wanted to say. I muted you, John. You can unmute yourself if you can figure that out. John had something he wanted to say about this. And so go ahead, John. Not that urgent. You're here. Yeah, I just want to see who some of these characters are that are, you know, that I don't know. I don't know Noah. I don't know, Alan. So it's all very interesting. I kind of watch the show starting at 11. You can you can watch on YouTube. You don't have to actually come onto the live stream if all you want to do is watch. Well, I mean, if I hear something interesting, we can we can talk about it. Nice job, Chad. That tile looks great. I got to figure out a way to convince my wife. We're going to fly, Chad, because because because, you know, this construction thing is I'm going to I'm going to have to see what kind of bid Chad will give for for for fixing this ship or retiling our shower. Chad, do you do what do you just do? I mean, I think it's a good question. Chad, do you do what do you just do, Tile? Do you do a little bit of plumbing and that kind of stuff, too, or not? Not really. Here's the way we have to go. You guys have to pay for all the material and pay for the flight and stuff. And then I would just do it for free. You can do it for free. You got to earn some income. No, because I can't technically I can't do side jobs because my union status. Oh, I have to figure out how to. All right. Well, I'll talk to my wife and I'll send you a note. So see what we can do. It probably takes like a week. So you get to hang out with me for a week. That would be awesome. You'd stay in my house. I'd feed you. I drive up to Sacramento to go to church. You can go to Living Stones. You can bring your wife. I mean, that would be totally fun. That'd be really cool. That'd be great. So cool. Great show today. And that so what do you man? Story was outrageous. Yeah. He he was like right when we started, he was down there and I saw him down there. And I thought I didn't put him on the list. So I thought, well, if someone doesn't show, I'll slide him in then. And then I figured, well, he's been in that he's been there the whole time. I got to let him on. And once I let him on, it's like 20 minutes. So the fire truck went by that was like, oh, catch a breath. Yeah, that's great. I sat with him at a table in Chino. OK. It was it was fun. It was fun. All right. I'm I'm talked and listened out. So if you guys want to go a little bit more, you got to carry that. You got to carry the ball here. So OK, let me throw in what I let me throw. And what I what I would have brought up if I had had a turn in your in your speed rando thing. I feel an asteroid meeting coming on. Go ahead, John. No. Yes, maybe. But no, it has to do with the mental constipation. It has to do with can we take in all this information without ever having an opportunity to get it out to actually I think that you almost need to be able to talk about the stuff that you're hearing in order to properly process it. You cannot just be taking in information nonstop, whether it is in in real life or online. I mean, either way, it is. So, I mean, that's just the thought that I thought I'd throw up. Don't threaten me with a good time. Well, I have my bootleg estuary that I run. Like online. And that's that's how I I kind of do that. I just have a bunch of friends who I get together and I just kind of stole the estuary protocol and just been doing it. Yeah, I have the Google Doc and everything linked. My dad is going to show up for the next one. So it's going to be interesting. Yeah. Intergenerational estuary. Yeah. Love it. I think that really works in terms of the every week estuary. We got going at Living Stones. The intergenerational aspect is really key. I'd like to encourage everybody who's listening to do exactly what that guy just said. Steal the idea and run with it. There is no as far as I know, official like membership dues or fees or anything like that. That's cool, man. Yeah, I definitely found that, John, what you were saying about you don't even really know what you can have these discussions online and so where you can listen to a lot of stuff online and you don't even really know if you really understand it or what you really think about it until you start having a conversation with somebody and then then they ask you questions and also it's like, oh, hmm. You know, it's like, oh, now I got to think about it this differently. Or they don't understand what I'm saying. So then I got to rephrase it and it helps me understand better if I even agree with what I'm trying to say. And it's great. I had hopped on here hoping to directly say to Paul, thank you. There it is. I just said to put a slight little damper on some of this stuff, but my mom passed away a couple of weeks ago on January 7th. And my dad was in a really tight spot financially, to say the least, because it had been a process of about three months that involved a whole bunch of traveling, hotel stays, medical expenses, all this stuff. My dad's a blue collar guy. He's a Mason. And I was like, oh, I'm going to go to the hospital. My dad's a blue collar guy. He's a Mason. You know, he doesn't make the most money in the world. And if he misses work, he misses work. He misses that money, you know? And so I put together a GoFundMe and we like more than doubled what I asked for. And at least half of that came from this little corner. And so I really can't thank you enough for continuing to do what you're doing and everybody in this little corner who supported me either through finances or prayers or whatever, because it was a tremendous blessing for me. And then forget about my dad. I mean, he's still a puddle about it today, you know, when he talks about it. So it was a tremendous relief for him in a time that was already hard enough without all the financial expenses associated with it. And in addition to that, I made some really good friendships in this little corner, one-on-one. Some people have my cell phone number and stuff and some people have called me and we've had conversations about all this and they've been super supportive. And so this place is very, very real. And I love all you guys. Thank you, Christian. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. And that's, I mean, one of the things that's sort of been cropping up is the now this isn't a church, but there are there are church-like things that sometimes sort of pop in. And that's kind of like a church thing where, OK, here's a need in the community and people reach out and then that's beautiful. That's beautiful. So thank you. All right. Anybody else got something they want to say? I'm looking forward to people seeing the end of Alan's conversation because as I said, like this corner needs more East Coast people who can tell them how it is. So that was great. I almost maybe maybe today I'll make a clip of it and post it on the channel because enough! I don't think Vendonk is a member, so Vendonk hasn't seen it yet. So I think Vendonk will get a real kick out of it, too. So, you know, you should probably split these up, you know, and put them as separate videos because I'm thinking like I'm trying to figure out, I think I want to share this with my pastor, but it's like here, watch a three hour thing. It's just too much for the people. But you know, this is nice because you could have a whole playlist of 30 minute conversations. It's a lot more digestible, a good way to ease people in. So one of the things I think about when I when I live in an imaginary world where I don't have time constraints is actually doing something similar to what Justin had been doing, going back through the back catalog of Rando's conversations and doing some editing on them because there's gold in that back catalog. There's just gold back there and it doesn't it doesn't get surfaced. The channel is a lot smaller than people don't find it, but there's gold back there. And so I think about that sometimes. And I always say, well, if maybe I run out of ideas of things I want to make videos about, I'll do that. But I'm afraid that isn't going to happen. So, Michael, what do you think is a better strategy to get your pastor to go online or to get people online to go to church? I mean, I think well, I think we need a little both because that's what I you know, I see it as with the estuary thing, you know, the healthy evangelical churches won't stay healthy forever if they don't figure out what's going on here a little bit. So, you know, because I think like in probably the estuary, too, like I think I think my pastor probably pretty open to something like that. We have a new pastor, so it's kind of like figuring out the situation. But but, you know, you have to get manageable things that you can pitch to people. So so it's it's tough. It's tough. It's tough how to make shorter videos than it is longer ones. That's for sure. It's true. It's very true. Alan, you came in. What do you have to say? Yeah, no, I I thought, you know, I might as well. We've been talking about it. Be if I'm going to spend so much time listening to these podcasts, I might as well have a role in shaping a little tiny corner of the corner. So, you know, put your money where your mouth is. But I'm sort of on the opposite end, Michael. I think it's way more you're going to get people to go to church than you're going to get. I think that video with Rick Walker really illustrates how you can't fit the world into the corner. You got to fit the corner people into the world. And, you know, we're really doing ourselves a disservice because I trace sort of the history from Jordan Peterson and everyone's like, I just wish I could have I told my cousin about it. I told my wife about it. She hated it and she hates. You know, I can't. And we have this whole and then we were finally like one day we'll have friends we can talk about Jordan Peterson with and it'll be perfect. And that happened. That happened. And now we anybody you can go down as many rabbit holes and talk about the transubstantiation of Mary through the carnal bodies of the Ukraine, you know, but, you know, and we have our beautiful lovely corner. But, you know, if we just become so insular, it's just, we're really doing ourselves a disservice and they're going to have to be figures who can cross the waters, the dog headed saints who can carry Jesus across the river. So there are going to have to be pastors who can, you know, oh, I'm high in openness, I can watch this video I understood that I got that reference, but I definitely think that seeing sort of the specifically that Rick Walker video. And how much people want to gatekeep the corner and I just want to, you know, here's some East Coast ism. Like, I'm sorry, it was never meant to be gatekeep. It was never meant to be. Oh, well, no one wants to talk to me about Jordan Peterson. Well, now I'll start my own club and we'll kick all the people who are mean to me out. And it's just like, that was not the point of us getting together. It was not the point was to like, let 1000 flowers, flowers bloom and to get together and I love it. I go to estuary or go to church. I listen to the podcast like I do. I participate heavily, but I just am such a believer that it's like it's not us making our own little like, you know, wearing little badges and being like, I'm a corner member and I'm proud, you know, I'm a corner member. I'm a corner member. No, I'm a corner member. You know, this Spartacus, it's just so I'll cut off my little spiel there. But I definitely think like the if you can't go to church, go to estuary. If there's no estuary, start an estuary. I'm just such a believer of like this corner should give us the confidence to be like something real is happening. But the more insular we become, the more we actually destroy that's that thing. I'm curious about this about this statement because like I don't I don't understand where where the idea or this where people are saying there is gatekeeping happening because I personally didn't see that. No, it could be perceived that some of the stuff that I was doing would seem as though I was gatekeeping. No, but I actually wasn't doing it. It's not you, Chad. It was you, Chad. And I think about you all the time and your gatekeeping and all over. All I think about is Chad and his gatekeeping. So now it was not you that I was thinking of. No, I know. I OK. Well, I am curious of where it was because I didn't see it. That's when people have said this. I'm like, I don't know if you're talking about because I didn't see it at all. But if there could be like specific things pointed out, that would be helpful because then I can understand what you're talking about. Maybe it's not so much the gatekeeping as such, but maybe it is the apparent difficulty of expanding the audience and attracting newbies who are not familiar with the lingo and to actually welcome like really make people feel welcome. We're not sufficiently familiar with the celebrities like Jonathan Fajot and John Vervecky and even Paul. So that so that you can kind of introduce what is happening here to a larger audience. That is the same difficulty that churches have in reaching out to their neighboring people, to the community. And that's why I think that the tension and the strategies might even overlap. So if you figure out how you can reach a broader audience in TLC, how you can attract more people to it, then that is the same dynamic that you could employ on the ground in your churches and have people feel welcome in your local churches. It's the same exact same dynamic. Yeah, I mean, it was my thought. You know, I think churches churches where it's at. You got to get to church. But like, you know, because I think about that Jesus Revolution movie and it's like, we only know about the churches that let the hippies in. We don't know what happened to the churches that kept the hippies out. You know, they probably knocked on some doors and visited once and never came back. And so, you know, I just want random Internet people to be able to come in into our church. And I mean, that's the thing. People are Internet. People are so much more familiar with just the Internet in general than any of the workings of going to a local church. I see it more a chaos and order dynamic in that. There's a desire. I mean, it was it was so Alexandra had this, you know, little paper she wrote about control. You want a bit of control and you got to leave it and you're always sort of managing that dynamic. And so for some of the for some of those who semi regularly express discontent with with me, with this, with that, I think a lot of it's we want more structure and order so that and we think that the structure and order is going to lead to the outcomes we desire. And I see this actually as part of the American cult of intentionality. Yeah. That here's if you want to accomplish this, you need very you need to be very intentional about all of your steps to get there. And that is often the case. Yeah. Failing to plan means, you know, you're not going to succeed. And there is truth to that. But in my experience with something like this, which tends to be more organic, it's that it's way too complex for any of us to have thought about it and to have planned. And so, you know, I go back to it was really 2019 with Hank and Sam, you know, they wanted to they wanted to start a 501 C three, and they wanted to, you know, they wanted to do all of these things at that point. And I said, it's way too early. We have no idea where this is going. And I think actually, you know, there will be some 501 C threes that get started out of this some already have. But there were some that are going to be some that are sort of closer to the effort. But again, my admonition that I have seen growing out of, let's say, church planting is structure structure only when you need it. The longer you can keep it organic without causing damage and destruction, the better because you're going to let the organism grow. I mean, it's sort of the part of the problem is, you know, so you've got like a crab, something with an exoskeleton. If that process of molting is really difficult. So don't form that hard shell until you know you need a hard shell. That's my philosophy in this stuff. Yeah. I really like the idea of like intentionally or trying to open it up like aiming at a specific demographic. I think that that's to me, it just seems like time in a sense, it seems like antithetical to what actually happened. You know what you what you did, I mean, in a sense, it is what you kind of tried to do with Peterson. Right. You try to make him kind of accessible to people and that worked out. But then like and then I think you've done this with other little areas, other partners. But like where like what is the arbitrary line that you stop on? Should we do it with like, you know, like snowmobiles? Like, should we? You know what I mean? Should we do it with? And that's why I think that that's actually the role of all the other channels. You know, everybody has their own little ideas that their little thing that they're really interested in. They kind of already bring that to the table. You know, and then everybody has their own little flavor. And that's actually where the where the diversity lies. And that's pretty cool. Yeah. And so, yeah, that's my take. I understand what you're saying, John. But at the same time, it's like, I don't know if you try to manipulate it, I mean, one of the first things that struck me that Paul said was how he pointed out how the church is so insular. I don't really think that that's what's happening here. Maybe that's because I've spent the hours and picking up on the language. But I remember when I first came here, I'm like, I don't know what the hell you guys are talking about. You bunch of weirdos. And it just took time spending time. So that's kind of the cost. Right. There are no dues. One of the dues you pay is to listen. So I'm sorry. I go. What comes to my mind is there are two videos that Paul came made that came to my mind. And that was the Nick Cave live stream and the Dark Souls video you made a while back. These two that are very much outside of your realm of expertise, Paul. But like you you looked into something in the culture that was happening and being able to process it like vocally and being able to be someone who is already kind of looking at those things and saying like, oh, somebody who is also looking at those things and how do they interpret it? It's not even like being super accessible, but it's just being hyper specific to yourself. But taking something from the outside and seeing how it's processed in someone else. Al, Yosef feels that we're missing Alan's point. So yeah, I, Yosef, you're completely right. I'm missing it and I'm glad someone finally said something. The thing I'll say is like, I think it's already like it's already it's already happening. Like I go to my estuary and it's not with it's not a lot of corner people. In fact, there's almost sometimes there's none besides me. And I kind of makes me laugh because someone said I guess the people who run it are aware of the two people run it and me. So it's three. But they sort of said like, oh, you know it from the pod. Like, you know, the estuary from the podcast, right? And I was like, oh, yeah, like I know it from the founder of Estuary, Joe Rogan. And I remember everyone in the room like having a panic attack because they're like, I thought like, oh, this is actually a Rogan secret. You know, I shouldn't have done that. That was me beyond my bad behavior. I love it. All these all these normal people. They're like, we just came because this is a conversation. Like we're just like the idea that like what informed that we're just sitting around having a conversation. There's nothing here. There's no trick being done. But the second you say like, well, if you want to come to Estuary, you have to memorize the ten rules of estuary. You got to like, you know, like you got to like know who Jonathan Pajow is. Here's the three hour live stream you got to watch. Like even just saying like, oh, you need like even when we just say, forget about Joe Rogan, even when we say like, oh, I learned about it at Chino and I went to a conference. The people who come who don't know about it are like you had to go to a conference to learn how to have a conversation. Like like they you might as well be like, what are you talking about? Literally, some people think we're just like literally just sitting around chit chatting, having a conversation. Is this thing working? Yeah, we can hear you. Keep going. So the point being of like the idea of like we need to organize and when they enter the estuary, they must wear the robes of estuary and they must, you know, put the balm of estuary onto their, you know, like under their eyes. It's just like, guys, it's already happening. Like the spirit of estuary is there. No one needs to know who Jonathan Pajow is. No one needs so this idea that like, oh, well, we must organize and we must protect this thing. And I think it's so ironic because so many people come here to begin with just being like, I am a loner. I don't know where I fit in. I like Jordan Peterson. I like Jonathan Pajow. I like PVK. And then now we're like, OK, now that there's I mean, what? There's probably like 5,000, 10,000 serious members of the corner or like not serious, but people who lower. OK, 2000, 1000. Now we're like, I was also going to make a video on trying to make this count because it's we're really talking about different dynamics. Yeah. Yeah. So in terms of like the official where the robes put on the sacred garments of the corner, there's 2000 of us and we're going to be like, this is how it's done. And this is how we've always done it. How dare you come here? Like, it's just like enough, guys. Enough. Like, enjoy. I don't have to post it. It's already out there. Yeah. Now, enjoy the estuary. Be kind to the estuary. Come to the videos. Come to the live streams. But the second that we like say, like, this is the way we think. And what is our catechism on this teaching? And just like, come on. Like, really? Four years ago, none of us were like could even speak to someone else about this. And now we're going to like be like, well, if you speak, you must raise your right hand and make the sign of the buffalo. And, you know, it's just come on. Come on. We finally have a like a little bit of victory under our wins. I've got eight minutes more I'm going to give to this live show. And then I'm killing it. I'm done there. Yeah. Good question. Three hour conversations change the world. Joe Rogan, you're right. You're right. Like, so coming into the TLC like a week and a half ago, like kind of clean slate, even though I've been in this space of ideas for five or six years. I'm already seeing how it works. So I'm kind of a part of a house church, like 30, 50 people. Seven. This just happened in the last six months. And I can't like all this stuff is it gets distilled. I helped do the music and the liturgy. Oh, so there's no cross in this house. Joe, I'm going to put a cross in this house when we worship. I'm going to put a cross in this house when we worship. Like, like it's that simple. Like, everyone or Michael on a stream the other day said, you know, if I want somebody to know I'm going to say go watch my YouTube channel. So a guy that's been coming to this that we haven't had a relationship in five or six years. And I was just like we, we, he's wanting to kind of jump into orthodoxy. And so I said, Hey, let's talk. And, you know, I was like, here's my YouTube channel. And then today he's sending me reels on Instagram of Jonathan Peugeot. It wasn't a conversation. I'm just saying these things like when you say it's already happening, you just kind of have to think about waves of obsession. He said maybe we should all make channels. Maybe you should all make to a degree if you want to get this stuff out so that you can say, hey, and your extra hour of work. You can listen to my random thoughts. And then we're having a Facebook conversation and then we'll have breakfast next week or whatever. That's just kind of how it's played out in a week and a half. In my experience, it's really hard to know what's going to take. And so I was recently asked, I remember who it was, but they are it was it was it was with Malcolm and Simone. And they said, well, if someone was going to start with your channel, where would they start? And I said, whatever the algorithm serves up for them, because actually the algorithm, just like what Nate said, based on what you've been watching, the algorithm actually has kind of an idea about what you will like and what and not just what you will like, but what might be accessible to you. And so I tend to be fairly non-anxious about this, and I don't try to say, well, watch my videos, because that's it's just not going to work. It's going to happen. When you have 10 versus 1500. Yeah, that's true. Twenty five hundred videos is kind of a lot. You're muted. You're muted, John. I said, but do make sure to become a member, though. I'm sure she's such a troll. She's such a frickin troll. All right. Last thoughts. Five minutes. Last thoughts. Well, I don't know. I'm going to a couple of crew meetings with my pastor at the college in town. So I guess that I'll get to see a little bit more of where he's at with with the young people out in the world and see what's happening, because I just there's the problem is not like there is no same like here in the Bible, Boutel or whatever, there's a closed circuit of mega churches that people just hop around. So, you know, we need the new the new people. And so that's and I don't and I think it's not it's not as much of a stretch for an evangelical church to figure out something like an estuary. It's basically what they do, but just tweaking the format a little bit. But yeah, so before we had to promote it and how to promote it. Well, that's that's not exactly true because what they're going. I mean, I bump into it now with the starting of my estuary on Sunday morning because people are like, this isn't we usually just the Bible and Jesus and stuff. I mean, that that you have to say those words. And if you don't say those words, churches are going to get nervous. Yep. And I deal with that. Yep. Somebody said today it was like a conversation without having to say I believe something. And that that that was such a powerful statement to me. And that's what I feel like in this space. That was what was so freeing and it has continued the spirit of that, which everybody has believed. But instead of coming to the conversation saying you have to decide. And that was the whole thing. Hey, have you heard this story? Well, isn't he a heretic? I was like, well, I can't even I can't even talk to now. Yeah. Yep. All right. Three minutes left. I'm going to land the plane. Because it's actually, you know, this is Joe Rogan does it in person. I mean, it's actually more fatiguing looking at a screen than doing it in person in person estuary. Two hours goes by like nothing. But looking at a screen, it's fatiguing. And yeah, I tend to listen to things more than I look at them. All right. I think I'd sound it sounds to me like we're done. Yes. So all right. Well, thank you. Thank you all for watching the first Speed Rando's Friday live stream. Will there be a second? I don't know. One love. I it was up cycle that said I should take clips from the Freddie and Paul show and use that for branding for my channel. I think that's genius. That's it. That's surely a takeaway. All right, Alan. Well, Alan's video is coming to the full channel on Saturday, probably 10 a.m. Rough draft for Sunday is at 6 a.m. And I still have to make that video. So all right. Thank you all. Thank you. Thank you.