https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=tSMM08v--Po

 I'm just glad we can restart this. Okay, we're here. We're here. So, let's open with a word of prayer. Lord, we do thank you that we can gather this morning, whether we're watching online or whether we're here in this room at Living Stones. And we thank you that we have vaccines and masks and some of these things and that COVID has receded enough that we can once again meet in a room in person. We ask, Lord, that you would continue to be with us now as we dive into the book of Romans. And we ask, Lord, that you would give us your spirit and help us to grow in love for you and love for each other and in love for your word. So, hear our prayer now in the name of Jesus. Amen. All right. So, I don't know how much I've always sort of wanted to use PowerPoint sometimes with this class. So, uh-oh. Yeah, masks and headphones and earrings are all over the place. Yeah. All right. So, let's a little bit of review, some of for the streamers, because we've been doing this for over 10 years. And so, we all know the Sunday School routine, but anybody watching doesn't. Sunday School was always a very popular, you know, before I used to have a camera set up and a little phone set up. And so, I would, I would stream it. And that was a very, that was quite a pop, quite more of a popular thing than the worship service because a lot of people like the teaching. So, we did this for a long time. I've always sort of wanted to include a little bit of PowerPoint because there might be some things that I want to show you. We've always sort of done book studies in Sunday School, kind of go through books serially. And one of the things that's difficult for people to understand with a sermon, you've got about 25 minutes that you have to, you need kind of a general life introduction and you need something from the text and you need a life application. You've got to squish that into 25 minutes. In this class, we've got a lot more time to really study the text in depth and to look at all the issues around the text. And so, that's, I think, a powerful thing we can do in this class that you can't really do in a worship service. So, that's what we do. And as I mentioned before, and oh yeah, I've also often had requests for this in audio form. And so, Rick, if you didn't remember, we want to take an audio version of this too. If not, we can just strip out the audio. So, Rick is over in the other building managing this recording and managing the streaming like he does during the worship service. And so, today's in some ways kind of a dry run. We are streaming, but we didn't promote it a lot. We're going to see how this goes. So, there will be an audio version of this coming out on my personal podcast stream too. So, at some point, we want to include Zoom people in this. And we don't quite know how we're going to do that. It's going to be a very select group. It's not going to be open to anyone. It's going to be people who basically commit to it. And so, if they want to get a Zoom link, they're going to have to say, now anybody locally from Living Stones that wants to be in, that's no problem. But anybody out there in internet land that wants to be a part of this, they're going to have to commit to it. And so, I'm going to deal with that with them. So, and technically, we're going to have to figure that out. We certainly don't have all the bugs out yet. So, that's just a little introduction for the stream so people know what's going on. And let's get down with the class. So, we were in the Gospel of John before COVID hit. And we were basically, we did the woman at the well and we started going beyond that. Then COVID hit and everything shut down. So, I thought about trying to continue that. But that was almost two years ago now. So, in the worship services at 11 o'clock, we've been doing Paul. And I've been at this church 24 years now. And I've never really focused much on the epistles, partly because so much of the epistles are built into Reformation. The epistles are built into Reformed theology that you get a lot of that just through Heideberg Catechism and those kind of things. And, but I thought, now is probably the time to really dig into Paul. So, over the worship services over the last number of months, I've been setting up Paul biographically. And I've been looking at NT Wright's book on the Apostle Paul. And we've done some of that. We've been going through the Book of Acts. Now, when we get to the end of November, we'll hit Advent. So, then we'll be on the coming of Christ and all of those issues at the worship service. And I didn't want to sort of let Paul drop. So, I thought the Book of Romans would be an excellent thing to do in this class. As we're going to get into in successive weeks, even though there's a lot of focus on the Gospels, the Book of Romans has been foundational for the Christian Church in a way that few books in the New Testament have been. And we're going to get into the reasons for that and the shape of the book and what's behind the book and all of those kinds of issues. And there have been incredibly important theological transitions that key theologians, Origen was an ancient church father. Martin Luther is, of course, a big one. When Martin Luther read Galatians and the Book of Romans, it changed his perspective on the church to such a degree that it was integral in the Protestant Reformation, which is one of the most important historical events in recorded human history. So, the Book of Romans is a really big deal. And it's the longest epistle we have from Paul. And you really kind of have to ask, in what way is it an epistle? Because it's really sort of his attempt to lay out his theology for the church. So, what I wanted to do today is to begin, well, let me ask you, when you think of the Book of Romans, what do you think of, if you've ever read it? Complicated doctrine. Complicated doctrine. That's right. It's, you know, people, when they read through the Bible, they say, OK, I want to read through the Bible. So they start in Genesis. Oh, there's all these cool stories. And then Exodus continues. Oh, Moses and Aaron and Pharaoh and desert wanderings. And then about after they hit the law on Sinai, then you have like the construction of the Tabernacle. And then people sort of drop off. And then maybe a few stories in Numbers. And then they get to Joshua, a little bit in the first part of the first few chapters of Joshua have some story. And then Judges is full of story. First and second Samuel is full of story. Kings. So you have all this story going on. And then they sort of lose their way. And then they start in the New Testament with the Gospels. And, oh, there's Jesus and the Gospels and the miracles. And that's really cool. So you have the four Gospels. Then you read the Book of Acts. Oh, more stories. That's really cool. And then you start to hit the epistles and Galatians. Well, there's this big fight about circumcision. What's that about? And then you hit Romans. And now suddenly you're not quite sure what kind of book you're reading. And then you sort of frog around in the epistles looking for little passages that sort of are exciting and emotional and inspirational. And then you hit the Book of Revelation. You have no idea what's going on. So that's sort of an experiential walk how a lot of people deal with the Bible. So Romans has all of this doctrine. And we're going to even have to talk about what we mean by doctrine. So what I thought we'd do today is walk through some of this document. This document is from F.F. Bruce's Commentary on the Romans, which is in the Tyndale New Testament commentary series that's put out by InterVarsity Press. And the Tyndale commentaries are very short. They're basically made for a lay person that has wants to go a little bit deeper than a study Bible. So, you know, often I'll talk about what I've also done with this class is let's see how this works with. Make sure I don't monkey around with Rick's camera settings. So we've got two cameras. So if one fails. So you start reading the Bible and you like story and you like inspiration and you look for guidance. And most people, that's sort of the level that they read the Bible with. And at some point you begin to go a little bit deeper and you begin to notice different translations. And once we dig into the book, I'll continue to do what I've always done in this class, which is give you usually a copy of the Greek text, because that's what the translations are based on. And then I'll usually have something like the the Lexham English Bible, which is a a really sort of word for word translation. That used to be the way that translations were mostly done. And then I'll usually go with, let's say, the NIV, which is a little bit looser than something like the Lexham English Bible. But try to keep on this spectrum of a translation. And then I'll usually go to like what's what's the new living translate. OK, then we'll usually go to the new living translation, which is really a paraphrase, which basically tries to take the Greek and. And. That's the all in 26. We can get into those kind of things later, but takes the Greek and says, I'm going to preach to it. I'm going to read the Greek and I'm going to interpret it and I'm going to write down the interpretation. So this is sort of the way Bible translation goes, something that's fairly keeps all the ambiguity in the text, something that keeps some of the ambiguity in the text, but tries to make it a little bit more intelligible and then a paraphrase. And then what inevitably happens in the classes, people will read the new living translation and say, well, this one is my favorite because it's very clear. Well, yeah, because a person that shares your culture and your time did all the hard work and wrote down their thoughts and give it have given it to you. But if you have another person and another person and another person at different periods of time, you're going to come out with different things. And so part of the reason that you have these levels of translation is it expects you to do the work. All right. Now, Lily's sitting there with and looks like Edie's got one too, a really fat Bible. And it's like, well, why are their Bibles so much fatter than the other Bibles? That's because they've got a study Bible. And what a study Bible basically is, is you have usually one translation. And again, the NIV is the NIV is a very common translation for people to recommend. And I recommend when people ask me, what's a good translation of Bible, I usually recommend the NIV because it doesn't do all the chewing for you like a paraphrase. But if you read one of these other translations like the King James, the King James Version or sometimes the New King James Version, they try to continue this tradition of biblical translation. But other weird things happen because you've got a lot of distance between the King James Version language and our language today. That's why I will sometimes use the King James Version when I quote texts. But this translation I'll often use. Now, I think you can I think they're just starting to put out a printed copy of this. This basically comes with the Bible software that I use. So sometimes people use the New American Standard Version for it to sort of get at this. But if someone is new to the Bible and they're reading this, they get lost pretty easily. So that's why I usually recommend the NIV. It kind of gives a nice balance and it's a little less shocking. But now a study Bible comes underneath. And again, usually it's an NIV or an English Standard Version or a New Revised Standard Version, something like that comes underneath and starts adding a lot of equipment. And it's adding a lot of explanatory notes. And that's really helpful. So you read the Bible and they'll give you explanatory notes. And then you'll see in your Bible these tiny, tiny little footnotes. And those get after manuscript issues. And as we go through the Book of Romans, we'll look at manuscript issues because those things come up now and again. Because the Book of Romans was written in the middle of the first century. And until the 16th century, all of the copies of Romans had to be copied by hand. With all of that physical copying, little weird things happened. Now it wasn't until the printing press came along that we could really standardize versions and sort of chug them out with machines. And so then things get a little settled. But there are sometimes little issues that come along that are important for interpreting the text. And so we'll deal with those as we get into the text. And if for those who have been in this Sunday School class a long time, you know that we get into these things at this level in the Sunday School class. So this is sort of the study Bible level of studying the Bible. And it's helpful to get a better idea of, well, what's going on in the text. Now what you'll find with study Bibles too is that there are different church traditions of study Bibles. You'll find study Bibles that are Roman Catholic. And they'll give Catholic interpretations and teachings of the text. You'll find study Bibles that are, let's say, broadly evangelical. So the NIV study Bible will tend to be a broadly evangelical take on what you find in the text. Something like the English Standard Bible, that one tends to be a little bit more Reformed oriented or gets murky fast. Sort of Puritan English Reformation versions of the text. The Orthodox study Bible has Orthodox. So study Bibles then really develop into not only saying here are some of the issues behind the text, but here is our theological tradition and what it has done with the text. Now our commentary is way more. And then you'll have theological tradition. You'll have more analysis. And it's just a little bigger paper that you can draw all of this stuff on. So this Tyndale commentary series is kind of a thin layman's commentary and then commentary scale up from there and get even more differentiated. The Bible is by far the most studied, analyzed, dissected book in all of human history. There is nothing in this world that is anywhere near it. I mean, second would be the Jews and just what we call the Old Testament. But the Koran, no, any of the Eastern texts from Eastern religions know the Bible has been poured over, analyzed, broken apart, dissected more than any other book in human history. And the Book of Romans has to be up there in terms of what has been done to this book. Okay, so I will at times pull things out of commentaries because that sort of helps us get a little bigger perspective. But it's important to remember that there with all these layers, commentaries are a ways down the road. This is someone deeply located within a church and theological tradition and they are giving you their take. All right, so F.F. Bruce, the author of this commentary, was an evangelical English scholar, sort of in the mid-20th century, one of the best. And so you'll find New Testament commentaries from him. And he's also got sort of a biography of the book of Paul, Apostle of, I forget the name of it, see this is why I should do PowerPoint to remember these things, but I don't always. Okay, so this is the introduction. This is from the introduction of his commentary. Paul spent the ten years from AD 47 to 57 in intensive evangelization of the territories east and west of the Aegean Sea. So during the worship service, we are sort of on the second missionary journey. So down here you have the coast of what today we call Palestine, and then you have the coast of what today we call Turkey. And then you have sort of the crossing over and you have the Aegean Sea here. And then up here you have Macedonia and here you have Achaea. And so you have Ephesus. This is what they called Asia. And so Paul was from Tarsus, which is about here. Antioch is about here, really, where this Gentile church really broke out. Jerusalem is down here and Cyprus is here where Barnabas is from. And so Paul, here you have Galatia, this area up here. And so Paul goes through here. He goes over. You have Philippi up here. You have Thessalonica down here. You have Athens down here. And so what Paul does is he starts planting churches all over this area here. And then eventually comes down into Asia here. You have Ephesus. You have Corinth about here. And so Paul, for about 10 years, does extensive traveling and living in this part of the world, planting churches. And this is what we find in the book of Acts. This is what we've been talking about at the 11 o'clock worship service. During those years, he concentrated in succession on the Roman provinces of Galatia, Macedonia, Achaea, and Asia. So these are the names of the Roman provinces. At this point, of course, the Roman Empire is ruling this land. Paul grew up in Tarsus here. And so culturally, this is going to be very important for this class. Culturally, he is very much a part of this civilization. So I moved to California in 1997. Before that, I lived for a few months in Grand Rapids. Before that, I lived for seven years in the Dominican Republic. Before that, I lived for 10 years in Grand Rapids. And before that, I grew up in New Jersey. Now, this is all part of the United States. But if you've ever lived in different parts of the United States, you know that there are different cultures in different parts of the United States. Edie grew up in Montana. Lily grew up on the East Coast. Where did you grow up, Maria? Texas. Okay. So Texas culture and Massachusetts culture and New Jersey culture and Montana culture and California culture, they're all different. And it's even different. Sacramento culture is different from the Bay Area culture, is different from Los Angeles. So there's all of these different cultures. Now, I grew up in the Christian Reformed Church, which is sort of this Dutch Calvinist culture in America. So all these cultural layers just go, you know, just keep going down. Part of what we're going to see throughout the book of Romans, and I think is key to understanding Paul, is in many ways, Paul is part Jewish and Paul is part a citizen of this Greco-Roman world. And in many ways, what Paul does in the book of Romans is put these two worlds together. Now, we might listen to this and think, well, how does that help me? I'm not part of the Jewish culture. I'm not part of the Roman culture, the ancient Roman culture. Well, what's key here is actually the bridge, because what happens through Paul is Christianity goes from being sort of a Jewish subgroup that begin to believe that Jesus rose from the dead and he's the promised Messiah, the heirs of the New Testament. And Jesus becomes king of the world. And that's key because in the Roman world, there was already a king, a king of kings who was born of a virgin and saved the people and delivered peace to the world. And that king was Caesar. And so what Paul is going to do is make this transition. And what that means is that because Paul makes this transition, this transition keeps being made to African culture, to Indian culture, to European culture, to culture in the Americas. Most religions don't make any jump. If you're a Muslim and you want to read the Koran, they will say, you know, start meeting at our synagogue, start praying with us. But if you really want to be a Muslim, guess what? Guess what you're going to need to do? Learn the language. Learn Arabic. Because there are translations of the Koran, but they're not really the Koran. The real Koran is in Arabic. If you decide you want to investigate Judaism and you start going to a synagogue and you start doing that and you're like, wow, I really enjoy being with the people. But you're in the synagogue. And what do you start hearing? Hebrew. And they're going to say, you know, you can pray with us, you can worship with you, you can do all that stuff. But if you really want to be part of us, well, one of the things you bump into is, oh, here comes Maury. One of the things you bump into is a bar mitzvah ceremony. That's right. That's right. So if you really, if you really want to become a Jew, you're going to have to learn biblical Hebrew. And so when someone comes of age in the synagogue, they go through their bar mitzvah, is they read Hebrew in front of the entire congregation and they give a little interpretation. And that shows they are now able to function in the world. Christianity in the Roman Empire uses the Bible in the Greek. Right from the start with Christianity, this business of cultural jumps is incorporated into the genetics of Christianity. And this is unique. And this is part of the reason Christianity and world history has jumped from culture to culture to culture to culture. In my opinion, one of the most amazing jumps is the jump from, you know, any any guesses. There's a particular racial demographic that is the most Christian participating demographic in the United States today. And those are African Americans, African Americans per capita go to church more than any other people group in America. Now, if you think about that, historically, it's an astounding thing because these people were sold out of Africa, bought, brought under force and duress to America, brutally enslaved. And their masters were Christians. And you would expect this group of people to say, I don't want to be a Christian. Look at the people. Look what these people have done to me. Christianity, the slave saw something in Christianity that they basically looked at and said, this is this is not the religion of my master. Right at the beginning of this religion is the freedom of slaves. And so what you see growing in African American culture are African American spirituals. All of this language of the Bible gets built into African American culture, which is sort of some of the culture comes from Africa. Some of it is coming now through the culture in America, and they put together a deeply Christian culture. That happens because right from the start, within Christianity's DNA, as it were, there's a cultural adaptive power that Christianity has. And this comes to us through Paul. And the Book of Romans is actually critical to understanding why this keeps happening in human history. So all of this incidental stuff about Paul's life seems like people read the Bible. It's like, OK, I want God to speak to me, so I'm going to open the Bible and I'm going to get doctrine. I'm going to get moral guidance. I'm going to get inspiration. And God's going to lead me through this doctrine and moral guidance and inspiration. God's going to do all of that stuff for me. And he will. But God worked this through history. And so these two aspects in the Apostle Paul, his Hebrew aspect and his Greek aspect, as they would call it, and the fusion of them, in many ways, that's the power of Christianity. And why? Well, you know, we're reading about the very early church in the Book of Acts, which is mostly Jewish. But very quickly, this religion starts to grow. And the Jews are about 10 percent of the population of the Roman Empire, which is pretty significant. But let's say maybe 2 percent of Jews become Christians. We have no idea what these numbers are. But then suddenly, this whole world of its cosmopolitan, its ethnically diverse, not unlike, let's say, Sacramento with its own culture. Or so I grew up in New Jersey. And one of the things that I noticed very early when I came to Sacramento is that Sacramento, by the time I got here, didn't have ghettos. New Jersey, where I grew up, we had ghettos. So there's the place where the blacks lived, the place where the Jews lived, the place where the Italian Catholics lived. They had all these little ghettos in the New York metropolitan area. And, well, all of them had their distinct religions and their cultures. That was sort of like this, because you had areas which were traditionally, let's say, so this part of what was called Asia, actually there were a lot of Greeks that went back and forth over the Aegean. So this area had a long Greek history. And Troy is somewhere in here, so you have a lot of Greek culture and influence there. And it's not unlike the fact that Portuguese are around Sacramento, and you bump into Portuguese someplace, because they came here fairly early. But then you have places like in Galilee, where you have a significant Jewish population in some cities like Capernaum. But then you go to other cities, and guess what? It's all full of Greeks. Well, what do they mean by that? Well, people from all over the Roman Empire found economic opportunity in this region and so came in. And this we see in California all the time. When I go down to Southern California or the Bay Area in the Christian Reformed Church, there are Korean Christian Reformed churches in Southern California, in the Bay Area, in North Jersey. Well, what are all those Koreans doing around New York and San Francisco and Los Angeles? Well, they came over for opportunity. So this is this patchwork that you have in the Roman Empire. And so very quickly you have people who are... So am I more a product of New Jersey or the Frisian immigrants who came to White andville, Massachusetts, or the Dutch immigrants who came to Western Michigan, or the Jews like my father's family who snuck in with the Dutch and came to Western Michigan, or Western Michigan culture, or American culture, or Jersey culture? So, you know, Maria, you come from Texas. So you've got, you know, how many layers of culture built into you? And Maury, well, you know, Maury, you got any Frisian in you, Maury? Are you Dutch? Okay. So Maury's got some Dutch, but then he grew up in Ripon, so he's got some California culture in him. And so there's all these cultural layers. And so what kind of happens is you become sort of a cosmopolitan person. It doesn't mean that these layers really go away. What it does mean is that you learn all of these other different layers, too. And you act like a Sacramento at some point. This is happening all over the place. And again, what happens with Paul is this religion that Paul is a part of the formation of that we call Christianity today has everything to do with the bonding of these cultures and making the resurrection of Jesus Christ in the context of the Old Testament and it's intelligible and understandable and applicable to this cosmopolitan world. Now, here's a really funny thing. The Roman world doesn't really go away. If you were to, if you had a time machine and you kidnapped someone from ancient Rome and you brought them to Sacramento, the building you should take them to first is, you know what building? Capitol. Why the Capitol? They would look at the Capitol and say, oh, this is a temple. And we would say, Capitol is not a temple. Capitol is where the Senate, they'd say, oh, the Senate. See, Roman culture is still with us. Well, maybe then you say, I'm going to take you to a place that's going to feel really familiar. Take them to Capitol Mall in Washington, D.C. And they're going to say, oh, oh, this is like home because you have buildings with domes and you have arches and you have statues. He would recognize that because Rome is actually with us. And even some of our words. The Latin came through. Part of the problem with English is you've got a lot of German and Northern European languages in there, but you've got a lot of Latin in there, too. So all of this stuff continues to connect with us today. But in many ways, it all starts with Paul taking Jesus and saying, I'm going to show how Jesus is not just the ruler of the Jews, but the ruler of the world. And that's why, well, Jesus is obviously foundational. And at the center of Christianity, it's all about Jesus. But Paul is the one who says, this is how you who are not a Jew can connect in with this world. OK, we only got through the first sentence. Typical for our Sunday school class. Along the main roads of these provinces and in their principal cities, the gospel had been preached and churches had been planted. Now, this word gospel, again, this is a word that a Roman would understand. And we talked about that a couple of weeks ago in the sermon. This is the good news. And I have this book that has all of these sayings about Roman emperors from the first number of years. And they just keep talking about the gospel. What's the gospel of Julius Caesar? It's the gospel of Caesar Augustus. It's the gospel of Tiberius. It's the gospel of Gaius. It's all of these gospels. Now, we hear that and say, what do you mean the gospel of Julius Caesar? Well, Augustus Caesar brought peace to the world. Oh, no, Jesus is the Prince of Peace. He brings peace to the world. Well, now you've got a conflict. Well, is it Caesar or is it Jesus? Now, here's the interesting thing. When I say gospel today, everyone thinks of Jesus. No one thinks of Caesar. Jesus won. Paul took with proper seriousness his commission as Christ's apostle. Now, there's a Hebrew word. Christ's apostle among the Gentiles, another Hebrew word. See, this language and culture is built all into this and we don't recognize it. And now he might well contemplate with grateful praise not, as he would have said, what he had done, but what Christ had done through him. Well, now we're really talking weird. Because, well, what do you mean what Christ had done through him? What is Christ that he acts through other people? Now, when I say this in this class, none of us blink. Because this is language we totally get on board with. But Paul has just said something really strange that we know because it's been built into our culture and our language and our church. But we're going to have to figure that out. His first great campaign was concluded. The churches he had planted in Iconium, Philippi, Thessalonica, Corinth, Ephesus, and many other cities in those four provinces could be left to the care of their spiritual leaders under the overruling direction of the Holy Spirit. Okay, so we're following a chronology at the 11 o'clock worship service and we're not yet up to Romans. And I understand that. We will get to Romans at some point, but part of when I was planning out the series at 11 o'clock, I thought, how on earth am I going to deal with Romans in sermons? Now, you can take little bits of Romans and do sermons about them, which is usually what we do. But it's really hard to give people a vision for how monumental and important this book was. So that's why we're doing this in Sunday School. So in the 11 o'clock service we've had, we've seen in Acts 16, Paul at Philippi, in Acts 17, Paul at Thessalonica. This morning at 11 o'clock we have our second sermon from the book of Thessalonians, where we'll cover another chunk of the book. And Corinth we haven't even gotten to. Corinth is a very big deal. Ephesus is a very big deal. He stayed a significant amount of time in both of those cities. Ephesus, which is one of these, in this area that was formerly controlled by Greeks, and it was eventually taken over by Persians, and then the Greeks took it back, and then the Romans took it all. Ephesus is over here, a significant city. John, who we looked at before, that became his home base, we believe, in Ephesus. Corinth is over here, another significant city. It's all these really important cities that Paul tends to focus on because he understands, well, why is the city of Sacramento here? Okay. Okay. So Sacramento is important because, well, not too far right over there, running the whole length of the city is what? Sacramento River. And so you have the gold up in the hills. You have the river here. Another 60 miles southwest of us is what? San Francisco. And if you go down to Old Sac, there's a bronze statue of a what? Pony Express, right? The Pony Express was male. And come to San Francisco, you have a statue of a man. And you come to Sacramento, and at Sacramento, then you cross the river, and then you're pretty close to... So Sacramento is a hub, also because we have the American River, we have the Sacramento River. I mean, you just have all of these aspects that made the city important for what it was. This would be the kind of city that Paul would be interested in because, well, in terms of automobile transportation, what goes northwest through the whole United States? What goes east-west through the whole United States? Sacramento is right at the connection between 80 and 5. Sacramento is probably going to continue to grow because of all of these nexus points that go through Sacramento. These are the kinds of cities that Paul spent time in. If Paul were in America today, he would definitely spend time in New York. He would definitely spend time in LA. He would definitely spend time in San Francisco. But Sacramento would be the kind of city he would like because the roads go through here. Now, after he planted churches, he would leave in these churches, like we'd see that Timothy would sometimes go back to these churches. But at each local church, there would be some kind of leadership. And Paul will address that later on about the kinds of people who should be leaders. So there's leadership in these churches, and Paul will continue to write to them. But Paul's task was by no means finished. During the winter of 56 to 57 A.D., which he spent at Corinth, the home of his friend and convert Gaius, he looked forward with some misgivings to a visit which he had to be paid to Jerusalem. And this is something that gets almost zero attention when Christians read the Bible devotionally. It was tremendously concerning to Paul that these churches be accepted in Jerusalem. Now, we saw some of that in Acts 15 over the question of circumcision. But why was it important for Paul that these churches be accepted in Jerusalem? Okay. Okay. So this Hebrew aspect was integral. Can't be lost. This Greek aspect was integral. This Hebrew aspect was integral. Can't be lost. This Greek aspect, not as essential. Because, you know, we're not Greco-Roman very much. All these other cultural translations would follow through the years. But this Hebrew aspect is foundational. And so we look at Paul as this founder. He looked at himself as himself. He wanted to make sure that he didn't go too far afield. We read that. You can read that in the book of Galatians. His anxiety about that. Part of his anxiety is that, okay, so if, let's say, if only a fifth, let's say if only 20% of Jews become Christians, part of this group believes that circumcision is vital. Part of this group says it isn't. And the conflict that is going to, at the end of the book of Acts, get Paul arrested, that is going to get set into motion, his crucifixion at the hands of, but he wasn't crucified, his execution at the hands of the Romans at the end of his life, this starts with conflict within Christianity over this question of circumcision. And there's a whole lot of others around them that are also very hostile to Paul. Are you bringing Gentiles into the temple? Are you polluting and contaminating our religion with this Jesus stuff? And so part of the reason we're all set up like this is because I've got a YouTube following and so I'm doing all this work in YouTube land. You know, there's a couple of guys in that whole side that, you know, they're very knowledgeable, observant Jews, very conservative, and they're like, Jesus, I understand. I don't think he's the son of God. I don't think he's the Messiah. I don't believe in the Trinity. But when I read Jesus in the Gospels, yeah, I get him. Paul? Oh, don't like Paul. And it was funny because on this Discord server where we do a lot of this work, you know, this one now friend of mine who lives in Southern California, he can't stand Paul and he talks very openly. And, you know, you'll find him in the comments, even in my rough drafts for sermons. You know, you're not terribly happy about this part of my, you know, because Jesus, OK, not God, not Messiah, didn't rise from the dead, no Trinity, but Paul. No, no Paul. Well, some of this leads to Paul's death. This is a huge deal. Now, for us, it doesn't seem like a big deal because very quickly the church grew and this little Jewish part is just sort of becomes invisible to us. And that's part of the issue here. What we know of this world is very hard for us to see these days because so little information exists. All right. When that business had been transacted, this gift to Jerusalem, which we will spend a lot of time talking about, Paul looked forward to launching a plan which had been taking shape in his mind over the past years with the conclusion of his apostolic mission in the Aegean lands that's around here. He must find fresh fields of conquest for Christ. In making choice of a new sphere of activity, he determined to go on being a pioneer. He would not settle down as an apostle in any place to which the gospel had already been brought. That seems to be what John really did in Ephesus, sort of settle down and people could come to him. He would not build on another man's foundation. In other words, he wouldn't go to some place and say, there's a lot of debate in terms of the relationship between Peter and the church in Rome, obviously, because that becomes key in terms of later questions about the Church of Rome versus the Church of Jerusalem and Antioch and Alexandria and all these places. So he would not settle down in one place and become basically a megachurch pastor. His choice fell on Spain, the oldest Roman province in the West, and the chief bastion of Roman civilization in that part of the world. But a journey to Spain would afford him the opportunity of gratifying a longstanding ambition, the ambition to see Rome. Now, again, Paul grows up in Tarsus, which is by virtue of him being from there, he's a Roman citizen. So half of Paul is Roman in many ways, and he wants to see Rome. Although he was a Roman citizen by birth, he had never seen the city whose freemen he was. That gets into a whole other question, which we'll have to get into at some point. How wonderful it would be to visit Rome and spend some time there, all the more wonderful because there was a flourishing church in Rome and several Christians whom Paul had met elsewhere in his travels were now resident in Rome and members of that church. The very fact that the gospel had reached Rome long before Paul himself ruled out Rome as a place where he could settle for pioneer evangelism. But he knew that he would continue his journey to Spain with all the more zeal. He could first, with all the more zeal, he could first of all refresh his spirit by some weeks of fellowship with the Christians in Rome, and then perhaps he provided, be provided by them with a base for his advance into Spain. During the early days of AD 57, therefore, he dictated to his friend Tertius. Okay, we're going to get into this question of Roman, of Paulian authorship of some of these New Testament books. Because if you read Romans and Galatians and Corinthians and Thessalonians, people read those books and they're like, wow, these books all, they use the same words, yada, yada, yada. But then if you read Ephesians and Colossians, was this written by the same person? Well, right away we know Paul used secretaries to write. If I sit down and write a letter, I no longer take a pen to paper and scratch something. My handwriting is atrocious because I sit down and I type something and I don't put it on paper and put it in an envelope to have someone transport that silly thing distance to somewhere else. That's so 1975. I do it via the internet. Paul, with his longest letter, probably would have taken 11 hours or so for him to dictate. It probably took him a lot more for him to plan out this letter because it is not just off the top of his head. Someone else wrote this down for him. And we know that from this letter. And so we suspect it of all the letters. That was also very common in the culture. A Christian secretary possibly placed at his disposal by his host Gaius, a letter destined for the Roman Christians. This letter was prepared for them, prepared them for his visit to their city and to explain the purpose of his visit. And he judged it wise while writing it to set before them a full statement of the gospel. There's that word again. He understood and proclaimed it. As he understood and proclaimed it. One reason for his setting this full statement before them may have been his awareness that his message was being misrepresented by his opponents in various places. So Paul has some from the Jewish side of his story who have not accepted Jesus, who hate him for polluting their religion. He's got other Christians who hate him for the same reason. And so it's quite likely Paul calls them Judaizers. They have been traveling in all of these places and they have gotten to Rome and they have said, there's this guy out there, Paul of Tarsus. He's really popular and he's very impressive. But he's going to tell you that Gentiles who are now trying to be incorporated into the Hebrew God's plan to save the world don't need to be circumcised or follow all of our ceremonies. Don't listen to him. So Paul writes this letter to say, I know people are talking about me. I want to tell you exactly what I think. That's what this letter is for. So he's being misrepresented by his opponents in various places and he seizes the opportunity to set the record straight. But more than that, he probably wishes to involve the Roman Christians in his ministry. He bespeaks their prayers for his safety in Judea. But if it turns out that he was not only to be imprisoned, but even to die at Jerusalem for the name of the Lord, Acts 21 13, which he doesn't, he would like to know that the continuation of his witness, especially in the Western extension to Spain, could confidently be entrusted to such a faithful body of people as the Christian community in Rome. So in other words, Paul understands he's got to go back to Jerusalem and he knows full well this may cost him his life. We read about those events in Acts 21. And so before he goes back to Jerusalem, he needs to write down in a sense his magnum opus. I've got to get this out. I've got to get it in writing. And I'm going to send it to Rome, which will likely be, and eventually did prove to be, one of the most influential centers of Christianity in the world. And that continues to this day. But I've got to get my story out to Rome, and I've got to get it down as best I can because I may die in Jerusalem when I bring this collection all the way back there. So he's got to write this book. And this book's got to be, in some ways, the quintessential formulation of how he sees this connection between the world of the Hebrews and the larger cosmopolitan Greco-Roman world. That's what the book is really going to deal with. Now next week, we spend the vast majority of our time in church talking about this Hebrew world. We're going to have to take some time and talk about this Roman world because if we don't understand the Roman world, we're not going to understand this book written to the Romans. Okay? So, any questions? We don't know if he got to Spain. We don't know if he got to Spain. Because, so, Luke ends Acts at a certain place, and it kind of feels, I mean, I tend to lean towards early dating for a lot of these books because why wouldn't Luke finish the story of Paul with his execution under Nero? The book sort of stops. You almost get the sense that Luke wanted to get this book out. So we don't know if Paul got to Spain or not. Some people think he did. Some people think he didn't. And we know he eventually is killed in Rome under Nero. So if you remember the story, and we'll have to get into this, Nero is his own other character. You know, Rome burns. Nero scapegoats the Christians. You know, Peter and Paul are nice showpieces for, see, I know how to deal with Christians, and that'll continue. But we don't know whether or not he got to Spain. But it's really interesting. You know, you look at life and you think, why are there so many of these chaotic, random things in life that don't seem to make any sense? If Paul didn't fear for his life to one degree or another, if Paul didn't really want to impact these people, he might not have written this book. And if Paul didn't write this book, I don't know that Christianity would have had the shape that it did. So Paul was on, was along for the ride the way we are with our lives. Why do these things happen? I don't know. But because they happened the way they happened, we have the book of Romans. Because we have the book of Romans, Christianity takes the turns it does. Origen reads it in a certain way. Aquinas reads it in a certain way. Luther reads it in a certain way. Calvin reads it in a certain way. And we're going to read it in a Sacramento way. So, any other questions? Alright, so next week on to Rome. And we're going to talk about some mythology and some history, because I'm going to start telling these stories and you're just going to be like, you're going to start drawing connections to this world. And you didn't know why you had those connections, but they all get pulled to us through this big stream. Alright, let's pray. Lord, we believe that you are king of the world. And we believe that Jesus is Lord in a way that Caesar was not. Which is why in this room today, 2,000 years later, we say Jesus is Lord. And we don't say Caesar is Lord. And there's not a single temple to Caesar Augustus in Sacramento, California. So Lord, we pray that you would continue to work your spirit through us, as you did through Paul, as you do through your church, and that you form us and shape us into Christ by your spirit. That Christ's spirit inhabits our presence individually and communally. Help us to grow in you as we continue to study this amazing book that you have given us. So hear our prayer in the name of Jesus. Amen. Alright, Rick. Thank you.