https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=YeLuoZFin24

 Hi, this is Paul and it's Friday so it's Rough Draft for Sunday. Rough Draft for Sunday is where I walk through my current edit of the sermon I'm planning on preaching on Sunday. We're in the third week of Advent. Many of you know I spent a week on vacation back in Whitenessville, Massachusetts and I went actually to two services last week. Today I worship at Pleasant Street CRC, which is the church that baptized my mother and my mother currently attends. And a former classmate of my sister who passed away actually was preaching. He's the Christian school teacher and John did a wonderful job and the theme of the sermon was looking for peace in God. And he used a lot of good PowerPoint and I very much enjoyed the sermon. After that week we went over to Wellesley College and we attended, I won't say participated although we did sing, we attended a service of lessons and carols. Now that's a traditional service this time of year and there was a, the music was tremendous. There was a wonderful choir made up of the women of Wellesley College. There were a number of little homilies spread throughout the service given by the Unitarian person and the Protestant person and the Catholic person and some person from some other religious tradition and the place was fully packed out. We in fact got there early so we could get good seats in the balcony and the chapel they have there is gorgeous. I noted that I couldn't find crosses or any kind of specific religious symbology or ornamentation but the symbolism of the place itself was designed to somehow reflect the cathedral but I think that they imagined by avoiding specific religious symbolism perhaps they can maintain their so-called non-sectarian perspective. I listened very carefully to all of the little homilies because I was quite interested in what they were going to say and I noticed that they were all pretty circumscribed about getting specific. One of the things they couldn't edit out was in fact the words of the texts that they read. Texts from the Gospel of Luke, texts from the prophet Isaiah. Those texts weren't shy about naming God or talking about Jesus or declaring him Savior or announcing the names of God as were preached about in the Pleasant Street Church, wonderful counselor, mighty God, everlasting Father, Prince of Peace but every time they had to insert their own words it was pretty clear they were following a certain line which let's not have God be too masculine or too real or too interventionist and basically the summary of most of the little homilies they gave is that your hope is in yourself and in reforming the federal government and there was a fair amount of hand-wringing about the present administration so on and so forth. That reminded me of the Greta Vosper situation in the United Church of Canada and just this past week someone sent me an email regarding the current status of that controversy and so as I was working on my video about the John MacArthur Ben Shapiro thing I poked around a little bit more in this and found a very interesting article in the UC Observer in 2016 about how this whole thing came to be. It all began with a prayer. The day after the tax, those are the Charlie Hebdo attacks, the church posted a message on its website, I imagine the denomination, from the then moderator Barry Reverend Gary Patterson praying for all affected by the Paris shooting. Posting it was nothing out of the ordinary. In fact, most denominations do this kind of thing when there's a crisis or a shooting or some kind of tragedy. It was nothing out of the ordinary. Disturbing or tragic world events often prompt an official response from the United Church. Gracious God, the prayer began. By the light of faith, lead us to seek comfort, compassion and peace in the face of escalating violence around the world. The prayer wasn't much different from the kinds of things that I observed at the Wellesley service. What was unusual about the prayer was the response it elicited from one of Patterson's fellow ministers, Reverend Greta Vosper, a minister of Toronto, Wests Hill United, who was also the author, speaker, blogger and for the past several years a self-described atheist. Quickly weighed in online with an open letter to Patterson, she questioned his reference to a supernatural being whose purposes can be divine. Apparently Reverend Patterson's much scrubbed prayer, in fact, was too much of a prayer for her. A being whose purposes can be defined and called it a belief that has led to innumerable tragedies throughout the timeline of human history and will continue to do so until it fades from our ravaged memory. Hmm, sounds like Khrushchev in the dustbin of history. Having a supernatural being at the center of the church's moral framework, Vosper wrote, means we allow others to take the same claim and must defend their rights to do so even if their choices and acts are radically different from our own. In other words, Christians who confer divine authority on their God open the door to Islamic who can do the same with theirs. Although I would imagine Greta Vosper taking a step out of this game would likely not dissuade any Islamists from the games that they play. I urge you to lead our church towards freedom from such idolatrous belief. That's a very interesting word choice. The letter continued. It concluded, now is the time to speak clearly and bravely. And that of course launched all of the controversy. I watched another video from another pastor from the United Church who noted that it was only Greta Vosper who would use the term heresy trial. The church never used such a term. But it seems quite clear that she wanted to use this rather benign little, I would say frankly weak little prayer as an occasion for promoting the agenda that she wished to promote. There's so many interesting thoughts that her actions raise in mind as if the Paris police failed to stop the Charlie Hebdo attack because they're too busy praying instead of policing. I really don't think that prayer got in the way. And I've never really seen Christians. Do Christians not address the immediate needs because they look to God? I've never really seen that. Often when I go and pray for people who are in the hospital, it's because they are in the hospital and because they have gone to the hospital seeking doctors and seeking medical help, but they also expect that me as their pastor will come and pray for them in the hospital. Now, did a little bit of background. I've always kind of wanted to look up these numbers. Comparison between CA versus CA. CA is obviously the postal code that we have for California in the United States, but often I know a lot of Canadians and I'm often in conversation with them. CA is abbreviation for Canada. Canada has 3.8 million square miles of territory. California 169,000 square miles of territory. Canada is a whole lot bigger than California. Although Canada has 36.9 million people, California has 39 million people. So California, despite its far smaller size, has a few more people than Canada. Canada has a GDP in 2017 of $1.6 trillion. California has $2.8 trillion in GDP in 2017. Now the United Church of Canada is the largest Protestant denomination in Canada, the second largest denomination after the Roman Catholic Church. It began in the early 20th century as a union of Methodists, Presbyterians, Congregationalists, and Brethren. And they reached the peak of their, they reached their peak in 1964 when Canada had only 19 million people with 1.1 million members. Today about 132,000 people attend. That's a pretty dramatic decline of almost 90% of their worshipping body when the population of Canada has grown by as nearly double. And then the question was should Reverend Vosper be disciplined or removed? Well in 2016 a sub-executive recognized that this was not the decision that some people had wanted. Some will be disappointed and angry that this action has been taken, believing that the United Church may be turning its back on a history of openness and inclusivity. Others have been frustrated that the United Church has allowed someone to be a minister in a Christian church while disavowing the major aspects of the Christian faith. The question that the Church actually brought to Reverend Vosper was can you affirm the vows that you took when you were ordained? And the answer was no. And as of 2018 the Church basically decided to not push it. Apparently some lawyers got together and arrived at a settlement and Reverend Vosper's cried the rest of the church just shrugs and goes about its business of what seems to be a long-term decline. Now, I don't want to be unfair to the United Church of Canada. I saw some other videos of some other pastors who are talking about renewal and some good things that are happening. Most of the renewal, ironically to what I've been putting forward in this little treatment, most of the renewal is happening in places where people are doing things like reading the Bible and looking at discipleship and trying to figure out what prayer means and how to practice it. Now the text this week as our Advent text comes from the prophet Zephaniah. Zephaniah doesn't seem to be in any way bashful of talking about God. Sing, daughter Zion. Sing aloud, Israel. Be glad and rejoice with all your heart. Daughter Jerusalem, the Lord has taken away your punishment. He has turned back your enemy. The Lord, the King of Israel, is with you. Never again will you fear any harm. On that day they will say to Jerusalem, do not fear Zion. Do not let your hands hang limp. The Lord your God is with you. The mighty warrior who saves. He will take great delight in you. In his love, he will no longer rebuke you but will rejoice over you with singing. I will remove from you all who mourn over the loss of your appointed festivals, which is a burden and a reproach for you. At that time, I will deal with all who oppressed you. I will rescue the lame. I will gather the exiles. I will give them praise and honor in every land where they have suffered shame. At that time, I will gather you. At that time, I will bring you home. I will give you honor and praise among all the people of the earth when I restore your fortunes before your very eyes, says the Lord. Now this clearly would be something that Reverend Vosper would find highly offensive and terribly inappropriate. She imagines to the feelings of those who suffer and those who are poor and those who are downtrodden. Now this time of year, we usually pick our text from the common lectionary, which in the liturgical season of Advent has text like this. The downside of choosing this method throughout most of the year, I usually prefer to go through books as such, is that very few people who are listening to this probably know anything at all about Zephaniah. He's one of the 12 minor prophets. Well, the book itself isn't very long and you could read through it in a matter of minutes, and you might discover that this is about the only upbeat section of the entire book. Most of the book is about the day of the Lord. And Zephaniah prophesies to the southern kingdom of Judah that God will bring calamity and destruction upon it in judgment of their abandonment of their covenant with him. And in fact, just at the end of the book, as is common of many of the prophets, there's a word of hope that after the suffering, after the day of the Lord, Now the day of the Lord is, well, it's if you look at the end of the Bible and you see the book of Revelation, it's singular, not plural. Revelation is the English translation of the Greek word apocalypse, which essentially means revealing. And so what happens on the day of the Lord again and again in the Bible and the book of Revelation points to the final day of the Lord, is that all is revealed and what is revealed is the truth. And the truth is that Israel has abandoned her covenant. The truth is that Israel continued the rebellion that was begun in the Garden of Eden. The truth is that Israel has not lived up to the agreement that she herself agreed to and that God in fact will judge her. But what God does in the end is say, yes, you will be judged, you will be punished, but you will also be restored. One of the things that you see at this lovely ending of the book is that in fact in the prophecy, all of the wealthy and the powerful of Jerusalem are prophesied to be carted away as they were to Babylon and those who are left are the dregs, those who are too feeble or poor for the Babylonians to bother in fact carting them away. Now there are a number of ironies in this. The imagined descendant version of Christianity that the Wellesley service seemed to imply and Reverend Bosper seems to imagine doesn't want to say God's name or even profess belief, lauds the biblical theme of, but yet lauds, I should change that sentence, it's not really working out. Let's try this over again. The imagined descendant version of Christianity that doesn't want to say God's name or even profess belief, yet lauds the biblical theme of God's concern for the weak, the poor, the marginalized and the dispossessed. Yet they are offended at actually praying to this God for divine historical relief. What you don't find in the Bible is that the poor are in any way embarrassed or slow to cry out to God. We not only had prayers through history, but governments, policies and programs. What real reason should the poor have to imagine that now suddenly the wealthy and the powerful will get serious about dressing their suffering or are even able to do so if in fact they want to. What so much of this assumes is that somehow we ourselves are founts of generosity and that if there is a God, he's negligent or uncaring or doesn't care for the poor. Now, this is an alarming set of beliefs given the fact that this is the only part of the Bible that they seem to want to affirm. Yet they can't in fact allow this God to believe so or do so. Yet why on earth should the poor of the earth imagine that they're going to get a better deal than the poor people over the years have gotten themselves. In fact, in 1964 when the United Church of Canada was at its peak, LBJ had his war on poverty while he at the same time fought the war in Vietnam. Now, folks are going to have different ideas of the effectiveness of the war of poverty, but one of the things that didn't end, that it didn't end in fact was poverty itself. Are people really slothful about their needs? If you lack food, don't you look for it. If you are sick, don't you see a doctor. If you can, if you have the money for it. If you need money or if you need money, don't you look for work or some sort of assistance. Don't governments build armies to defend their people? Don't you call the police or fire department if you're in need? Is there somehow some binary relationship between all these things and prayer? I've never found it to be so, either among the rich or the poor. But here's an obvious irony. The churches and the people that have given up calling on God are usually the ones with the wealth and the power. Wellesley College's endowment, I just looked it up, it's about $2 billion. Maybe they don't ask because they feel they don't need. But in my experience, the suffering, the struggling, the in trouble people of the world, they're the ones that cry out to God. Most of whom know they can't or won't find relief from their government or their neighbors. And so they call out to him. And what we find in the Bible is that it asserts God listens and it asserts God will act. And the trial that all of us have to deal with is waiting and the question of faith. Will he act? Will he come? Will he move? Will he in fact do for us what we are unwilling and or unable to do for ourselves? The powerful and the comfortable declare we can't trust in God to act so we must perpetually admonish to people to do so. Do those who look to God not act? Is that same Bible that gives us the words to ask God and promises his action fail to admonish? In fact, just a generation ago, people were complaining. Oh, the Bible is just full of admonitions. We want some happy stuff. One of the videos that treated the ongoing decline of the church in Canada brought in a scholar from Wilford Laureate University. And the scholar was the reporter at the end of the piece asked, well, why should we care if the church in Canada is disappearing? He said, well, the church does a lot of stuff that nobody else does. What do you mean? People who attend religious services give three times on average what people who don't attend religious services give. In fact, if the churches go away, they will be missed. And, you know, who will mostly be who will mostly miss them? Probably the poor. Now, humanity's capacity to rescue ourselves seems to remain about the same. Even though we are blessed with greater wealth and technology than our ancestors, the fact of our suffering and our ability to undo our own messes seems to remain about the same. I've always been alarmed by the fact that when I worked amongst desperately poor Haitian people, I never once heard of a suicide. But coming back to North America, I find it's the rich that give up on life. What does that say about us? Now, in Advent, we remember the first coming of our Savior, Jesus, and look to the second coming. The church has always acted to meet needs where it can, but recognizes that our neediness goes way beyond our capacity to fix ourselves and restore our crises. I want to add something to this. I've also noticed, in fact, that it's those who are most active themselves in working with the poor and the distressed are often those most keenly aware that for all our wealth and knowledge, it is so often the fact that we are unable to relieve the kinds of suffering behind doors locked from the inside. How many times don't you sit with someone who is in severe distress? And so often the reasons for their distress are themselves. And as much as we like to wade in with money or advice or treatment or something like this, we don't have the keys to unlock their addictions, their obsessions, or whatever it is that plagues them. The church continues to proclaim, God hears, God cares. The church continues to proclaim that God hears, God cares, God will restore. That care is seen in the risky and costly mission of his son, which exposes how cruel we really are. When the perfect man comes to earth, the idea most at hand is to shut him up and get rid of him. We are seen not just to be bad rescuers, but really the perpetrators of our own crimes. How should we respond? Now, what's interesting about the Bible is that we should respond in worship. We should respond in prayer, but the Bible also tells us to respond in deed. John said to the crowds coming out to be baptized by him, you brood of vipers who warned you to flee from the coming wrath. They probably kind of sheepishly said, well, you did, because John was out there proclaiming the day of the Lord, the day of his revelation, the day of his coming. Produce fruit in keeping with repentance and do not begin to say to yourselves, we have Abraham as our father, for I tell you that out of these stones, God can raise up children for Abraham. The axe is already at the root of the tree, and every tree that does not produce good fruit will be cut down and thrown into the fire. This is a message that you wouldn't even dare hear from the service like I heard at Wellesley. What should we do? the crowd asked. Anyone who has two shirts should share one with the one who has none, and anyone who has food should do the same. Even tax collectors came to be baptized. Teachers, they said, what should we do? Now, even tax collectors, because they were the ones who were collaborating with the oppressors. They came to repent, and they probably left the baptism service and went on collecting taxes. But John has a word for them. Teacher, they asked, what should we do? Don't collect any more than you are required to, he told them. Then some soldiers asked him, what should we do? He replied, don't extort money and don't accuse people falsely. Be content with your pay. These don't seem like radical virtues. These don't seem like crazy things. Even John the Baptist, who seems like an extremist, is not calling for the overthrow of the tyranny. The people were waiting expectantly and were all wondering in their hearts if John might be the Messiah. John answered them all, I baptize you with water. But one who is more powerful than I will come, the straps of whose sandals I am not worthy to untie. They were probably expecting some kind of brawl. He will baptize you with the Holy Spirit and fire. His winnowing fork is in his hand to clear his threshing floor and to gather the wheat into his barn. But he will burn up the chaff with unquenchable fire. And with many other words, John exhorted the people and proclaimed the good news to them. Is this good news? Well, in fact, Jesus does come. Jesus does come the first time not to bring judgment, but to bear judgment. And he comes the second time to fill his barn with wheat.