https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=GP2k3GRaJEQ

 John. Turned us on. So go ahead. Oh, stream is live. Nevermind. Oh, nevermind. Oh, actually, you know, maybe this, you know, whatever the internet. So Jordan Peterson is about to start his book tour for the book that hasn't even come out yet. Right. We Who Wrestle Against God is and Chicago is one of his early dates is here in like mid February, something like that. Why in the world you would want to come to Chicago in mid February? I don't want to be here. But um, do you think that there is any way that we could reach out to him on behalf of our meetup group? And either get a chance to talk to him or something like that. Because at this point, we're like a four year running Jordan Peterson meetup. And but I don't know. I always try. We can always try. Yeah, I wouldn't give it I wouldn't give it a lot of Wouldn't invest too much hope or If you look at that, if you look at that schedule, I mean, again, it's typical Jordan. It's like every other day, another city. And he that's what he likes to do. He clearly likes to do he's got his wife going with him often on this. And I mean, they live. I mean, these these are the kind of people that live on airplanes and you're not going to see them on Delta. That's yeah, I guess. Yeah, your invite got lost in the mail. What kind of conservative Catholic are you, Luke? What? I am not a conservative Catholic, nor are you. Where are the conservatives on this thing? I mean, it's just it's just me and Sam. Yeah, we're the other we're the other even guests. Cal said he was there and now he isn't. And I better drop the link in the email again just to make sure that people can come. Well, let's let's get started. Anything to say before we have Catholics on to defend themselves? Well, well, well, well, well, what were your first impressions of especially the because you were I mean, it was the Catholic I posted on Twitter the picture of myself, Bethel and and Aaron. I mean, you were the guys that brought us all together. So what were your impression of Aaron's video? I thought it was pretty right. I, you know, he who calls us all the time, sent that video to me as well. I think he said to both. I don't know if you got sent it multiple times. Hank sent me that video. I don't know. Hank, Hank is hard to ignore. Hank is hard to ignore. Yeah. And of course, anything that makes Catholicism look good or talk about Catholic or Protestants converting to Catholicism will catch his attention. That's although it wasn't I mean, Aaron Wren wasn't necessarily the most flattering or positive in talking about this sort of conversion to Catholicism or orthodoxy from Protestantism. No. But I mean, for the most part, it was describing something that everyone in this corner is very familiar with. But at the intellectual level. So why does it seem like intellectual conservative Catholicism has its act together more than any sort of institutionalized conservative Protestantism? I think that that's probably true. And that does jive with my experience in elite conservative Christian places. But it's not like the Protestants have no game. There is something. But I do think we're sort of outgunned. My basic thesis would be and I'll mean this as a compliment that Catholicism has done a better job by not splintering of keeping the elite and the middle and the grassroots united in one institution and not allowing for schism and splintering even though there are factions that might not like each other. They're at least technically underneath the same church. Whereas Protestantism, mostly because of the fundamentalist modernism fight in the early 20th century and then the complete gap between the mainline and evangelicalism and fundamentalism on the other hand, has just made it harder for the grassroots of conservative evangelicalism or Protestantism to nourish the trees and the flowers that bloom into intellectuals. And so when you come to these elite institutions, there's basically no footprint on the ground from conservative evangelical institutions aside from a couple of campus fellowships that are doing better work than they get given credit for. But it's still, yeah. So I think really Protestantism's propensity to schism quicker than the Catholics do has sort of caused, keeps causing the high flying evangelicals to get cut off from their grassroots in a way that Catholics don't. That's as far as I can tell part of it. But I also really liked what Aaron said when these Catholics do have a good apologetics game where they're like, look at these things that are Catholic. Oh, all those other things, that's just American. It's like, well, what do you mean? All right. If we're going to do a fair accounting of what comes from Protestantism and what comes from Catholicism, we have to at least give the Protestants credit for all the things that they've done and not just call that liberalism or America or common sense or whatever you would attribute it to. Yeah. But Sam, remember that Catholics weren't considered proper Americans until Kennedy pretended, said what he said in Houston in 1959. I mean, I think that's a significant part of this conversation. I mean, Catholics were always sort of always had dual loyalties to America. So I'm not terribly surprised then that that. I know that Rand's take was what it was, you know, as sort of the voice. I mean, he knows and he knows what the mainstream and the main line was. I think Catholics did, too. I think that the story of Catholicism since Kennedy has been the desire to either the desire to act out the truth of that claim, right, that that Catholics can be as as American as, you know, a Methodist. And and and and, you know, I have my own sort of take on why I think that that has probably been a bad Catholic play. But, you know, a priest friend of mine and colleague has always said, you know, that never underestimate the desire of of a Catholic and especially a Catholic clergyman to be accepted in the mainstream. And in my lifetime, I think there's been a very distinct generational divergence. You know, if you look at sort of Boomer Prelates, Boomer Prelates, Prelates very much wanted to be of the spirit of Vatican, too, and very much sort of in that John Courtney Murray askew vein of we can really be fully American, too. Right. Because if you call at the end of the 19th century, you know, Americanism was an explicitly named heresy in in the Catholic Church. Right. So then so that in the mid century with the Second Vatican Council, you know, there was this moment where, no, we can be just as good. Right. So the Boomer priest sort of drank that deeply and Boomer Catholics drank that very deeply in my generation, somewhere in the midst of the, you know, the pontificate of John Paul II, you know, especially toward the latter half over the middle to the latter half of it. A lot of Gen X priests and people like me realized that maybe the sort of the play to the mainstream was going to come at the expense of Catholic identity. And so I think what you're seeing playing out now in the Catholic in Catholic circles is, you know, you know, very much, you know, the Gen Xers want to be conservative and roughly speaking here, right, the Gen the zoomers want to be tried all in shred, like the heck with this Vatican to thing, the heck with this, you know, sort of quasi Lutheran liturgy. You know, we want to go back to like Bell smells, you know, verticality, you know, all of that kind of those distinctive. So I don't know where I've probably talked too much. That was all right. Well, I mean, yeah, if I can jump in, I had I had a student who was Catholic and it was it wasn't a Catholic school. So he felt sort of lonely. He was kind of surrounded by kind of very low Protestant kids. But he and I could always chat, you know, because I followed the stuff that he followed. And he wasn't having like a crisis of faith or anything like that. But he was just very discouraged with all the, you know, like he would rant about guitar masses, you know, that Francis and this and that. So he would kind of think out loud like, yeah, I don't know. Maybe when I grow up, I'll try to find an ordinary at church or something, you know. And I just felt, yeah, I just felt bummed because, you know, here's this kid, you know, super bright. You know, like every, you know, every Catholic mama, you know, would would want to have a bright young Catholic kid like this. And the church is, you know, edging him out by doing stupid stuff. Yeah. Yeah, that's the sort of the acceleration. I mean, you can sort of look at the decade of Francis's pontificate as a kind of accelerationist project to basically do a kind of radical A-B test between, you know, trad or not. Right. So they sort of burrowing out this sort of this middle ground that I grew up in, which was kind of conservative. You know, there's these two schools of post conciliar theology. There's the conciliam school and the resource among school. Right. And the conciliam is basically progressive and the resource among is basically a kind of progressive retrieval of traditional isms. Right. So it's not entirely neat. But basically, John Paul II, Benedict XVI were sort of conservative progressive traditionalists. Right. And Francis has been sort of more in the line of John the 23rd, Paul VI as a kind of, you know, it's a new day. It's a new springtime. You know, we're going to go out with the old and we're going to sort of do a new thing. It's going to be the Latin Mass. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. And so I think that's why American conservative Catholics is this establishment that Paul, you mentioned in the in your videos. You know, I think that's why they're so flat footed in and unsure as to how to even comment on the Francis pontificate, because it had been brought up in the school of John Paul II and Benedict XVI, which basically said that, you know, no, the proper interpretation of the Second Vatican Council is not rupture, but continuity. Now you can play all kinds of games with those words rupture and continuity and good Lord, we could do that forever, but it would bore everybody. But but that's basically it. Right. And so Francis seems to be very clearly I'm not even going to play dance games anymore. But Francis is very much of the sort of the hermeneutics of disruption that Vatican II is a radically new thing. Right. There is not, you know, and so you'll hear some lip service to continuity type things. But ultimately, by his appointments and by his projects, he's clearly wanting to do Vatican II for real. I've seen people joke that he's the first Episcopalian pope. Right. Well, and that's in you. You will hear both both trads and conservatives be like, look, you know, we're not really sure what Francis is doing. I mean, it looks to us like he's just doing, like you said, a kind of version of, you know, Anglicanism or something like that. Again, no offense to my Anglican friends. I mean, I have a tremendous amount of respect. But but that's really sort of been the thing. Right. So they looked at the liberalization, say, of the Presbyterians and the Methodists and the Episcopalians and everybody in this country. Right. Which spawn the originals rip right with evangelicals away from the main line. You know, the Catholics are sort of sitting like, well, they tried it like they really did. They they they really did give it a go. And it doesn't seem to have worked. So why do we think that we're going to sort of make this thing work? And oh, by the way, there's this thing called the deposit of faith that you're kind of pretending doesn't exist anymore. So, again, I'm not sure how accurate that is. I'm just sort of giving voices to the feeling of people who care about these sorts of things. Kale, I was going to ask if you read the novel mechanical for Leibowitz. Oh, yeah, yeah, of course. Yeah. Yeah. I was just talking to I introduced a young friend of mine to it for the first time. It's very that's that's a real boy. I wish I could read this again for the first time. Yeah. Yeah, true. So so just for people who aren't familiar, it's a classic sort of dystopian Catholic novel. And it's all about nuclear holocaust. So there's a nuclear holocaust which wipes civilization off the map and it has to be rebuilt. So the world is it's cycling through the new dark ages, the new enlightenment and then the new futurism. Yeah, it's funny. You hear podcasters talking about speed running, you know, using a video game motif. But can't believe this is speed running Western Civ. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. It's absolutely fascinating. And the constant is this little monastery out in the desert of the American West. And it's just still there, like no matter what happens, the monks are still doing their thing, preserving the flame of the church. And it's an utterly tragic novel to read now because it's sort of built on this sort of platonic ideal of Catholic basedness. You know, it's just like it's all about what you want the Catholic Church to be. Right. You know, like the priests are fighting for Catholic social teaching. You know, they're telling people not to kill themselves, even if they're suffering from radiation poisoning. They, you know, like it then at the end, they go into outer space and they're going to preserve the church in space. So like there's a pope and you just assume that this pope is like this rock solid conservative track guy. And so but my young friend, it's not Catholic, but he said, man, I like I almost might become Catholic now after after reading this, even though I'm a Baptist, because, you know, the vibes, you know, it's sacrament and all that stuff. But then you kind of stumble back out into the real world and it's Francis, it's the guitar masses, it's James Martin, it's the synodality. And it's like there is no unified church anymore. There's the pretense of unity, but it's really just as all over the place as any Protestant denomination. Right. And I think that's the dark night that a lot of conservatives and trads are kind of facing right now. And I'd be lying if I say that I'd include myself right that, you know, I sort of call it bulwarkism. You know, the kind of bulwarkism that that made me fall back in love with the church after a kind of teenage rebellion against the church was that it was like the thing. Like it was, you know, almost a kind of instantiation of a platonic form. And if I could just hue myself to it, then I could weather all of the inanities and the absurdities and the contradictions of modernity. And so I think what you're seeing, Paul, you probably see a lot of this actually in this little corner. And I think this is also been a great boon for our Orthodox friends because basically people held on to the sort of the claims of what the church made about herself. And now they're looking at but it doesn't look like as Bethel is just sort of rattle off all the things that again, I kind of based Zoomer is looking at. It's like this doesn't pass the sniff test. Why are you keep shoving James Martin in my face? I thought this stuff actually mattered. And then and so then they so like so OK, so then all of a sudden, if if my ecclesiology is blown up to smithereens and, you know, this is just bad theologies all over the place, why don't I just go find like a really great weird super like cosmic liturgy like, oh, I don't know, Eastern Orthodoxy because I tried the Latin mass and oh, you know, that got ripped away from me brutally, by the way. You know, and so I look, I think that that is again, I'm starting to realize that maybe nobody really believes in theology. You know, maybe really is you brought up the vibe word that though, but I think that maybe vibes actually are the thing ultimately. And we just sort of retrofit theology to make sense out of it. Now, the purpose of the stream isn't necessarily to host the the particular miseries of the current state of civil war and American Catholicism, which is a perennial war, it seems. But the part of part of how this came up is for me, we're in this moment where Rob Reiner, Phil Visser, David France, Kristen Cobes-Damey all decide to get together to make a movie to save America from Christianity. And especially from dread Christian nationalists when then I'm watching the Ren video and it's like, oh, those sneaky Catholics. That's that's that's like the old Jesuit playbook, you know, and here here everybody's pointing to, you know, everybody's pointing to all the the people on January 6 in the Washington Mall with crosses and and Jesus stuff. And it's the Catholics behind the whole thing. Well, and you know, I was going to comment, to be fair. So like you mentioned, the sneaky Catholics sneaking out to the Supreme Court, that kind of thing. There there is also a ton of hate for those justices. I mean, like when Amy Coney Barrett was going through her hearings, you saw, oh, there's the anti Catholic prejudice coming out. So it will come out of the out of the woodworks whenever it's mostly come from Catholics now, because it's it's it's also occurred to me that Catholics are sort of like Muslims now. I mean, or or the don't don't make me look bad. I know I go to Catholic Church, but I'm not Amy Coney Barrett. Well, those people aren't really Catholic. It depends what you mean by really Catholic. You're more likely to go to a Catholic church. You're more likely to meet someone like that than you are to meet. I'm more Catholic than those people. Right. I mean, do we want to talk about, you know, devout Catholic Joe Biden? I mean, do we really want to descend into this? You know, right. But I think what Bethel brings up is actually a good point. But, Sam, I think you rebutted this. Look, they go to a Catholic church. Right. I think that's interesting. I think the question is, how am I supposed to parse these? What kind of glasses should I wear so that I can go throughout the real? You know, maybe Judaism could be actually interesting. That's because, yeah, I mean, I think, yeah. Identity is really interesting. I think there's a tendency for people to say, oh, well, yeah, I'm Catholic in a little bit. The same way people say, oh, yeah, Jewish. Right. It's almost I was just going to say there's an ethnic overlay. I think the words are like completely, you know, and so for me, it's weird because, you know, I'm half Jewish. Right. So it's it's you know, so like Zeldin's a Jewish name. On your father's side or your dad's side? My dad's side. So I know it doesn't count. But, but but anyway, you know, and that was very much part of our identity, like the extended Zeldin family in Louisiana. Like, we were Jewish. Nobody ever went to nobody ever darkened synagogue. Right. I mean, but we were we were Jewish very much in the way that you see Eric and Brett talk about it. You know, more Eric than Brett, to be fair. Right. You know, so it was like, you know, nobody believes in this stuff, but like this is what we are. And so, you know, so like my dad, when he converted to Catholicism after he married my mom and after my brother, my older brother was born, that was like a dark sheep of the family moment. Like they never treated him the same way because, you know, he he was a traitor. Right. To to try. And so so for me, as a kind of half Catholic, you know, whatever, you know, you want to call that, you know, the this sort of this ethnic overlays always made no sense to me because I was already kind of like a mutt anyway. Try leaving the Catholic Church, try and see how your relatives treat you, including your own parents after you left the Catholic Church. You know, there is that same sort of ethnic bristling of the against the apostates who dare, you know, suggest leaving. But I think it's, you know, it's similar to what Paul's experiencing in the CRC. There are the ethnic Dutch people who feel like this is their birthright and that their identity within the church trumps whatever propositions we think we're actually going to come down on at the end of the day. Let's be real. That's deeper than the propositions and way, way, way more Catholics who think that way than there are Dutch people. And in the summer, we all saw that, you know, with the with the clip that that that Paul brought out an extended clip in which the the the female pastor gets up and says, you know, is there a place? Is there a place for my gay son? Who was that? Paul was there a place for my gay son in our church? You know, I don't even have to be just just a son who can't abide being in a church that right. That's right. That's right. You know, like that. That is, you know, again, it's like you're not making a theological argument, actually, you know, it's it's a it's just weird. I don't know. You know what I'm saying, Paul? It's like it's a it's a it's a version of that, that you're not making a confessional even though it's saying my son can't abide to be in a church who would suggest that sex matters. right? But it's a family. I don't know. It's complicated. It's not the she-how could you tell those sorts of people that they aren't Catholic, right? They're like, what the heck are you talking about? Well, right. My ancestors have been Catholic since Saint Patrick scared away the snakes. Right. So like, how dare you at some way? The problem is, the problem is that-no matter what we believe or what we do or how we behave, that part of our identity is deeper than anything you have the right to criticize me over. And I have some sympathy for what they're saying. I know where that idea comes from and I've seen that up close. I mean, you understand it psychologically, but I think Catholicism isn't in fact the same as Judaism. I mean, there can be a meaningful sense in which somebody can be Jewish without believing anything because it is the ethnicity. There's an ethnic thing going on there that there really isn't. And just saying, well, my family are all Irish or whatever. I mean, that's not the same thing. Well, I think one thing that I think is interesting is zooming out a little bit in time and thinking about this. Because the spicy comment I left in the video was basically to the tune of the Wasps had way more reasons to distrust the Catholics prior to Vatican II than we're capable of imagining really very well, unless we separate ourselves from our current post-Vatican II historical age. And that it wasn't just ethnic or denominational prejudice, although there was that. Like, you know, the Wasps didn't like the Irish when they started coming over. That is true. But there was more to it than just that in the Protestant establishment distrusting Catholicism. Because Catholicism, for a really, I mean, we also have to remember America once upon a time was puny and weak and was scared that the old world would come and take it back over and ruin the experiment that it had started. And it felt very vulnerable to that. And for good reason. And we had a Catholic front up in Quebec and a Catholic front down in Mexico. And like, that wasn't a joke. And that we were scared that the Spanish or whoever could come and try and take away democracy from us Protestants who had worked so hard and had put so much on the line to risk this experiment. And it's only now that we think America is invincible. That's laughable. But America was not always invincible. Democracy was not always just assumed. And that so many of the assumptions built into democracy and American democracy are so Protestant to the core that Catholicism was striking right at the core of those ideals. And that there was a decent amount of, I would even say, justified civilizational fear of old world Catholicism coming back and taking American democracy away from the Americans. Yeah, that's true. That's historically true. And what's interesting about this now is now with the recession of modernity, the Enlightenment, a bunch of these things. I mean, one Orthodox person on Twitter is like, why do you have any Orthodox here? And it's like, they're not even in the conversation in America. They are in the, but this Christian national conversation though is, I think James Lindsay was right that, you know, this is a number that's being done on a bunch of conservative Protestants that haven't quite thought this through. There's a number of other conservative Protestants that are going to say, you want to label with this? You want to label this? You want to call me this? Really? You really want to give me this label? You want to give us this label? You want to have this fight? You know, that sort of Doug Wilson's thing. But there's, there's guys, if you've been following the Dusty Devers win in Oklahoma. No, I don't know who Dusty Devers is. Oh, oh, oh. Okay. Well, this is relevant. So, so Dusty Devers is a pastor who ran for the Oklahoma Senate. And, and he just won. He had an upset victory. So, I mean, if you look up clips of these guys' speeches, I mean, his speeches are sermons. You know, I mean, like, he's just like, he's just bringing it. He's just like coming up and like delivering these kind of like fire and brimstone political speech sermons. And people are pointing to this guy like, here we go. It's happening. The Christian nationalist takeover, you know. So, yeah. But, but there's, there's so much in here in terms of the, the WASP protestants were able to sort of, you know, there's no establishment, there's no church establishment at the federal level. And the states sort of put them away at the beginning of the 19th century. But the, I mean, the protestants were able to sort of say, we're just going to do a lot of winking because we really do all have the same culture and we really do all have the same goals, at least close enough. And we can fight about the details, but when it's all said and done, this is sort of our platform and our program. And it's, you know, in the middle of the 20th century, it's so funny listening to Steven Pinker Laud, the universal declaration of human rights. And I'm just thinking, well, you know, those WASP protestants, they smuggled that sucker hard. Well, it's so shocking to me. I was, I was listening to that on the car. I had to drive some students up, up to Boston for the break today, to the airport. And I was listening to you, Paul, and I am, I am amazed at how much of a straw man history those guys have to have to make the kind of claims that they make about, well, now we like, you know, we, we believe we should think about our problems and apply thinking to our problems. And you're just like, good Lord, do you know the straw man that you've created for like the entire history of humankind? And you're going to say that this was sort of like burped out in the last like half second of human time? I'm just amazing, just amazing. So, but we're at this moment now where, okay, the WASPs, they went from lions to foxes. And, you know, and I'm listening to the rest of history, the Bay of Pigs, you know, why, I mean, Kennedy's, I mean, Kennedy's really sort of at the cusp here of so many things, because he's the first Catholic president, but he's darn WASPy. And he spends most of his time in England. He's in his, his father, you know, I mean, and at New England, boarding schools, right? I mean, like, that's a real thing. He did not see the thing that nobody remembers about Kennedy's, he was not educated in Catholic schools, which was very parochial, very ethnic, very tribal. His father was a social climber from the get-go. Rose was not. She was very much, very pious and devout, actually devout Kennedy. And, but, you know, he, his entire formation, I mean, his entire formation was WASP. He was, he was for all intents and purposes a WASP. Yes. And, and, but, but you've got so many things, because his father, of course, would, in some ways, people would look at his father and say, yeah, that's a Catholic. He's not faithful to his wife. He's slick in business. You know, he's, he's looking to grab power. He sure wants to, he sure wants to have one of his sons be president. He's in cahoots with his ethnic co-members against the establishment and will cut them better deals than he'll do with us. And, and that's how he made his fortune, right? I mean, they gained prohibition to create their fortune. Right. Which was the WASP establishment trying to get rid of alcohol. And so they're, you know, taking advantage of the weaknesses caused by the overstretch of power of prohibition. There's a quote that I heard. I no longer remember who, who said it, but, but was talking about the young Kennedy before he had become president and said, we will package him up and sell him like soap. Like it was very cynical, but that's exactly what happened, isn't it? You know? Oh, he wasn't as packaged as well as George W. Bush. George W. Bush was really well packaged. That's also true. Yeah. But, but Kennedy, of course, has all of those things right in him and also the change from, I mean, the, if you, if you looked at that one video about the, the art conference, you have the lions and the foxes and the lions are the ones to say, we are larger than charge. We know how to do civilization. We know how to do culture and we are going to show you how to do culture. And in some ways, the Orthodox Catholics, and then these WASP Protestants could play the role of the lion. And then in the counterculture, you have this movement, this transformation into foxes where it's very much the therapeutic, but it is also, you know, it is this different kind of control where it's not, you know, you're going to do it our way, or we're going to marginalize you and put you in jail. No, it's much more Gavin Newsom where, I mean, Gavin Newsom is the whitest dude in town. I mean, look at him and his wife and his kids. They are, they, they are as, they are as privileged white as you're ever going to find, but you wrap yourself in this cloak of multiculturalism and all of this woke-ish stuff. And it's like, oh, that's Justin Trudeau. That's, that's Trudeau. That's the genius Fox move. No, that's right. That's right. We're not even, Canada isn't even a nation. We're just a movement of diverse people from around the world who are trying to love the planet as best we can. Shut the hell up, you truckers. I mean, this is the picture of me in an Indian costume. That's right. Paul, can I just ask, so, so how are you making sense of this in the context of this movie, this Rob Reiner movie featuring all of our favorite evangelical main, you know, stars? Well, the evangelicals for a long time, and I'll have, I've certainly done this plenty in my own life. In many ways, evangelicals have tried to be the least offensive foxes on the block. You know, Christianity isn't a religion, it's a relationship. And we don't really have a church. We're just, you know, we're just, we have a movie theater. Yeah, we're in a movie theater and we're with a concert and a message. And that's right. That's right. A concert and a Ted talk. That's right. And we'll, we'll play whatever movie music you like. We'll put Jesus in it. And, but of course, that's the packaging of, that's a certain packaging of Jesus too. Jesus is the nicest guy you'd ever want to meet. And, and Jesus wouldn't be mean. I mean, that is the Jesus that is out there in terms of when people look at the church, say they're not like Jesus, they're mean. It's like, yeah, you haven't really read that gospel book too much when Jesus talks about things like whitewash tombs and- Yeah, yeah. But you see, Paul, Jesus was speaking to the super conservative Pharisees. So that kind of stuff is okay. That's what we're doing. Cause we're also talking to the super conservative Pharisees. So we're really, we're just like Jesus. The Jewish nationalists. Yeah. So then when the unheard guy, the unheard people go to San Francisco and are looking around at San Francisco and they go to the city council person and he's still trying to defund the police and it's like, whoa, that's a, that's a, that's a bold move buddy. When basically the businesses are leaving your city and you're watching what's happening in these American West coast cities. And so, and so now you've got, you know, now you've got a very interesting moment where you've got a very interesting alignment of, of the lions or the would be lions, the Orthodox, even though they're not players on the American political scene at all. The Catholics who are sort of, yeah, you know, are, are they the brains behind the scene? Are they the ones holding the strings? The evangelicals that are the ones out there in the street, you know, catching crap for being dread Christian nationalists. But, but we are at the moment where there's this, you know, and I and Hersi Ali has pointed this out for, you know, more than most people because she comes and says, why don't you Westerners preserve this whole, the stuff that I came for, the stuff that put you on top of the heap in the world? And it's like, and so then of course, Jacob is always, you know, yelling at me to be a lion basically. And it's like, yeah, but you gotta understand there's also something to this Fox strategy that has really in many ways won. There's, there's something else going on in that trailer, which there's a very strong racial element to this. So you mean notice the voices that they're propping up as the good voices, right? Is your black voices, liberal black voices. And I mean, the one guy, if you look him up, I'm sorry, I'm blanking on his name. He's, he's the guy, I think he gets the last wine. But this is a guy who will show up at political rallies in his, you know, priestly vestments, right? You know, and I mean, if you want to talk about Christian nationalism, go to the black church. Yeah, like, yeah, it's unreal. It's unreal. Yeah, like, let's listen to the way they're fusing, you know, the political with with the spiritual right from the pulpit, right from the, you know, the political. And so, you know, I think what's happening with, you know, some, some strains of white Protestantism is like, oh, okay, why can't we play that game? So that's why I brought up I brought up Devers in in Oklahoma, you know, the kind of stuff that he's saying now that he's won his Senate seat, you could do like, like a side by side with things that some some black politicians have done. It's really not any different, you know. Well, it's it's also helpful to understand that part of the reason that, first of all, black Protestants are really sort of a different thing from a lot of the white Protestants, but just because of the way their institutions had to develop, because the church for many, I mean, part of the reason Martin Luther King Jr. came up through the church was the church was kind of the only institution they could have. I mean, they could they could really be theirs. And so those dynamics in the black church are are very different. And but the but the the inter the the little spat, you know, the hilarious thing to me is is that you get this you get this book, Jesus and John Wayne and this long litany of, oh, these these horrible these horrible Christians that have their politics and religions all mixed up together. And it's like everybody's politics and religion are connected in some ways. It's just the different nuances of the connection. And so now we come to a point in time where the the the wasps can, you know, it's sort of Gerardian where the scapegoat doesn't work anymore. And so the sort of waspy trick doesn't work anymore. And we're at this point where suddenly you're gonna you're gonna have to have a religious belief. You're gonna have to sort of you can't you can't anymore just say I don't have a religion. I mean, that's going away. I mean, even the atheists are admitting that now. Maybe even maybe even especially admitting it now, which is really fascinating to me as an observer. Right. So suddenly, we're at this moment where, which in many ways, we've been trying to avoid since the 30 years war where we're no longer going to fight over metaphysics. Right. Yeah. So yeah, so I was thinking you were talking about this. And I wrote myself a note on the drive, you know, that that that whole game was an attempt to solve for violence. Right. And so then everything becomes a kind of proxy war for violence. Right. We're no longer, you know, literally, you know, lining up, you know, you know, green team versus orange team, or what have you on the field in Flanders or something. Right. But but but but so then in America, all that gets kind of transposed here. Right. So it's like, so if it was then trying to an attempt to solve for violence, and it basically worked, but right. But as we all know, you know, that there's no such thing as a solution that, you know, yesterday's solution bears, you know, today's problem. Right. And so and so then what are we attempting to solve for now if we once attempted to solve for violence? Are we trying to solve for meaning or we tried to solve for power? Right. Because power is not the same thing as violence. Like, you know, I'm just that's what I've been showing on all morning long is like, what what are we now trying to solve? I think we're trying to answer the question about human nature. I mean, you yourself said it in previous live stream, Kale. The real question is now what is a human being? That's where the meaning crisis has brought us. Right. Right. Right. And and that's why you're winding up with religious answers, because that is the level of analysis where you answer that question. What am I? Right. And what was it the Peter Thiel video you were doing the other day with Miller, you know, you were saying that, that that they put the question because it was just too hot, right? They put the question of what does it mean to be a human being on the side burner? Interesting, of course, because then it births the 20th century in which it turns out that, you know, if you're not going to insist that there's a shame shared human nature that we have to fight over, then we'll just blank blank out whole swaths of people that we don't care for. Right. Because if there's no shared human nature. So, yeah, no, I think that's I just are we so are we still in that or is this a different phase? Well, go ahead, Sam. It's all Unitarianism's fault. I love it. I'll say like so much like Unitarianism, liberalism and the Enlightenment are all basically the same thing. And that the first liberal government in Europe was in Poland from about 1560 to 1650. People forget this, but the Unitarians were being chased around after Michael Servetus was burned and some Unitarians in Italy, they were trying to figure out a safe place that they could go. They went to Poland because they found some sympathetic princes. And there was a Unitarian not anti-theocracy in Poland for a while that says, how about we don't fight each other? How about we don't kill each other over theology? How about we don't do the thing where the prince just gets to decide what religion everyone underneath him is in this new post-Poesan Reformation thing. And there was about a hundred year religious peace in Poland that was mostly because the Unitarians were very influential at the top, but they were still a pretty small minority. So if you're a small minority who thinks that other kinds of Christians are fine just mistaken, but knows that the other Christians will kill you if they get the chance and they have the power, what sort of government do you build? You don't build your own theocracy because that will turn the people against you. You build a liberal government and you try and instill the value of toleration and pluralism on broader Christian assumptions. Okay, Sweden invaded Poland, the Catholics rise up, re-takeover Poland, the Unitarians have to run to England and they run to John Locke's house basically. And John Locke loved the Polish immigrants from the escaping Polish Unitarian immigrants. He's like, oh, what kind of government did you have? That's fascinating. I didn't know about that. Let me philosophize about this for a little bit and write some books. And then, okay, then the Unitarians escape over to North America. Thomas Jefferson, John Adams, et cetera, are reading them, soaking up as much John Locke as they can get. And that is where Unitarianism and liberalism and the enlightenment are all basically the same thing. Liberalism is Unitarian political theology is really what it is. And that's interesting. And what I think happened is that Unitarianism takes over Harvard in like the 1810s or something like that. And then from there it keeps spreading. And what the deal that Unitarianism made with the devil at this point in time was like, we will open ourselves up to new discovery, to new ideas and new learning on the faith that this will go in a good direction. And that we will even sacrifice in some sense the identity that we are now to be transformed into the identity of wherever this path of progress and enlightenment is headed, who knows where, in exchange for the fact that we get to control the reins of this horse. We don't know where the horse is going, but we get the reins and it's going to be here from Boston. You're better on being the reins side than in front where there's all the trampling going on. And what I think is happening is that really is the trajectory of American theology and stuff like that is wherever Boston basically decided to go from there. And what's interesting is like the stuff that's going on at Harvard now is like the end of that. It's like come to some logical conclusion where it was so self-emptying, so tolerant, so willing to take in things from outside itself that eventually and for a while that gave it so much power. Because if you can take things from outside of yourself without losing yourself, you can gain the power from the outside. And America is nothing if not the thing that is incredibly good at strengthening itself by gaining power from taking things from the outside. But it has finally come to the place where it like ate its own tail and is killing itself. And I think that's really what's happening is that the Unitarian bargain with the devil that happened sometime in Cambridge in the early 1800s has played itself out and we still don't really know what's going to come next after that. Anyway, that's my... Says the Sam Adams, the Unitarian. So we have to kill Sam as our scapegoat and the world will be better. It's Jonah. He's telling us to throw him off the ship. That's right. Or maybe only a Unitarian can fix it. I don't know. So I'm intrigued by this trajectory though. There's probably a little bit more zigging and zagging up that line than a sort of a straight one. Because you look at that mid-century, if you look at the mid-century of the 19th century rather than the 20th, and you look at the responses, you have sort of like normie poets, and then you have the kind of the weirdo poets. And it's important that we remember that somebody like Hawthorne and Melville were definitely like the weirdo poets. They did not play well with the Boston establishment, even though they later kind of got adopted as sort of native sons. But that's really not accurate. And they went in and sort of decidedly, whatever, English teachers will call this like dark romanticism or whatever. I'm not sure how helpful that is. But they recognized the weak gruel of Unitarianism, say of like the ascended Emersonian vision. They were like, this dude's, he's a, well, I mean, interestingly enough, he's kind of like the Jordan P. Emerson was the son of a Unitarian pastor. No, no, I know. Yeah, no, and prominent. But he was a rock star. I mean, Emerson was a rock star. And like very much the way that Peterson is a rock star. Yeah. So he sort of, so Peterson does, Kale, how did you divert the discussion into blaming all this on Unitarianism? I do. You would solve this tree at its best. Well, we were talking about JFK earlier. JFK is the perfect example of the Unitarians being like, we know that you really deep down want to be like us. So in exchange for you becoming like us, we'll let you in and you get to be powerful, but you have to change who you are to become compatible with our thing. And that is like a symbol of what I would call the denominationalization of Catholicism, where instead of being a civilizational threat to American democracy, it becomes a Christian denomination that is propping up democracy instead of threatening it and gets to be another church on the city square next to all the other ones. Right. Well, I guess, you know, if you look at those guys, if you could, if you trace those family lines, you know, like, I don't think I'm wrong with it. I think, Arthur's daughter converts to Catholicism in like the late 1860s, 70s, like post-Civil War. Like, and then there's this interesting way in which these early Americans who sort of became wealthy in the Boston area, they sent their kids, they started sending their kids to Europe, right. Which again, if you would have told the Puritans of the Mayflower, you know, yeah, you know, your descendants are going to become wealthy and go back to Europe and look at all the churches and, you know, be impressed. And anyway, they would send their kids to Europe, right, for culture, right, you know, to get them some culture. It's very similar to the way that we send kids, you know, for college, you know, a year abroad or what have you. And what is interesting is that, you know, then the American establishment kind of breaks sort of two ways. They kind of lean into sort of post-unitarian liberalism or they become kind of like weird and sort of crypto-Catholic. It's a really fascinating move. It's almost like those are your choices, right, in this sort of, again, I hate to sort of be overly simplistic, but there's something, you know, missing that they see in Europe, even if they don't have any access to it because it's not their, it's no longer their tribe, it's no longer their people. You know, so like the entire, you know, body of work of somebody like Henry James is all about like the American girl encountering, you know, the, you know, the cynical European man, right. And it sort of becomes this sort of this super, you know, allegory of, you know, the new world feminine and old world masculine and the kind of, you know, decadence that ensues and, you know, anyway, something like that. But it's, sorry, I lost my train of thought. Sorry. Well, another thought I had about Europe, maybe this is sort of going in a different direction, but I mean, Europe is also considered to be the seat of higher criticism in the 19th century. But German, right? It's German, so different, you know, versus the Italian thing. And Harvard was a close follower on the higher criticism. Yeah, because, yeah, I mean, because, well, that was what I got out of the book. You made me read, Paul, one of the, what's his name, the orange book. I read American higher ed, your, your historian guy that you always like. Oh, George Marston. Marston, yeah, Marston. I mean, basically, you know, every mainline Protestant minister went to Germany to learn how to be Hegelian and part of that, that whole movement. That was really new to me. And Schleiermacher too. Yeah, yeah, that was really news to me. I'm using Hegel's shorthand, but you're right, sorry. You know, but that was really news to me because, you know, that is not like the sort of the Catholic genealogy, you know, like that's, that's definitely a Protestant thing that I did not understand until reading that Marston book. When my dad was, uh, uh, grassed in philosophy in Vanderbilt, this would have been, let's see, my dad was born in 65. So this would have been early. Early eighties. Yeah. Early nineties. Cause he was. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. So Heidegger was all the rage. Yeah. Yeah. And he tells a story on himself that like one day he was walking past the lounge and he heard some girls gabbling about, about Heidegger. And that they were also talking smack about Descartes at the same time. And my dad was a big Descartes stand. And so like he saw red, it just like went into these, these Heidegger fangirls. So, so anyway, but yeah, I mean, the continental philosophy then very much got transported to, to the States. And so now, you know, when you talk about philosophy, you really have to get specifically where we talk about, we talk about the analytical strain or the continental strain. Um, Paul, you posed the point that I think people got a little upset about, about this. And I think Nate kind of got upset with you, not upset, but that's being silly. But anyway, Nate pushed back and said, hopefully Nate, Nate will come on a little later. He couldn't come on and right away. Yeah. You know, you were saying that, oh, you know, you go to DC and you see all of this Catholic infrastructure. And I'm wondering if you could sort of, sort of reset the deck for us on that one. And, you know, um, maybe that might help part of this conversation. Well, I, I, you know, so I put it, Bethel sent out a, a piece from that font days. And it is a good piece. And so Nate, Nate basically said, oh, that was true in 1992, but I don't think so. There is, I was having a conversation, what was I talking to? It wasn't online. Um, with someone about that. There is something to what Sam, before you two jumped on where Sam and I sort of started, there is something to the effect of keeping, keeping everything within an institution that strengthens things. Now, I was talking to Hank about this. Um, so it's funny. Evangelicalism is like a network. It's, you know, it's, it's intended to be more like the internet. It's sort of, you don't have to go to the same church. You don't have to agree on baptism. You don't have to, I mean, almost, you don't even have to agree on the Trinity. Um, and so evangelicalism is sort of this network that everyone can sort of come into. All you need is an IP address and you can participate in it. You know, Catholicism is a different thing. It's within an institution. The Christian form church, I think, tried in the middle of the 20th century when the Calvin philosophy department was at its heyday, when it had Mao and Waltersdorf and Plantinga and Marsden was teaching there. I mean, Calvin in the sixties and seventies tried to sort of, we're, we're going to do what the Catholics do when we're going to do it in house. But then of course, Plantinga goes to Notre Dame. Marsden, he would spend some time at Notre Dame, but you know, and, and they all go out to the bigger places. Mao becomes president of Fuller and you basically have the sense that- And in Southern California? Yeah, yeah, Mao was president of Fuller. Wow, that's really interesting. I didn't know that's really interesting. Mao, you know, Mao, if you listen to Mao, Chad would love Mao, you know, went through AA, you know, gained sobriety, also has ministerial credentials. Richard Mao's a super interesting guy. We wanted to have him in Chino, but he had a, he had a conflict. That would have been a fascinating thing to have Mao with Verbecky and Peugeot. But, but, so, so Calvin tried to, the CRC tried to do it. The CRC's all, you know, it's an inspiring thing. And it was succeeding for a while. Yeah, yeah. Don't say yourself short. It was, it was the, it was doing better than any other Protestant institution at that, as far as I could tell. But then I think your point is that it scattered. Right. Well, it was prone to schism. And in a way that the Catholics are less prone to schism. Yeah, but I think that's under, I think that's over. I don't, it's just somebody from the inside of the Catholic thing. I think that y'all look at us as if we're way more unified than- Do you not underestimate our ability to schism? No, no, no. You do not know how further you can get in that direction. But Sam, what Cale is saying is Cale's saying don't underestimate the Catholic ability to schism either, you know? Right. So, so like, I can ask you one question. Let's say I'm in a room of a hundred graduates of a Catholic, they have a college degree from a Catholic institution, right? Let's say there are hundred of them in the room. And, you know, I can line everybody up and I can pretty much, pretty accurately ask them where they got their degree from and maybe even ask them what they studied. And I can tell you without knowing anything else, whether or not they still practice the faith. Okay. So, so you asked earlier, Sam, you know, what, what, what is like a definition of a Catholic? I mean, to me, I don't think you can answer it singularly. I think you can't even answer within a family, but you have to think of it in terms of, of three generations, right? You know, so like the thing that keeps me up every day is that I want to pass on the faith to my children as it was passed on to me. You know, you know, I'm a little bit of an outlier. I was born in the seventies, right? And I'm one of three boys and all three of us are still practicing Catholics. That is just a like absolute outlier, right? Just, just on the numbers. Like my younger brother is actually a second career. He's in the seminary right now. He's studying to be a priest. Okay. And so, so, so my mom's faith given to her by her mom and her father, you know, has sort of lives in us. And, you know, for me, it's, it's my faith is almost not real unless my children take it up. Now the, you know, the, the, the, the forces and the pressures are aligned against me, right? But I know that there are certain things that I can do to make my kid not Catholic, right? And one of them is to send my children to almost any Catholic college. Wow. Wow. Well, send them to Hillsdale. Well, you laugh, you laugh Sam, but like literally that's on my short list, right? And the only thing, the only thing that would keep me from sending my kid to Hillsdale is just money. Like that's it. Because at this point, if you don't go, I'm going to name a couple of colleges here. People in the comments can say what they want, but like University of Dallas, Thomas Aquinas College, you know, maybe a Christendom, maybe a Steubenville, you know, maybe Thomas More College, you know, they're, they're literally like, like less than 10. And most of these are micro, micro colleges. Okay. But like, I think it is a miracle if you send your kid to Boston College and they remain Catholic. Like I really do. Georgetown or Notre Dame. Yeah. Yeah. Oh God. Notre Dame, you've got a, a better shot. Again, there are certain sort of specific culture. Hey, Nate, there's certain specific cultural things that Notre Dame has been able to kind of maintain that make, if you want to be Catholic at Notre Dame, you can be Catholic and remain Catholic. Okay. But at most other places, I just don't think that's the case. Nate, I don't know. Did you hear the front end of that part? I was in work meeting, so. Sorry. I was basically telling these guys that. I was talking on Catholic colleges. Right. They're talking about like the unity of the Catholic church and, you know, never underestimate the Catholics, the Protestant ability to schism. And I get all that. And that's a sort of also kind of a funny Catholic inside joke. But I was just trying to tell them that, you know, what might appear as sort of this sort of unified thing on the outside is really far, it couldn't be farther from the truth. For me, my Catholic college experiences was one of the most unambiguously Catholic colleges. Yeah. And I know where you went. I went to Thomas Aquinas College. Yeah. And I went to Thomas More College back in the day. So it's a similar vibe. Like most of my friends, you know, Just stick with colleges with Thomas in the name. Be safe. Yeah, that's right. That's right. You know, so, you know, so that, you know, but our experiences, that was an outlier experience, right, Nate? Yeah. Yeah, very much so. You know, so anyway, my example of the hundred, you know, people with a college degree from Catholic universities in America, I can line you up and I can have a pretty good chance of telling you about whether or not they are practicing Catholics or not. And your definition of a practicing Catholic. Right. Well, I mean, I mean, the baseline is you go to Mass on Sundays. Like that's our obligation. We're supposed to go and we're supposed to go to confession at least once a year, hopefully during the Easter season. Or the Pope is Catholic. Yes. How about Joe Biden? Is he Catholic? Again, you know, by the, I can't, I don't know what he says in confession, but you know, I have a hard time with that one personally, just because I think his political commitments are counter, ultimately counter. He's not the only one and he's not the only one, you know, there's plenty on the right that could qualify for similar raised eyebrows on my part. But I just don't see. It's like, who was the bishop who refused communion to Nancy? Cordiglione. Yeah, right. And I think that was completely appropriate to. Yeah, right. And of course, you know, but again, all of the mainstream Catholic university types, right? All of them were universally disgusted by that in very much the same way that a David French or a Christian Corbett, as to may, we horrified about that version in their own circles. It's exactly the same. Beware, beware refusing communion to politicians by their political stances, because this is why Catholicism and democracy struggle. If there is someone who has political authority over an elected politician's conscience, then it messes with the ability of democracy to function in the way that it was designed. And you might say so much of the words for democracy. I know that there's plenty of people out there in our little court of the internet who think that, but that is what I'm saying is this is why democracy has a little bit of an anti-Catholicism immune system is because if you can get a whole bunch of people elected into public office and there's someone above them who can tell them what to do at expense of their immortal soul, that's it harms democracy. Yeah, but Sam, I don't think that it bothered Nancy Pelosi that much to not. Right. Which is why she's a Protestant. But and so that's why it was able to work. But that's what I'm saying. Be careful if you go down that road, because let's imagine that you do get enough authority over these Catholic politicians. Then people are going to start wondering if I should elect Catholics because I'm not actually electing the Catholic. I'm electing the Pope or their bishop or are they in a conservative bishop rick or a liberal bishop? Those sorts of questions come into play when bishops start having authority over politicians voting. So that's part of my point. I'm not saying that Nancy Pelosi is a good representative of Catholic teaching. I'm not defending that. But what I'm saying is the ecclesiology and the political stuff will get complicated if those things get too intertwined. Well, I mean, I'm a Protestant and I mean, if she were a Protestant, I don't think she should take communion either. So to me, I don't think this is limited to Catholicism. But you think that as your own personal conscience and if your pastor was telling you things against your own personal conscience, you'd go to a different church. Yeah. And the Protestants always have that option. So maybe a Canadian, let's say a Californian politician comes to my church and does something. And I say, I'm not serving you communion anymore. You go across the street. You go across the street. Well, right. And look, to that point, I think, Sam, you do have a point, right? Because I mean, look, we have a closed communion, right? Yeah. But they could, I mean, and this goes back to Cale, your earlier point about the variety of Catholics, you could go across the street to the liberal Catholic priest. Okay. Just like there's, okay, like James Martin will give you communion. Right. Right. He might even marry you. You could always just fly to the Vatican and get communion to show your bishop what's what, right? Isn't that what policy did? Right. But remember, Sam, remember, the way that the governing structures of Catholicism work is that the bishop is your pastor, right? Territorially, right? The bishop is your pastor. And so the pastor has a unique responsibility and relationship with members of his flock. So, you know, now in the spirit of collegiality, let's say that I'm the bishop of Rhode Island and you're the bishop of Chicago, and I say that this politician can't receive communion. And then that person goes over to your diocese and receives communion from you. That is a violation of the collegiality. But again, technically speaking, you're in you're within your prerogative, you know, to do such a thing. Right. So again, I guess the more important point is that that that there is a there is a low resolution unity. Right. And I and again, that's because I'm proud of myself, took your teeth away. Right. But I'm telling myself here a little bit in my own kind of weakened ecclesiology in the last decade of my life. Right. You know, that that that there is this this this low resolution sense of unity, but like, don't put on your glasses, because if you start really kind of poking around, there's some like, fancy stuff going on that, you know, moving things around and I don't know, you know, there's just a lot. It's a much bigger mess. Certainly, it is a much bigger mess in my appreciation of things than it was for me 15 years ago. And I appreciate what you're saying. I'm saying if it wasn't that kind of a mess, and if the ecclesiology were working as designed, that's where you can see how Protestantism and democracy gets a little bit worried about. And you can even see similar things with Mormonism. Right. You know, similar questions were being asked of Mitt Romney. Well, like, do you remember the Mormon Church have authority over you to decide how you're voting? It's not a uniquely Catholic thing, per se. OK, so then so then my question to you as a Protestant is, is this. Are you just. Is it really just you like like like, in other words, if I press you on, like, say an opinion you have, right? I mean, I've been pressed a lot. Nobody can be in politics and be married because their wife is good or their husband is good. Right. Well, well, that's kind of what I'm getting at, Paul. Right. Like I feel maybe this is just a phenomenological argument, but I feel that there's always somebody who catches our conscience, who acts as our backstop. Right. And I feel like I'm allowed a certain amount of honesty in that because I can just say, well, you know, the pope is the guarantor of orthodoxy, blah, blah, blah, all that sort of stuff. You know, so if I can really press you, like, what is your guarantor of orthodoxy as a Protestant man? The Bible in my conscience is sort of the classical biblical answer. But I are a Protestant. You could drive a truck through that. I know. And what I'm saying is, is I'm sort of almost over exaggerating the Protestant stance to say that there are things about it that are starting to crumble and not work anymore because I agree with the criticisms that you're pointing at. I mean, because don't you always think that it is a person, though? Like, I know you guys, the person of Jesus again. Yeah. OK. But like, I feel like there's always like there's a person who like holds that part of your conscience. And maybe I'm making a much larger question or point than just about me and the pope say. But like, like, is it my wife? You know, is it is it is it my brother? Is it my mom? Like, I feel like, you know, we you know, you talk about the two little guys who sort of hang out on your shoulders, you know, like we say it's our conscience. But like, really, maybe I just don't. Maybe I believe that there's always a person behind this thing we call conscience. But now let's let's kill kill drives us into this space where we've got Steve. So, Steve, your friend, Scodiac, Scodiac, Scodiac, you know, Steve deconstructed, left the Catholic church and he couldn't couldn't take it anymore. So it's funny. We had the Aaron Ren thing was like, why are everybody becoming Catholic? Well, and also Orthodox. But, you know, it was it was quite interesting when I watched the the guy, the Harvest guy who was saying, yeah, you know, Orthodoxy is gaining people through the Peugeot Peterson is gaining that. But overall, their population, they're losing population. And, you know, the Catholics have some of those same dynamics. And we are in a place where I think this is very much the meaning crisis where your question, Kale, where is there a there? Where do we come from? Is there anything under there? Or did did Mike Pence really not eat with women because his wife was insecure? I mean, there I said it. I don't know if that's the case or not. I've got no inside information with respect to Mike Pence. But and that sort of, I think, lean puts us into this, you know, I mean, people are saying, you know, oh, poor Bethel can't get a word in edgewise. And I'm thinking, do you really know Bethel? You really think if she wants to talk, she's not going to talk. Little little Bethel sitting by the side. Yeah. Yeah. Or we say that right now. Someone says someone mentioned that. But this sort of leads me kind of that Bethel talks when she has something to say. That's right. The the which I really like the early space right now. And, you know, part of the reason I wanted Bethel on here is because she is a walking encyclopedia about so many of these things. I mean, she she just there's sometimes I confuse it with the Internet because she knows a lot about a lot of things. And but and so now we're also in this space where it's it's almost a mere Christianity space. This this ecumenism that we're experiencing in the corner. I mean, we sort of handle lightly. I mean, even even Sam, the non-trinitarian, and we've got the Orthodox and the Catholics and the Dutch Reformed and, you know, Bethel is, you know, Anglican is sort of the, you know, the great the wobbly denomination where you can be just about anything. So if I can contribute a little bit from my own my own particular Anglican roots are sort of interesting in this conversation because when you say Anglican, that's that's vague. You really have to kind of get specific and go, OK, what kind of Anglican where and when. So so my my particular Anglican heritage is the continuing Anglican heritage. This was a breakaway denomination from the main line in the 70s. They they didn't like women's ordination. They could sort of reap the tea leaves and see that the main line was sinking leftward. And so then they broke away. They started this continuing Anglican Anglo Catholic Church. So that was when the my childhood parish was founded. So then that's that's where I grew up. And, you know, it's this quiet little bubble really, you know, of Anglo Catholic worship with the Book of Common Prayer. You know, the 1928 version was what we used and liturgy and sacrament where, you know, we were just sort of left alone to to do our thing. And then very sadly, that parish finally ended last year. And, you know, it was tough. I tried to join an ACNA church plant here in Lansing, but sadly, they couldn't get off the ground. They had to they had to close. So I'm actually currently attending an OPC church, a Presbyterian church, because, you know, it's it's the it's the sort of closest thing in my neighborhood where I just sort of happen to kind of feel comfortable. And so at the kind of church that I grew up in is very difficult to find. But they don't say. But the difficulty, I mean, what's so interesting about this this current moment with those who are going into church, it's almost impossible, it seems to go into church in a way other than sort of in a Protestant mode. You might be going that's, you know, part of what I've said about the Orthodox. And I'm going to, you know, you and Sam, you said the denominalizing of the Roman Catholic Church. I mean, technically, they're not a denomination, the way all the Protestant churches are. But it's like, there's this menu ahead of do I? Yeah, but guys, guys, I mean, what I mean, I'll tell you right now, I'm fortunate because I live and work at a monastery that has a, you know, it's a serious monastery, and they have a solid liturgy. It's nothing fancy, but it's very solid. But I guarantee you, if I didn't live here, I'm sure I'd be driving across town or across the state to go to a Latin Mass. I'm just telling you right now. Oh, no, I'm not having any doubts about your I'm affirming what you're saying, Paul. In other words, like, we're all in this moment. Yeah, we're all in this moment where we're actually all of us are looking whatever labels on the outside of the building. This is I mean, yeah, this is also interesting for me to watch because I like, I'm simultaneously right now looking at friends and acquaintances who are like photo negatives of each other here. It's like at the same time that I see people who are fleeing, or have fled Catholicism for orthodoxy or or something else. I mean, like literally just had a reader write the other day. He's a Catholic lawyer, he said he's having kind of a Catholic crisis of faith. But at the same time, I've got these Protestant friends, very energetic, young evangelical couple, and they're becoming Catholic, you know, because they're like, they want to be based in track, they want to be cool with their, you know. So I'm in a position where I can sort of wave at everybody and wish everyone well where they land because I, you know, in spirit, I'm, I'm very Lewisian, I have this kind of ecumenical big tent. Can't we all just get along to save babies kind of, you know, political view of things. But I mean, if somebody asked me, I mean, this Protestant couple, I know they didn't like consult with me before becoming Catholic, which is fine. They didn't need to. But, you know, if they had, then I would have told them honestly, what I think, and I would have said a lot of the kinds of things that Cale was saying, even though Cale, God bless you, Cale, you're still sticking in there, you know, fighting the good fight. But I would have told them, look, I don't know if you're going to find what you're looking for when you get there. Now, I think a lot of this is going to come down to the community where you are, you know, because it could be that maybe this couple I know, if they're going to find a sort of enclave of based tradeness in their area, in which case, great, you know, maybe they can flourish there, their kids will be happy. But yeah, yeah, jumping Cale. So yeah, so I, this is kind of, this is really something that's been kind of popping in my head as we've had this conversation. But I think that this is where this whole sort of mode of propelicity that we've been operating in has to come into question. So Paul, you just got finished saying, right, that, that, you know, the, the Orthodox church has been the direct benefit and indirect beneficiary of your pageos and all this online stuff, right? So you like, you know, loads of people who are flocking to the Orthodox church, right? But let, you know, pump the brakes here a little bit, right? Let's look back at the whole thing. There are not legions of people converting to the Orthodox church right now. There are very selective people who find their way into your consciousness, Congress, and through this channel and this little corner who are gravitating to these kinds of things. And so much of this stuff takes place in here on this little screen as we're doing it right now. Right. We might even know most of them. If we saw the list, it would be like, oh, that comment section person, that comment section person, but right. Yeah. And so, and so, so, and so this is sort of interesting for me because I spend so much, as you know, like I spent a lot of time on Twitter, et cetera. And, and, and, and for me, it's an absolute lifeline. It's, it's an absolute lifeline for me. And I'm never going to talk trash about Twitter because it's been really good for me. Like I needed it. It's doing a thing. I'm making real connections to real people, right? Okay. Period. Full stop. But this is not reality. Right. And so, so part of me sort of, you know, that, that Mueller book was really helpful for me because I recognize that I've been kind of playing. Now I kind of knew this, but I really now have language to recognize what I'm doing and what I'm projecting. I would, I would part ways with Mueller by saying that, yeah, but I also, I play a profile in my day-to-day life too. I'm Mr. Zelda. I am in the process of being a part of the world. I'm in the process of being a Zelda. I am in the front of the classroom. I'm pastor Paul, right? I mean, you know, like, you know, we dress up for a living, right? And so we're, we're already playing the profile game from, I know, denim jokes aside, right? You know, we already, we already play roles right now. I'm not a nihilist. I think that Mueller is probably a, a, a practical nihilist. And I, and I don't understand that personally. Okay. I do think that there is a, a, an underneath reality, you know, that's my work, right? That, that is, that is meaningful and real in every sense that way. And so my goal is to align whatever it is I'm projecting out into the world with, we would say the sort of the spirit of authenticity and maybe even, you know, the spirit of, um, sincerity or profilicity, sincerity, right? Right. And, and, and I would just, anybody who goes down the Mueller rabbit hole, it's not necessarily a progression. So just be careful of making it sort of an historical epoch type thing. Anyway, um, my, my point here is that with this, we're looking for a meaning crisis, right? It's ultimately an embodiment crisis, right? And so, so for me, so much of what has sort of kept me from diving full into like my YouTube channel and doing all this sort of stuff is because I, I reserve this kind of deep skepticism about it as even a place, right? And the only way that I can kind of come to peace with it is that I have to recognize that it is purely liminal. It is purely a portal to get me there and back and there and back and there back again, right? And so ultimately, you know, does Twitter matter if I'm at mass in the midst of a liturgy and the police is sensing the altar, right? And, and, and am I in a community? You talked about, you know, these, your friends who did not consult you, right? But they're probably looking for something that the four of us are not looking for, right? I mean, most people don't do the Twitter thing. Most people don't even do the YouTube thing, right? I think most people like go about their lives. And so all of this sort of chatter, um, has to take into account that, that we're the weirdos. Yeah. And one thing I think about is I think that we're in some sort of moment that's like Protestant Reformation-esque in terms of the explosion of information and who gets to make their thoughts known and a breaking down of the establishment organs of publishing and sense making. But one question I have is where are all the new denominations? Where are all the new kinds of Christianity? And there, cause there are like in the 1500s, you know, right after Luther was nailing on a door, there was an explosion of a bunch of new types of Christianity. Okay. In England and like the late 1600s and 1700s, sort of once England stopped fighting over this stuff, explosion of lots of kinds of denominations. The Burndover district in upstate New York in the 1800s, bunch of different denominations. The Pentecostal explosion, bunch of different kind of denominations. Okay. So that's like every hundred years or so Protestantism goes through some sort of, you know, Cambrian explosion of innovation. And then there's normally a bunch of new kinds of churches that have a new kind of name and new leaders that have a new vibe in them. But right now, none of this, I think there are new vibes, but they're not resulting in new institutions. It's sort of like when Ross Douthat asked, why doesn't Marian Williamson found a church? But part of that was back in the day, you know, when there was a new something going on, there was some charismatic teacher leader that was talking to his friends and his family and people in his town. And he got enough people together listening to him. And then, okay, boom, you got 100 people, you can start a church and it keeps growing. And you start wanting your neighboring town and it goes from there. Because the people that you're influencing are real life connections. So it's easy to build a real life institution once that gets enough momentum. But now we're having all of this electronic influencing. And I have no idea who in my real life is actually listening to this stuff, or most likely, like you're saying, Kale, not listening. And so I have almost no ability or it's extremely difficult to turn this into a real life thing. And like the estuary stuff is like the best we got so far. But I think that's part of why these don't result in new institutions is the disembodiedness that it just doesn't leave a very natural easy path into making a actual new church or denomination. So I'm going to throw something in here that might be weird. But I've been going pretty deep down the whole ufology hole, well, rabbit hole, and the Jacques Ballet and the Pasulka and all that sort of stuff. And he had this sort of tongue in cheek phrase for this invisible college. This invisible college was a kind of loose consortium of secret scholars who were kind of doing this esoteric work. And I wonder if something like this little corner is a kind of version of this invisible college. It's very visible if you tune in, right? I mean, it's like, I know Paul has a couple of private things that if you're not a member, you can't see, but it's largely very, very visible. But it's sort of hiding in plain sight. And so are we sort of playing this kind of esoteric role of sense making where you can come if you want, but the gate, it's not a locked gate. It's just like it's kind of like a geek gate, right? It's nerdy, talky. What do you always say? Thinky talky, nerdy, nerdy, right? Well, but I think, Sam's, so one of the things that I look at is I was watching, how many of these how many of these influencers now aren't on rumble? Or there's a few of these like, uh, Scott Adams has his thing on locals or something. So there are these, there are these little church like things and Scott Adams, Marianne Williamson, these would all be founders of new sex at some point, you know, 150 years ago. And now they're inhabiting this other space. I mean, Grim Grizz is in some ways a cult leader of a tiny little cult, a little Grim Grizz cult. But no, you're, you know, you're right, Sam. And, but then that leads to the other question of embodiment and instantiation that these, these churches, because of the mode that they, they lived in and worked in, they had a durability that all of the churn in the cyber world is just going to sort of blow away. And this little corner too, I mean, there's a cult like aspect to this. Really great conversation. It's still behind the membership section. It's going to come out with Neil, but Neil made the point that, you know, the, the relate military understands cults and it's basically what keeps a cult from being a cult is that a cult is really about sort of the, the tyranny of this, of Jim Jones to get, you know, to sleep with all the women and have everybody kill themselves for him. That's really what a cult is like. And, and these other organizations, they aren't really a cult around an individual who is basically manipulating everybody, everybody for his, his, his individual passions. So, yeah, I'm in a cult. There you go, Monica. I'm going to, I'm going to go touch some grass here. So, well, all right. Well, maybe it's good to see you Bethel. Thanks Bethel for coming in. So maybe it's a good time to transition into the questions. So if any of you want, want to ask a question, put question in all caps, and if we don't get a lot of questions, don't ask. If you want to come into the stream, don't ask any questions and then I'll drop the link. Question. Wait, Paul isn't the first part of your communion. This is not the table of living stones. No, and that's the, that's the Protestant denomination thing where Protestants do this weird move of saying the Christian Reformed Church is not the only church. And of course, this comes out of the code of the Reformation. And then of course, of course, now you've got Vatican II where, I mean, I'm not going to get into, I don't know, near enough to get into the weeds of what did Vatican II really say with respect to the uniqueness of Rome. But, but yeah, it's, it's pretty robust. What's pretty robust? Its claims. Yeah. I mean, yeah, it's pretty robust. And Father Eric asked, why hasn't Bishop Barrett founded a new order? Yeah, yeah, yeah. What do you mean by that question? I mean, well, his, so word on fire. What is word on fire? What would, what would word on fire be 300 years ago? I mean, it would have been, oh, I see. I'm sorry. I misunderstood the question, Father Eric. Okay. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. No, I think, you know, I know nothing, of course. So here I am talking. But as I told you, Paul, I think in one of our very first conversations many, many years ago now, it is so weird that Bob Barron is a bishop. It is, it is, it is not the way that politicians climb up the greasy pole. Right. He did not play the chance to read politics game in order to get that. He may have been named a bishop. And again, I'm totally riffing here. I have no insider information, but he may have been named a bishop so as to keep him in, in, in, in official church as opposed to becoming a Dominican or a Jesuit or Franciscan or a Benedictine or what have you. Right. It may be the case, you know, that, that, that was a move similar, I think, to the way that, that Fulton Sheen was named a bishop. You know, these are not typical political bishops. These are superstars, right, who get the job. I mean, it's a job and I don't want to pretend it's not a job, but that's my sense of it, right, that, that, that maybe him being named a bishop was the way of keeping him in the official church. Not that Jesuits aren't part of the official church, but you know what I'm saying, not in an order. And, and, and the, the Catholic Church has had ways of doing this in the past of, of helping find sort of the right context for particular giftedness. I mean, Bishop Barron is a very unique individual because he is both a, a world-class theologian, philosopher, Andy can talk on camera. Andy has a personality. That's a very unusual. Yeah, no, he's, he's, he's, he's hyper skilled. He's hyper novel, actually. Not novel, but he's, he's unique. Let's put it that way. And I would say that, you know, my suspicion is that what the church thought they could do with Luther was what they were able to do with a very, very different guy in France's. I really believe that they thought they could kind of make Lutheranism, you know, a Lutheranist order, but obviously it, it, it didn't work out that way for reasons that they were not able to anticipate or see. Yeah. But I, I do, like, because that's how they dealt with Luther's before. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. No, that's a great point. I don't chat. I don't know exactly. I see you mentioned contestants often. What do you guys think we are that about that? We are no longer Protestants. We're more like contestants. Is that where I think I know what he means. Explain it to me. Like in other words, is a contestant someone who just like literally is like, you know, if you think of a game show, you know, and a contestant is like the guy that who's like behind a little podium and gets to like play Jeopardy, you know, maybe we're, maybe that's the participatory revolution, right? That, you know, we all have a channel. We all have, we all have a profile. This is part of the new digital reality is that we're not, we all think we are the star of our own show. Well, and I think that connects with David Walker's question here. The trend in Protestant churches seems to be taking off the denominational label. Yeah. Yeah. And that's, again, that's, uh, yeah, yeah, yeah. That's a great, that's a great point in this conversation. Uh, Spatz says, what does, what does a Fox, what does a Fox imply? So terrorism and not being honest about once, once true beliefs. I don't, I don't think that Fox's are necessarily dishonest about their beliefs, but it is a tactical move. And, and as a pastor, I know this tactical move. If, if you're dealing with someone who is experiencing difficulty, they're acting out, they're, uh, they're not really very, very well in control of things. Often, if you sit down and draw them out and have them talk a little bit, they'll begin to regain control of themselves because a lot of their frustration is nobody's listening to me. And so I'm, I'm, I'm going to try to shout because then people will listen to me and it's like, settle down, start talking. It's, it's very much a therapeutic move. And, and in many ways, the, the Fox style of leadership is all about the triumph of the therapeutic and it's triumphed because it works because people, you know, you want to, you want to gain an enemy, treat someone poorly. You want to gain an ally or a friend, treat someone well. It's sort of like, you know, the two ideas of, well, here we captured this person from Al Qaeda and we want to make them talk. One way is to torture them. The other way is to let their guard down, put them in a nice space, treat them well. Eventually they'll be getting to consider you their friend and then they'll confide in you and then they'll tell you their secrets. I mean, it's the, it's sort of the, the other way of, you know, it can, and it could be incredibly manipulative, but it's also very powerful. Well, it's ultimately Luciferian, I should say, at least, at least in the idiom of Paradise Lost, right? You know, if you have, you know, if you look at the, the, the, the four speakers in, in Pandemonium, you know, you've got the total war guy and then you've got the like, well, let's, you know, we, you know, it's Gavin Newsom is the number two guy, Belial. And then you've got the guy who's like, you know, screw God, we're just going to make the best of it here. Right. And those are the three main, I'm not going to get into the last one, but you know, I think the mode of the fox is the mode of Belial is the mode of the politician. You know? Yeah. Upcycle. Thank you, Upcycle. Merry Christmas to the, to this little corner from a fringe, virtually not alone rebel, may next year shower all with blessings and joy. Thank you. In the context about doing each other in love, who's winning? I don't know who the contestants are necessarily. What are, what are our parachurch, our parachurch mini churches? Yes, sort of. And, you know, and one of the interesting things is that, again, the Catholics, the, the Catholics had all sorts of ways of incorporating that dynamic and, and Protestants are very new. And so the parachurch sort of came up to be, they're not exactly churches, but they're sort of like churches. And it's also deeply Protestant, is that they're kind of under the umbrella. Mark Knowles thesis of the Christianity in America, which is basically that, you know, part of the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the part of what happens in the American civil, and the American Revolutionary Wars, the British are trying to keep the Americans on one side of the Appalachians and Americans are like this free land out there and the Indians, I mean, we're going to beat them one way or another. And so we want that land. And so part of the American Revolution is get the British to stop. You know, keeping us, keep, get the British to stop. you know, guaranteeing can go and take their stuff. And so what happens is colonization outstrips the institutions of the church. So the Bible itself starts acting sort of like an institution. And that's where in Protestant land, you get Bible believing churches. And that becomes an implicit guarantor of things. And that's part of what happens with parachurches. All right. Oh, strange theology has a question. How broadly can we interpret the body of Christ and stay consistent with 1 Corinthians 12, 12 to 27? I wish I could rattle off one Corinthians 12, 12 to 27, but I'll out myself as a- Just as a body. No one has many parts. Isn't he talking about speaking in tongues? No, it's the body and it's the giftedness of the body and it's Paul's metaphor of, you know, in other words, don't the different, and we're gonna count the Catholics and the Orthodox as denominations. Don't these different traditions within the body of Christ also function in the same way that Paul talks about as the Pentecostals do this? It's sort of Richard Foster's streams of living water. You have all these streams. And I see it that way. The Catholic church does, you know, for the Orthodox, it's liturgy. For the Catholics, it's sacrament. And that's not the reduction of them. For the Protestants, it's preaching. And for the Pentecostals, it's, you know, so there's some of that. The first part of 1 Corinthians 12 is what the, yeah. The verses right above those verses are the Pentecostal verses. Okay, CW, could Cale briefly touch on his recent George Bailey moment so we can all reaffirm our own wavering faith in humanity? I don't think you have to. I'm not ready. I'm just overwhelmed with gratitude. Just shocked, but thank you, sorry. We love you, Cale. On the whole, do you remain hopeful of what Newhouse called a Catholic moment? Ha ha ha ha. You better flesh that out a little bit. That's Richard John Newhouse, right? Father John, Richard John Newhouse, founder of First Things Convert from, I believe he was a Lutheran pastor, if I'm not mistaken. Yeah, he was Lutheran. You know, he, and no, I don't remain hopeful in that way because I think it was meant in a very specific context that this was kind of a moment that Catholicism would come in and I think in his worldview, re-inscribe and reaffirm the United States of America. So I think it was a very much, I mean, like he was a neocon and he very much believed in that kind of John Courtney Murray, George Weigel view that America was Catholicism and Catholicism, you know, that was all kind of, I'm just not there personally. I mean, I have a tremendous amount of respect for those guys, but I don't think it means, I don't think it means anything in the way that he first uttered those words back in the nineties or eighties, whatever it was. Sorry. I don't know what to do with Anselman's question. Is it public apostasy to participate in worship of religions that reject the Lord Jesus Christ? Can apostate still be Pope? So yeah, do you know who Anselman is? I mean, I know him from the comments, but where does he come from? Is he Catholic or no? I think he's a Scottish. I don't think he quite is SSPX, but maybe close. Okay, so he's on the trad side. Yeah, and of course that's the question, right? Did the Pope worship Pachamama in the Vatican gardens during the Synod on the Amazon, right? And therefore did, if he did worship this Pachamama thing, which, you know, I think the Pachamama thing is a problem. I don't, you know, look, I mean, then you could say the same thing about John Paul II and Benedict because John Paul II kissed the Quran at a CC. I'm not gonna win this argument. I don't know, it's a problem, Anselman. I think it's a problem. What do you want from me? Is the question whether lion or fox is better or is it an intent to find a third way? Do spiritual realities supersede practical political realities? I think part of the reason WASP leaders in America adopted the fox posture is because of what Sam noted about the way, the different way that the American empire works. The American empire doesn't work by, you know, Donald Trump in the election to 2016 says, you know, gosh, we conquered Iraq and we gave back all that land. No, that's totally the American imperial way to conquer Iraq and then give it to hopefully a regime that's going to make sure that the oil gets used in ways that are, you know, that the American for the most part wants. So it's part of the, America is a very foxy empire and people who are sort of like, now we should be lions. It's like, yeah, but even after being, do you really want to occupy Iraq? Very quickly we decided, you know, look how long we were in Afghanistan and- Right, but Paul, you know, you look at some of the work that Rod Dreher has been doing lately, you know, he's living in Budapest and writing for the American, the European conservative now. And, you know, and one of the things that he constantly talks about, you know, is that he had never fully appreciated the way in which American imperialism worked vis-a-vis the State Department versus the United States Marines. And, you know, I think that that has always been part of empire building, you know, armies get the press and the pictures, right? But where the real work happens is when these, when the State Department- Diplomats pick up the phone to each other. Yeah, you know, and say, look, fly the progress pride flag or you don't get funding. You know, like that to me is the bully part of empire that we rarely talk about. And, you know, even I was amazed how long I lived before I had much of an understanding about the Suez crisis. Right, right, right. Where basically the French and the Brits are like taking over and Eisenhower picks up the phone and says, it's time for you to go. You don't control the important waterways anymore. Yeah. And so England and France- No one does, but we do actually. Sorry, your husband will call on you when we need you to do something. Thank you very much. I think that there's something a little bit like Fox and Lion isn't maybe quite right as masculine versus feminine power. And the feminine power is sort of the power to seduce and to set the frame of the conversation. And America has shockingly good feminine power. And part of the way that America works is that we have just this unending faith in our ability to seduce people just enough to be able to cooperate with us. And like even George Bush was like, all right, once we create the power situation such that democracy can flourish, no one will be able to resist that and it'll just happen. And it's just these weird structural Saddam Hussein things that are in the way. And so it was like masculine power with the faith that the feminine power would ultimately win. And I think the feminine power, well, it still has a lot of, I'm not gonna say it's done, but there, because there's still a lot of juice left there. But yeah. The shadow matriarch is America. The shadow matriarch. So is the American conservatism crypto Catholic or not? We never answered the question. It certainly seems to have produced, again, since the council, maybe that might be an easier conversation, Sam, since say 1965, let's call it. It certainly seems to have produced a lot of the intellectual justification or case for American conservatism. Whether that's still true. And I think that's probably what Nate was probably objecting to, Paul. I think that's probably changed a decent amount. The Supreme Court notwithstanding. But man, I think that we maybe, people need to talk more seriously about the death of neoconservatism as a force. I mean, it's amazing to me, as someone who grew up in all of that, that it's like dead. I mean, you know, like, like you want a kiss of death, like try to be a young person and be a neocon. Yeah. It's just like unheard of. It just doesn't make any sense. So I don't know where this American conservative-ism is right now. Sam, what do you got? I think that's what I was gonna say is what's American conservatism right now? And it's like, is Donald Trump, who let's just like give him the credit that he's due, is by far the most influential thing in American conservatism right now. Hate it or love it. Like, it's true. I mean, like, what, like, he doesn't even need to debate anyone. And Nikki Haley can get like up to 15% in the polls or something like that, right? No, it's astounding. It's astounding. And look, and again, like- How Catholic is Donald Trump? What does this Catholic thing have over Donald Trump? What influence do they have over him? Like, none that I can tell. So, and you decide- I mean, Nikki Haley would have been an absolute dream candidate 15 years ago. I mean, are you kidding me? You know, a conservative, a neo-conservative woman of color. Oh man, I would have like high-fived you. With a Southern accent and evangelical Christian. We're gonna win by double digits, you know, whatever. Garbage, yeah. Wow. All right. So what are your thoughts concerning the church needing to die and be resurrected, transfigured sacramentally with Christ? Unrecognizable? I mean, this is like the question that Peugeot and Vervecky talk about, where Vervecky likes it when Peugeot says that the church sort of needs to die and rise again. I think that would be a really big sacrifice that might, I don't know, that would cost a lot. And I- Go ahead, yeah. No, no, no, keep going, keep going. And I'm not, I mean, I do think that things will change, but I think that Christianity needs a sense of continuity with itself to really be historically credible. And people, all that we talk about people talking to Catholicism and Orthodoxy, part of what they find attractive is a greater sense of historical continuity and historical self-awareness than the evangelical mega church that they grew up in. And then like, you know, they read Church Fathers and they're like, what? There's all this stuff I didn't know. Because they were never taught. And so this idea of the church dying and resurrecting, I don't know, I feel like that's some, you know, that'll only happen once. And that'll cause, when Jesus comes, that'll happen, but like, I don't think it should happen before then. Yeah, I was just gonna add, I, you know, I started, I'm in the middle of reading Morton's Hyperobjects right now. And it's a really interesting book, Paul. It's like, it's like you're listening to a kind of early aughts Delphic oracle. It's very interesting just in terms of its style and its, you know, associative quality. Anyway, and he makes this funny thing. I don't think, he doesn't seem like he's a really funny guy, but I think he's kind of a serious guy. But anyway, he talks, you know, that there have been many ends of the world. And I thought that was a really helpful way to think of things, you know. So, you know, at the advent of the gas works in cities, like that's the end of a world, you know, with the advent of electricity and wired homes, like that's an end of a world. And then in backwards, you can sort of say, you know, internal plumbing is an end of a world. And so I thought that that was actually a kind of a helpful way to think through it, right? So even like in my church, you know, I think it's very safe to say whether you fall into the hermeneutics of continuity or the hermeneutics of disruption, it is very, very clearly the case that the Second Vatican Council signaled an end of a world. And, you know, people can get all upset with me and angry with me about how I'm talking, but you know exactly what I'm talking about when you say that, you know. So Paul, you know, when your church, for instance, decided, I think in the late 80s or 90s to allow ordained women, right? That's an end of a world. And so those people who left, you know, we were looking at that interview of that young man who had been part of a separatist group and came back, you know, that was clearly an end of a world. Yeah, yeah. You know, I watched the Jesus Revolution at your behest and what a great movie. It was really an enjoyable movie, but man, talk about an end of a world. Good Lord, Kelsey Grammer's church before and after what's his name, it's like, I mean, how can you even pretend? And like you said, like the fashion and all that sort of stuff, it's just like the total break, the total break. And so I think that, you know, to the question, yeah, yeah, we'll continue to do this thing until it becomes actual, like Sam says, at the high risk combos. I'm totally on the same page as you with that, Kale. I think the, you know, just the changes I've seen in the Christian Reformed Church over my lifetime. And I was at, I've always been at the fringe of the Christian Reformed Church. I've never really been at it, except when I was in college and seminary, more sort of at its heart. Well, you were part of the racial reconciliation wing of the church, right? You were already literally on the fringe there, right? So it's, and you find, and Sam, we've talked about this before with respect to, you know, was ancient Christianity sex negative? Yes, it was. Which was mentioned in that video that started this conversation. And Laura, Liz and I were like, where was our shout out? Yeah, they just said that on a platter. Sam, the Chicago, the Chicago, do you guys have a real name? See, until you name your group, see, once you name your group, then you can have a shout out. If you don't have a name, how can we shout you out? So, and why aren't you a church? You're not a, you know, it's like when Chad says to me on the bus at Chino, wouldn't it be great if we're all in the same church? And it's like, we can't even all take communion together. John Masters, with regard to the Catholic influence over American conservatism, is there a growing antagonism between those actors and France is due to his apparent progressive orientation? I, can I go? Yeah, you're the only one who can. So, no, you guys can do it. Like I talk about y'all, so you can talk about it. Anyway, yeah, I don't see it as a, and I think clearly the Pope does not like Americans. Clearly, and he really doesn't like conservative Americans. And so we can dance this up with theology all we want, but I think the dominant metaphor is that, you're a spurned peronista. I just think that that's the frame that you have to see it. That that's his frame. He doesn't like Americans. And so, yeah, I guess he's apparently progressive. I mean, he is, I mean, personnel's policy, look at all the people he's named. They're all progressives. They all want a new church. So here's a follow-up sub question. I don't mean to steal from Monica. What role does America have in the future of the Catholic Church? Because at some point, I really got to imagine that, what percentage of the money is America floating in this country at the moment? All those sorts of questions. Yeah, great question, great question. So the reason why this is even a fight right now is because all the Germans, what's left of the German church provides the Roman church with all of her money. And so they can't quite quit her. Because they need that cash. And Germany has that weird thing where you select your denomination. My sister lives in Germany. You say you can either be Catholic, evangelical, which is Lutheran, and like a couple other things, and then the government tithes for you. So I think, yeah, no, it's crazy. And that survives through Hitler. Yeah, it's amazing. Yeah, it's truly amazing. But so I think the, and that's part of the antagonism of Team France is like the English speaking members of Team France's, hate the American influence because they feel like we're making it look bad for the Americans sort of playing that kind of game. But I think that the future of the church is absolutely going to be heavily American despite sort of what's going on right now. And it's gonna be heavily American because, again, even though numbers are waiting for everybody across the board, I mean, who's left, right? I mean, who's really gonna be left? And you still have a bunch of weirdos like me who still care about this stuff. And I think that there's still plenty of us, many, I don't know, but Rome's gonna need America. And it's really sad, there's really no need. It was such an unfortunate turn of circumstances because America has had a great relationship with Rome really since the council, prior to John Paul II, that Americans enjoyed a great relationship with Rome. And I think I thought it was a good and fruitful relationship. So yeah, it's very weird to say this, like why pick fights? It just doesn't make any sense. David French being the water boy for Catholics by bashing white evangelicals. Is the water boy for the Wasps who, that's really who he's water boying for, yeah. So I was on a, I sometimes go on Muslim YouTube channels because they like to talk to me for some obvious reasons, often to talk about how dumb the Trinity is and stuff like that. And so, and I always have to feel careful, am I water boying for the Muslim apologists? And cause a lot of them have way bigger channels than anyone else who invites me on, Paul included. And so it is one of those dynamics that I have to be careful with. And the ortho bros will attack me if I go on the wrong Muslim YouTube channels. And I'm like thinking about that as like trying to empathize with David French. Cause David French, you know, feels like something's going wrong in his church. And in some degree, he's kind of right about the diagnosis, if not right about the prognosis and what to do about it. And so he's being ignored by the institution he wants to help, but this other institution has ill will for the institution he wants to help, will give him air time. And does that air time help more than it hurts? I don't know. It's like, I am trying to be nice to him. Or as part of this, the Protestant problem that is sort of at the center of this conversation where David French isn't in an institution. David French is out there in the open sea of evangelicalism where it's all brokering and networks and you're trying to find coalitions in order to do a thing. And now he's in a coalition with Rob Reiner to do a movie. This is kind of at the heart of it. Whereas, you know, at least for the Roman Catholics, they're having a fight. And in some ways, you know who wins maybe when the next Pope is named. And I mean, cause you guys, you know, more similar to let's say the fight within the American political structure where there is a structure. And so you are fighting for position within the structure. There is no structure that David French is fighting with. David French is out there trying to fight a spirit, trying to fight a hyper object. Right, right. Good. Yeah. This is where I think the hyper object thing is actually very helpful. But either of you seen this movie from the mid 2000s, it starred Matt Damien, Robert De Niro, Angelina Jolie, was called The Good Shepherd. Have you heard about this movie? So it basically it's a movie, I believe Scorsese even directed it. Movie's okay. But it's basically the story of Matt Damien is a guy who becomes part of the early CIA. And so it really is kind of about the whole, the sort of the high point of the Wasp establishment and its degeneration post-war, right? And a lot of that is because, you know, just demographically, right? You know, that you've got all of these Germans and Italian and Irish who are now really becoming. The blacks have their music, the Jews have their religion. The Italians have their family. What is it you guys have? That's exactly right. This country, sir. That's right. And we just let you stay here. It's a great line. I just butchered the line, but he just looks at, oh gosh, Joe Pesci in the face and says, we just let you work, like live here. Like you just doing your time here. This is our country. And I, but it really struck me when I saw it way back in the day. And when Aaron Ren started talking about the, actually with Jodie Bottom, of course, was talking about what the anxious age, the Wasp establishment, but then Ren starts talking about it again. And I just have been unable to stop thinking about this movie. And of course, you know, also kind of in Tucker, Tucker is part of that world too, in an interesting sort of way, tangentially, that old Wasp world. But I'm David French, while not a Wasp proper, right? I mean, he's a Tennessee Hill boy, right? There's still that sense that David French played the American game, right? That ultimately his really, and this is where I think same your line of questioning with me about Catholicism and the uneasy relationship that Catholicism has with American democracy, I think is a real thing, right? And I think for David French, it's like someone attacked his religion, right? And his religion consisted of, you know, robust foreign engagement, you know, at home, free markets, and, you know, may no one besmirch the good name of Ronald Reagan, right? And I think with, you know, the Trump thing that clearly broke his brain and many of these guys' brains, and for some good reason, let's be honest, I mean, he really was attacked, you know, by the sort of the crazy part of the alt-right. I mean, that's a real thing that happened, and I don't wanna ever pretend that that hasn't been the case. But ultimately, I think you go where, you know, people treat you nice. And so I think he retreated more fully and more truly into his actual religion. You know, if we find out what you really are by, but what is it preference, when you choose something, what do they call it? Reveal preference, right? You know, I think it actually just revealed what he really, really was. And he's not whatever modern American evangelicalism is. He's American, like he's an American, you know, he was in the army, right? But don't say American isn't Protestant, right? You know, like that thing that I said at the beginning, those two things are too tightly interwoven. Oh, but yeah, but you'd never have an argument for me on that front. You know, I remember buying the line, you know, that America is an idea and all this sort of stuff. And I get why people say that, and I'm not entirely immune to that frame. But, you know, I've been really swayed by, you know, the tribes theory of, you know, the Scots Irish, the Scots American tribe view of the American founding, and that this was, you know, they weren't fighting for ideas. They were fighting because of these assholes were coming and, you know, this foreign country, you know, is coming in and messing with us, right? That kind of visceral tribalism. And so to me, that spirit is Americanism. And that's ultimately what David French is. And I think that it's exposing maybe some of the contradictions in Americanism, but I think that's ultimately what he is. Where was I going to go with this? Oh, so, you know, pointing to that movie, The Good Shepherd, I mean, in many ways, Watergate, Nixon's resignation, that was really the end of lion America. And so Jimmy Carter comes in. And of course, you know, Gerald R. Ford from Grand Rapids, Michigan, kind of a transition figure, nice guy, super nice guy, good Christian man, good father, all those things. But Jimmy Carter comes in, and that's at the same time, the counterculture- And we can't even rescue a couple hundred Americans from an embassy in Tyran, you know, right? Exactly. And so in that sense- And the way they try to do it, like the sort of the secret, like backdoor op that blows up, you know, spectacularly, like you can't even mark a division in there, like just get the- Yeah, yeah, yeah, totally. But then of course, Reagan comes in, and Reagan gives the sense that we still look like lions, and Reagan had some lion in him in terms of, you know, in terms of how he dealt with the Soviet Union, but Reagan also had this sense of, if you just get me in the room with the Russians, I'll charm them. And of course, Gorbachev at that point is dealing with a collapsing house, and you know, the end of the Cold War. And then at the end of the Cold War, you know, and new atheism is very much a Fox thing, you know, new atheism is very against lions. Right, right, right. So if you follow that strain along- No, that's cool, I like that. No, that makes a lot of sense to me. No, that's great, that's great. But yeah, we can still park some aircraft carriers off the coast of Israel and show what's up is what's up, at least for now. If someone calls our bluff sometime, or if enough people call our bluff simultaneously, I can't help but worry that there will, America will have to really, really choose between fox and lion in the next couple decades, geopolitically. Like, can we still call the Suez Canal on the phone and be like, excuse me, if you've forgotten, this is ours, in fact, or will the Suez Canal or some other waterway somewhere or some other important infrastructure, geopolitical, whatever, you know, really break free of our power? This will be something that will be really interesting to see how much fight we have left in us and how much fight everyone else does. Well, China and Ukraine, I mean, both of those questions, you know, is, and Biden, you know, Biden, Biden wasn't supposed to say, yeah, we'll defend Taiwan, but Biden, you know, but then again, having to say that at that point, in a sense reveals weakness as well. Eisenhower didn't go on, you know, did Eisenhower go on the television networks and tell on the networks, or did he just have to call them on the phone? So, someone wants to, someone wants to, where was the question? Sorry, I can't hit all the questions. There's more questions than I can hit. So, someone wants to, someone asked the question, I'd be curious to hear what you guys have to say. Define evangelical and is the CRC evangelical? Well, does someone want to finally tell me if I get to count as an evangelical? Yeah. I'm still waiting for clarity on this question. So, I'm probably not the right person to ask, or maybe I'm the exact right person to ask because I've traversed so much of this boundary, I know where exactly where it is. Well, and I've intimated at it, but part of what I've been really, so I want, so Sam, and part of you, part of what's inspired me on this is you, because you're the one who has paid attention to Islam on YouTube and Islamic apologists and this whole thing, and I've been, I've dipped my toe into the whole Muslim thing a little bit, but watching this show on Hulu of Rami, just really, so what on earth is a religion? This gets to your point too, Kale, about, I mean, you, there's no question in my, I visited you and I never felt as Protestant as when I visited Kale, and we would go into the chapel and he would, and first it was like, it was like the experience that I had when I went to lunch with one of the truck drivers when I was delivering lumber in college, and sat down, we were having lunch together because we're out on a long run, and I just bowed my head in prayer, and what you doing? What you doing? I said, I'm having a prayer. Don't do that anymore, it makes me feel weird. But, so Kale, I mean, Kale's got the propositional beliefs, he's got the, I mean, Kale is a four P Catholic, but then when you get into this question of Islam, and I don't, I haven't yet sort of brought in, I don't know how many people watched Sam Harris and Eric Weinstein on trigonometry with respect to Hamas, and Sam Harris is basically like, kill them, kill them all, and Eric's like, you know, but there's a lot of whole, lot of nice people that might be a little sympathetic to, you know, the sorrows of Hamas, and you're gonna kill them too? Can we denominationalize Islam is the question. Right. Can we do what, can we do the Muslims, what we did to the Catholics and the Jews? That is the question, and do we have faith in our feminine seductive power to allow them to keep enough of their identity where they don't see what happens to them as they go through this process? And that's exactly what happens in that Rami, cause like Rami can't give up the porn, he can't give up hooking up with the Jewish girls and the white girls, and then he decides he's gonna be a real Muslim, and then he sleeps with his cousin right before his wedding night with the real Muslim girl. And you know, and it's all of that tension is, well, can Islam be seduced? And don't forget, Osama bin Laden attacked America, because basically what a lot of the Islamists were saying is that America, Hollywood is seducing the young men of Islam. And they're asking the same, you know, the same question that Kale was saying, will our children be Muslim? And you know, and so now, you know, depending on who you believe in terms of what's gonna happen in Iran, how long will that Islamist regime go on, or will this whole massive group of young people in Iran finally say, no, we want Western movies, and we wanna wear what we want. Will they all go Sarah Heider? So- Right, right. Evangelicalism is a mood and a vibe, and the vibe is dying. It's hard not to see otherwise. Wow, there's a mic drop moment. There's a mic drop moment. All right, anything else I can't follow, I can't possibly catch up on all the comments, so. CW weighs in with the big box, money box. I'm gonna see the world, then I'm coming back here to go to college and see what I know, and then I'm gonna build things. Kale has done George Bailey one better, securing the future of all things by building up people. Bells are ringing. That's beautiful. That's beautiful. That's beautiful. All right, let's, oh, oh, grail country, poor. For those of you who watched, we very much wanted to have Nate in, but he had some work conflicts, and so we tried, and so those of you who are coming here for Nate, sorry, Islam is in conflict with modernity, it never gave up tradition, and the hardcore traddies should let that sink in. Yeah, but there, and again, to me, this is one of the, and I know Christians have, Christians have played the lion and eaten lambs countless times over the centuries, but part of, I can't help think that part of what's going on now is in fact, you know, Islam doesn't have the same DNA in it as Christians do with respect to, so I listened to, I listened to The Rest is History, an eight-part series on the conquest of the Aztecs, and Tom Holland keeps reminding us, you know, all of these people who are like, oh, the horrible Catholic, you know, Spanish who did this, that's a Christian objection, you know? They're complaining about Christianity with Christianity, and so I think part of what's happening with this whole struggle with Islam is that every time they kill someone, people who have been deeply formed by the West say, I'm sorry, I just can't sign up for hunting down men, women, and children and killing them in their beds. I differentiate between soldiers and non-combatants, and anyone who kills a civilian for political gain is a terrorist, and I'm not having it, and I think this is part of the Christian DNA that through all of this stuff that we've had in the world has deeply impacted everybody's moral accomplices. I also think Islam is really diverse and complicated, and one thing that I have noticed in my ventures into Muslim land is that when they fight each other, they fight each other with a level of viciousness on the internet that Christians don't do. I mean, I get attacked by ortho bros, and I get attacked by James White, angry Calvinist, caged stage people, but there's a level of civility that they will still show me that the Muslims don't show to each other when they are fighting, and I found that very interesting, but I think that, I don't know, partly for that reason, the Muslims' inability to solve their own internal conflicts might cause them to see liberalism as a solution. Right, Sarah Heider. Yeah, and I think, I don't know, I mean, there's certainly lots of kinds of Islam that I think would be just perfectly fine in Western civilization than American, like have no problem. There are some kinds of Islam where I'm not so sure, but I think that on the whole, I think that it will be hard for Islam, because really what's been keeping Islam from fighting each other is America. They would never admit that, but that's true. And so what happens if America stops keeping the Muslims from fighting each other? They'll find that they need liberalism more than actually just about anybody. And so I think that it will be hard for them to come to the conclusion to not support the liberal project. No, I agree, I agree. All right, last words, then we'll end the transmission. It's great to see you guys. Great conversation, I appreciate it. Really good, I appreciate all of you. Appreciate Beth-El coming on, Nate trying to make the time. But I do think, Sam, that I think that this, the Islamic question isn't going to go away. And I think this feminine power, both in terms of let's say the Whore of Babylon, that America has some of that in it, but also the- Also a little bit Esther, right? Esther is a good example of the feminine seductive power that could be used for good ends, right? Yep, she's true. There's the Whore of Babylon and then there's Esther and Persia. Those are two sides of a similar coin. That's right. So yeah, yeah, anyway. On my closing shot, I just hope that we have generously and productively avoided answering the question directly as much as possible. So that's what I hope for. Jesuits! Jesuits! Always, always. All right, thank you all for watching and see you on the flip side. All right, see you guys. Take care, bye bye.