https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=IbuTAQunSLY

 Hi, this is Paul. I want to do a little commentary on two videos. One is this little excerpt forum from John Vervecky and Rafe Kelly's conversation about non-theism, and the other is a conversation on unbelievable between cosmic skeptic and bishop baron, because they overlap in some ways and I think can probably set up some helpful things to see and talk about. So let's jump in with Rafe and John. For me, when you talk about non-theism, it's almost like the question of the objective existence of God is just the wrong question. Yes. The core of the non-theist position is rejecting the shared, so it rejects the shared presuppositions of both the theists and the atheists about how to best understand this phenomena that you and I are clearly exist, which is the experience of the sacred that is really transformative of people. So, right. Okay, right there. Almost in the first 30 seconds of the video, you get the heart of the video. Now there's more stuff we're going to want to talk about, but I want to go all the way back and listen to that again. For me, when you talk about non-theism, it's almost like the question of the objective existence of God is just the wrong question. Okay. We have to deal with this word objective. Okay, what does Rafe and pretty much all of us when we use that word, imagine we mean by that word objective. Part of it. Part of that word means something outside our desire, something that impinges experientially. There's a big piece of this talk here that is all about, you know, phenomenology. Heidegger will get named. It's that we have an experience of something and that is usually what we mean by this word objective. It was objectively very rainy in Sacramento yesterday. Sacramento received more rain in 24 hours than it had received in any other 24 hour period in over a century. So it was objectively rainy, whether good, bad, right or wrong, whether we like it or not, it was So that's one sense of the word. Now, if in fact, someone were in prison in an isolation unit with no walls and no news and no anything, and if the building was sufficiently buffered, they might have had zero understanding that it was raining. But there's an objectivity to that, which is both phenomenological and which has a reality outside of phenomenon. We get at that with this idea of something that is public, so it's more than one person is aware of it. So this objective word is a very difficult word because what the word objective invites us to imagine is again this view from nowhere where we can see the world as it is. Now, someone who's living in Southern California might say it's not raining at all. Well, it's not raining in Southern California, it's raining in Sacramento. And so then, well, this view from nowhere is also sort of a view from everywhere. It's an attempt to get at a kind of knowledge that is non-subjective, and that's where you have objective, some subjective, and that certain pair. So let's listen to this again now. For me, when you talk about non-theism, it's almost like the question of the objective existence of God is just the wrong question. Now, of course, when we're using the word God, that word is in our imaginations going to elicit something that has been deeply conditioned in us. And in many ways, I sort of hold Michelangelo and the Sistine Chapel responsible for this because it is very hard for many of us who have been raised and formed by media in the West, Christian media, secular media, to not imagine God as this man with white hair. I once had a little boy, his parents were coming to church a little bit, and he looked up to me and he said, are you God? Because God looks like a white dude with a lot of white hair. So I told him, no, I am not God. Namaste. I did not say that to the child, but I live in Northern California, so I shouldn't make jokes like that. That's my point. I'm not God. But what do we mean by that word God? Well, in many ways, all of this atheism versus theism on the internet debates is all about having an argument, and we don't really care to define what we're arguing about. And that gets brought forward in this approach to non-theism, which tries to walk away from this. Now, it's very difficult to talk about this because many, many people are invested in this conversation, and in some ways, this move to non-theism sort of feels like a trick. The question of the objective existence of God is just the wrong question. Yes. The core of the non-theist position is rejecting the shared, so it rejects the shared presuppositions of both the theist and the atheist about how to best understand this phenomena that you and I are clearly exist. Okay. What phenomena is he talking about now? Again, a phenomena might be having a historical rain day in Sacramento. We're going to have to be a little bit more specific about what phenomena, and he's going to be. Which is the experience of the sacred that is really transformative of people. Okay. The experience of the sacred that is really transformative of people, and I think that's actually quite a good definition, although again, all of those words are, there's a lot more beneath the surface than the low resolution, handily grasp of these words that we have. I have to take a drink, so I'm going to pause. So again, back to the beginning. Let's listen to it again. For me, when you talk about non-theism, it's almost like the question of the objective existence of God is just the wrong question. Yes. The core of the non-theist position is. Okay. What do we mean by the wrong question? Well, that's a good question too. It means that to some degree, whichever way you answer this question, theist or atheist, you're not going to get out of the question what you really want or hope for. Okay. And I think now having had a decade or so of debates about theism versus atheism sort of bears that out. All right. Let's start again. For me, when you talk about non-theism, it's almost like the question of the objective existence of God is just the wrong question. Yes. The core of the non-theist position is rejecting the shared, so it rejects the shared presuppositions of both the theist and the atheist. So presuppositions, we might say the assumed definitions or what they're talking about between these two groups. And we might think about mental pictures. Now I did a fair amount of describing that in my Adult Sunday School. I'm on the fence as to whether I'm going to keep posting my Adult Sunday School content on this channel. It's always, I live stream it on the church channel, and so it's always available on the church channel. And the link to the church channel is below. So if I stop posting it, you can keep finding it on the church channel. But part of why I really love the Adult Sunday School class and why in some ways my Adult Sunday School class was the precursor to me being on YouTube is because I like thinking together. And what's amazing about doing that in the context of say an Adult Sunday School class with randos as it were, nobody in the Sunday School class besides me has usually has any kind of theological education. They are regular normal people who have day jobs and have had children or raise children and go to work and they're not familiar with all of these esoteric words or concepts that we bat around. And so for me, it's an enormously profitable enterprise to talk to people in a room in real time and professors have the same experience and try to figure out what kind of illustrations, language makes the lights go on. That's the exciting thing that happens in class. Okay, so I've just distracted myself. This whole debate between theism and atheism. Usually people don't pause to ask, well, what do we mean by theism? And atheism is a word that at least how it's understood today is a far less what do we mean by either of these words? And so non theism is sort of a verbal way to reset the conversation and do some talking about what are we trying to get at? And I love the way Rafe mentioned, it's the wrong question. What does that mean? Well, we're looking for something and choosing A or B theism or atheism won't necessarily give us exactly what we're looking for. About how to best understand this phenomena that you and I are clearly exist. Okay, so this one, while he's going to tell us all of this is the experience of the sacred that is really transformative of people. Okay, now, john and I are going to talk this week. And part of what I think we're going to talk about is the sacred that was a big piece of his awakening from the meaning crisis coming out as a cognitive scientist. We have this phenomenon of the sacred and now in many videos, I have connected the phenomenology of the sacred to the frame problem. Because in a sense, what if you're going to if you're going to do productive reduction of the way to combinatorially explosive world, you have to somehow get a handle on things, you have to somehow you need a fixed point. It's sort of an archa, sort of the point that Archimedes made, you need a fixed point. And from that fixed point, you can start fixing other points. Now, part of what I think happened in modernity is that they modernity attempts to improve on the fixed point, the historical fixed point of I don't want to use theism now because the word is too fraught that the I'm sort of stuck with it. I don't have another word that the fixed point of people who used God in their language in order to process the world. Now, God being the frame of frames, I made a video a long time about that, and this is some of my conversation with John over time. The point about God being a frame of frames is that God is a particularly useful frame because it's through that frame that we can see more things than necessarily through our individual consciousness frame. We all have experience with each other. Well, that's your truth, we'll say sometimes. That's your perspective. And so we all recognize that the frame of individual consciousness is limited because we very quickly in conversation with each other discover that we're hoping to have a fixed point apart from you or I. We want a fixed point of you and I, that sort of agreement. And then we want that fixed point of you and I to be that to scale. And so we want a fixed point of our community and sort of how you can understand community is around. We have a common frame that there's sort of a fixed point that we use through which to see the rest of the world. And so very quickly you can see the relationship between this frame and the sacred that so I came up to part of this when I was listening to Benjamin Boyce and James Lindsay talking about wokeism and all that where whether it's your lived experience or your experience of oppression or it's anti-racism or it's anti-misogyny or it's anti-homophobia, whatever that fixed point is going to determine how the rest of the world is seen. And so if let's say anti-racism is your fixed point, then all of history will be about racism. If God is your fixed point or theism, let's say small t theism, maybe we'll play that game. Small t theism is your fixed point, then everything is about whether or not something someone is or isn't in relationship with God. Now you can read the Bible in this way and understand that well different books in the Old Testament, for example, are very conscious about certain aspects. So maybe the book of judges is conscious about sort of a shared leadership that Israel needs in order to survive the normal tyranny of her surrounding neighbors or maybe it will be about high places or maybe it will be about whether you can have high places versus the temple or maybe it'll be about you take the covenant and that then becomes a fixed point and everything then becomes filtered through are you faithful or not to the covenant. So what we tend to do is we recognize that let's say making everything about let's say baldness is a pretty lousy fixed point through which to view the world. So we're often looking for frames that will work on a whole series of levels. Now let's look at the book of let's talk a little bit more about this non-theism here. Being the shared so it rejects the shared presuppositions of both the theist and the atheist about how to best understand this phenomena that you and I are clearly exist which is the experience of the sacred that is really transformative of people. Okay now this transformation that we're looking for is again something that we judge to be positive and I can work with some of John's language I think agency is a helpful word and we're looking for reciprocal broadening of agency rather than reciprocal narrowing if you go back to his awakening from the meaning crisis series talking about addiction let's say addiction is a fairly clear case to see reciprocal narrowing just this morning. So we had over five inches of rain I don't know how many how much we had actually I don't have a rain gauge but we got a lot of rain and one of the homeless guys on the property here is there's no roof over his head he's living in a corner and he's it's a corner surrounded by a wall of a mass of garbage and you know what I know about this individual is that this individual became homeless about three years ago when his wife kicked him out because of his drug habit and so this morning he emerges from the squalor and you know I've I've met family members grandchildren he's a he's an older man and this morning he emerges from the squalor the number of the number of walkers that he's generating is getting is getting quite interesting in that I'm sure he's going to clinics or doctors or something and they're giving him walkers because he's having difficulty walking he used to have a bike when he started here but I've been watching his decline over the last three years and so so he's getting walkers from doctors and what's astounding is that the most immediate what is his real health problem is it age or is it drugs well he's myself the doctors his family we seem powerless to do anything to help him with respect to drugs and so we give him walkers so he we can help him walk so he can walk to the grocery store to panhandle and he can walk to the drug dealer to get his drug and he's basically on a 12-hour cycle of you know doing what he needs to survive getting his drugs and then being there for 12 hours while he experiences his bliss and comes down from his high that's reciprocal narrowing his his life now has been reduced to a drug and again from now there's lots of sacred frames operating in terms of the value judgment that we're doing around this person but there it is and so you know if you look at my morality video that I did recently on morality rules or rationality rules you know there's there's sort of this dead reckoning that that we do and and we can often you know I've watched a lot of people undergo various transformations uh Christian conversion obviously as a pastor it's one thing that I've seen I've seen a lot of people transform away from Christianity you might call it deconstruction and so I watch those cases quite carefully too and I'm always I I try to be as open-minded as possible when I watch their transformations because well obviously they wouldn't be doing it whether it means they're pursuing maybe they're getting a gym membership maybe they're pursuing yoga maybe they're pursuing meditation again in the case of Christian conversion they start disciplining themselves to attend a Christian church they start doing devotions they start praying all of these things and what I what was really interesting about raf and john's kind of conversation here is that well maybe we've got questions about this theism language game let's call it I don't really particularly like that way of talking about it but it'll work for now maybe we have questions about this theism language game but if we sort of pivot and say okay well let's let's take a step out into non-theism and see if maybe this new perspective can afford some some wisdom some knowledge some community that that we can understand each other better because we are looking for transformations and in many ways sometimes I see people deconstruct from Christianity and it's kind of an upgrade because it's like yeah that's they're doing a little better without Christianity right now and again for a Christian minister to say that sounds like abdication of my responsibility but not all people's application or appropriation of Christianity always seems helpful to them but what do I mean by that well you might say okay vander clay what's your frame I have a few different frames that I apply to people from my Christian perspective quite obviously are they growing in do are they growing in trusting Jesus more than they trust themselves now again I can very easily think of some really bad applications of Christianity that would seem to relate to that idea so that's not the only thing that I look at I look at well in in some ways my trust metric might also relate to anxiety because if they're learning to trust Jesus more than they trust themselves they'll be less anxious and it won't be through medication I have no problem if they pursue you know a psych a psychiatrist or a psychologist to help them with their anxiety I've seen efficacious treatment in both respects have I will seen also seen a lot of non-efficacious efficacious treatment in both respects but I've seen Christianity when people learn to trust Jesus more than they trust themselves they're less anxious and when they're less anxious this then gets into some more of my frames they're more loving of what we're going to use God and we're going to have to talk a lot more about that that what we what we mean when when they say we say God there but do they love their neighbors more do they love their neighbors better are they a better husband now again what do you mean by better because that's not just out there in the world as such but we can dead reckon a lot of these things generally speaking a better husband is faithful to the the wife and the children in terms of his resources in terms of his attention in terms of his sexual fidelity in lots of men lots of measures so do they become a better husband do they become a better worker do they become a better neighbor do they and again there's a ton of dead reckoning stuff that you can glean from there without necessarily breaking a secular frame and of course given the age that we're in that's those are really important measures to us so let's understand the transformations the phenomenology of transformation that these two are talking about so we talked about trust we talked about love and let's also talk about joy does your life have more joy and again I would say then also to generosity because the addict that lives in the corner and will undergo five inches of direct rain for over 24 hours for the joy of his drug that's not a joy we respect and and so again I think it's it's got to be the meeting of heaven and earth because as I've mentioned before in some ways the most rational approach to life if in fact Jordan Peterson is right and a drug like cocaine can unlock just extraordinary bliss or maybe heroin and you can never by virtue of your brain chemistry undergo that bliss and if we're in sort of a naturalist frame well undergo that extraordinary bliss and so you have your your mega dose and then your bullet chaser but instead part of the reciprocal narrowing is because the addict continues to try to grab what cannot be grabbed which is a high to beat the first high physiologically we say that isn't possible and so therefore the addict reciprocally narrows and spends the rest of his or her life continuing to pursue that high and what that addict does is basically drag him or herself down and family with them and then you have the kinds of really sad conversations like I'll have in the church parking lot with the granddaughter of that individual who will come out and pick him up and take him to a doctor's appointment maybe try and share a meal with him but then drop him off to his corner of garbage and that's my grandpa that's deeply sad and we all know it and we understand it so there's a way in which Rafe and John and I can all talk about this and be on the same page even if again I am a theist I guess that's an easy thing for for me to talk about but we're going to have to talk about what we mean by this theist or non-theist so let's do a little bit more listening here so right and what I think is the idea that you know trying to make trying to frame this in terms of the existence or non-existence of a being and that it's primarily that and that the way we understand that is by manipulating beliefs and that we can sort of the way we understand it but also the way we participate in it because I think we're better off I understand we've got the four p's here but we're better off understanding the propositional always in the context of the participatory and the procedural and and all of the four p's because belief is always deeply intertwined with the others but I very much understand what John is critiquing here nail down get some final answer but the most appropriate symbols for that these are all things right and so the theist says yes to all of those and the atheist agrees that that's the right framing and then says no to all of those and the non-theist says no I reject that framing that framing is I think actually mis-framing the phenomena and the meaning that is afforded by that you know the connectedness that the phenomena is is is pointing to okay so now John obviously at some point they're going to get into the transjective and he's talking to rave and rave you know he's been on my channel number times he's been in John's channel rave is about parkour and in some ways parkour is I would say analogous to religious ritual and if you listen to rave talk about it he's very much in touch with it because participating in parkour can afford for people the kinds of transformations that we're talking about now again what we're doing here is we're stepping out of religious language and then people have obviously debating on where they stand with respect to the various tribes they have will say oh no parkour cannot afford these things that my religion can afford let's just kind of set all those things to the side now and leave those debates to the side and and talk about what we're talking about here and now that now what John just said is is is really quite important that's the right framing and then says no to all of the appropriate symbols for that these are all things understand that is by manipulating beliefs and that we can sort of nail down get some final answer about the most appropriate symbols for that these are all things right and so the theist says yes to all of those and the atheist agrees that that's the right framing and then says no to all of those and the non-theist says no i reject that framing that okay so let's talk about the beliefs the management of beliefs now protestants especially confessional protestants like myself Calvinists are all about the management of beliefs we're all we're very particular about doctrine but that's something that's immediately visible to many people now obviously if you're deeply involved in a church it goes far more than just simply the beliefs because you know we don't simply give pastors and people a pass they might say i'm a serial killer but i'm a five-point Calvinism so don't talk to me about my serial killing because my beliefs are in good order most Christian religions have deep within them even if those things aren't necessarily forefronted in the midst of lots of a history of theological conversations that no your life has to be in order and i can point you to articles of the heideberg catechism and many other doctrinal statements that basically all go about that in fact in the christian reform church right now we're having this big debate about same-sex marriage and they want to have a big debate about whether or not same-sex marriage is confessional based on a particular question and answer in the heideberg catechism and confessionality meaning sort of a gatekeeper in terms of whether or not you can be a clergy or a member of good standing or not and the point i keep making is that even though it's not phrased as confessionality in terms of this belief management manipulation scorekeeping system the fastest thing that gets the vast majority of ministers out of office these days is having an affair or sexual immorality is that not confessional it's what gets you out of office and so let's take a step back now here and and again note what what john just finished john just finished saying uh that and that the way we understand that is by manipulating beliefs and that we can sort of nail down get some final answer about the most appropriate symbols for that these are all things right and so the theist says yes to all of those and the atheist agrees that that's the right framing and then says no to all of those and the non-theist says no i reject that framing that okay so what framing are we rejecting we're rejecting that the management of beliefs and the um the the manipulation of symbols and let's throw practice in there because of course the context here is parkour that the practice is is sort of hinging on god yes or no and the context here is transformation but now neither raf nor john would be skeptical about the fact that inducing transformation positive transformation okay we're dead reckoning here inducing positive transformation is a function of management of beliefs manipulation of symbols or appropriation of symbols or management of symbols and acting these things out in the world practices okay so we've got beliefs symbols and practices now the atheist theist disagreement is all over whether this the presence of a being god and john's about to say that because we'll listen to this a few times is the hinge point around which the beliefs symbols and practices that that's the essential back to john that's the relevance realization between what works in terms of the transformation of self reciprocal broadening versus what doesn't work that's sort of implicit in the debate and that gets couched in where so many of these debates begin to revolve around which is morality all right now i just did that video on morality and from below phenomenologically one of the easiest let's let's just cut off any question of good as such or the mind of god or anything up there let's just let's just play our secular game and keep it all down below here and i'm saying this for the sake of my theistic audience because and i'm saying this for the sake of my theistic audience because very quickly we we rise up and point up and say but but we have this okay i get all that all right i'm a christian minister i understand all that but let's work from below because that's our audience here and well what is morality about and i think one of the ways to understand morality is as i mentioned in both the the randos commentary on the randos video today and then the video i made about morality and rationality rules if we look at it let's say from jonathan height's point of view morality is sort of reputation checking can i trust you can i be in relationship with you do i and and that again is also very do do i am i willing to live with you and can i sleep next to you now i've been watching a lot of survivor over the last few weeks and just been fascinated by that game and the show quite a bit but you've got these people who are get really upset with each other but they're all they're all sleeping together literally because they always build the same kind of shelter and i'm sure that when you see a show like this you don't see the hand of the producer but you know that everything is being shaped by the production and there's a lesson to be learned in that too the shelters i mean if i were to survive on one of these islands i would not build a shelter like that this is exactly the kind of shelter that whether it's tradition or what the producers are telling them to build this shelter is designed for the show it's not really designed for shelter it's designed for the show so that the people will be forced to sleep together and i don't mean that sexually i mean they're they're literally forced to sleep together and live together because you're gonna get them in the realm of now beliefs tend to be further down the road beliefs are something i think that that actually come later in development i think the symbols and the practices come earlier and at some point beliefs get formed and beliefs are just such a handy upper register way of tracking one another i could keep my eye on the time today because i got some appointments okay i've got some time so beliefs are just this really handy upper register durable way you know beliefs even if your holy book is left out in a five inch deluge of rain in sacramento the beliefs aren't destroyed if the book is destroyed at least especially post printing press because there'll be another book and so that's part of the reason we love beliefs because they're very durable even if our grasp on them might be difficult they're costly in some ways but symbols are a little bit more durable you can leave your statue out in the rain and it fares a little better than the book but you can see some of the complexities of durability and then practice of course is really powerful because practice is about well i see you being generous to me so i'll be generous to you i'll be generous to you and get into all the jonathan height stuff or even the c.s lewis abolition of man stuff and it's the it's this law of reciprocity and that's very deep within us i will know how to i will know how to treat you on the basis of how you've treated me it's very low level basic durable for people extremely common so we're looking though for these transformations and these transformations that would be considered good and but now part of where morality comes in is that morality is always sort of upper register dead reckoning and again you see this on survivor because you look someone in the eye and you shake their hand and you say i'm not voting for you tonight and then you go out and you vote for them and it's part of what gives the show its juice because nobody can be trusted and they go into the show saying this is survivor nobody can be trusted everybody's going to lie and in fact the entire game of morality is what that show is about and so you have all sorts of moral posturing that goes on by by some people other than more than others and then at some point some people will be very explicitly christian or buddhist or my word is my bond or i'm here to win and it's just the whole thing is just a big morality game but morality for us is such a such a crucial thing and because it's it's completely our whole social register is completely dependent on it so now okay theism versus non-theism are our theists or atheists more trustworthy well by virtue of experience we're sort of used to making judgments about that and and the atheists kind of have difficulty now very quickly we're going to get into god number one and god number two now those of you who haven't listened to a lot of my channel what do i mean by god number one and god number two i've i a lot of people say well you got to rename these because the number one and two that doesn't really work but you don't understand how i'm using these these are two buckets okay and i'm trying to be able to map things by virtue of these buckets and what i've noticed is that these these these buckets do start to contain mapping so god number one is imminent god number two is transcendent god number one is the arena god number two is the agent god number one is general revelation god number two is special revelation god number one feels impersonal god number two feels personal and so that's all of these mappings of god number one and god number two and i came up with this mapping listening to jordan peterson talk to sam harris and their different definitions of god and when i listened to jordan peterson talk about god i heard things from very early creedal i heard things from reformational descriptions of god and i noticed that there's been migration in that over time that in that god has gotten less and less number one it's been sort of replaced by laws of physics the universe it's basically along the lines of deism and in that way god number two gets heightened and you see that for example in the rise of the born-again movement you see that for example in chuck colson who now this isn't as such in his book born again but it's sort of the meeting he has with his wife because he goes and you know his life is a mess and he's been richard nixon's hatchet man and by the way the the unbelievable episode two-part episode on richard nixon that dominic sandbrick did i thought was fabulous i really enjoyed it but chuck colson then goes through this very painful this very painful experience of his life being pulled apart because he sort of faithfully bound himself to richard nixon and richard nixon cares about no one as much as he cares about richard nixon and his own reputation just listen to the rest of his history about richard nixon and chuck colson is his hatchet man he'll go anything he'll do anything he'll whatever it takes to to serve his master richard nixon chuck colson is going to do it and then he begins to realize that he is going to pay a heavy price for this and he meets someone in washington ducy who's an evangelical christian and for that person god is not just a lawgiver way out there and there's this there's this sappy song from this period of times he's everything to me when i walk i see him face to face you know i see him all over the place and that's really sort of a god number one god number two but they're always kind of weighted and so chuck colson then begins having a living relationship with jesus christ this is very big talk in sort of the the rise that the latter the rise of neo-evangelicalism in the latter half of the 20th century and i have a personal relationship with god i have a personal relationship with jesus and and this sort of you know runs the map in terms of christianity it's god number two all over the place and god number one is sort of forgotten to the point that some of the older doctrinal statements for example in the heideberg catacombs of the belgian confession i began finding modern charismatics who who would say oh no god doesn't bring fat years and lean years and it's like i don't know did you read the book of genesis it the book of genesis and and no no no it's it's the devil versus god and so then you see sort of this dualism so many dualisms you see sort of this you know good versus evil dominating and so you know then that plays itself out in the in the religious metaphysical systems so when i listen to raf and john talk now non-theism i think is a way of sort of bringing just like jordan peterson bringing god number one back into the conversation okay let's listen to a little bit more that framing is i think actually mis-framing the phenomena and the meaning that is afforded by that you know the connectedness that the phenomena is is pointing to okay what's that phenomena it's reciprocal broadening of our agency it's it's a transformation that and and i'm going to talk to chad the alcoholic a little later this afternoon and we'll i'm sure we'll talk about his transformation because he mentions even in his own little videos that know what i mean by little because his channel is little because they're short um sorry chad i didn't mean to use a diminutive with respect to your videos but in his in his channel he mentions the fact that you know seven eight years ago he was a drunk and now he's got a wife and a house and holds down a job and yeah it's hard but life is so much better and you know that transformation occurred in terms of agency chad the alcoholic now makes youtube videos and you know he's he's one of my clip channels now and you know they're memeing me and mocking me and having fun with me and i i thoroughly love it and there's a transformation and of course it was a 12-step program that that helped him and continues to help him with that so there you have beliefs and symbols and practices and community and all of these things that that afford a transformation okay so the non-theist yeah rejects that question the non-theist says can we come up with uh framing that puts that well i once described this to you that affords us to fall deeply in love with being once again okay and right there we're getting into so many of the issues that i've been talking about in my channel for a very long time because falling in love with is a very relational move being is very impersonal so we want to have a relational move a relational posture that's going to involve it's going to involve beliefs i mean i i completely understand the the recalibration of the propositional no argument with me there modernity modernity accentuates overplays the hand of the propositional all the time it's what modernity does and this is this is sort of how history works there's always these compensations for things that have happened in the past and when you look at the enlightenment the protestant reformation all of these things were attempts to recalibrate the story versus the upper register that many began to feel was getting out of sync with the lower register and the physical so so so modernity the enlightenment the protestant reformation these are all about recalibrating because there's a sense on a large scale that the sink is off the lips moving and the sound coming out of the video are not in tune and so you kind of halt everything and maybe you come down to the physical register and you say we're going to get things in sync again and we're going to start from below and we're going to build our way up which is a very reasonable thing for us to do as as deeply physical creatures that's one way to understand the protestant reformation and all the reformations the enlightenment modernity that's all an attempt to do that but we tend to overplay the hand so that's part of what we're in now is we're now pulling back from the overplaying of the hand and trying to get back to a better position so we're reintegrating the self we're reintegrating the personal so when you say fall in love with being i see this very much in terms of a recalibration but now part of what i think we have in terms of being left over is theism when imagined to be a being can we say being itself without just because of our humanness not turning it into a being that is so hard because again of combinatorial explosion the kind of reduction we have to do even just putting a word on it which again sort of leads us to christianity where the god who must not be named is is is right there in such a way that you've got the belief and the symbolism and the practice that is so strong in the old testament around this this is very like that's a nichian thing almost right it's it's nichian in some way but i think it's heideggerian because i mean i think the problem i mean this is a critique that he i mean this is a critique that he heidegger made of nichi that nichi basically is still locked into nichi basically inverts christianity so he's still locked to it so i think the atheist just inverts theism and they're still locked to it and i want to break out of it it's kind of like the the white supremacy versus white oppression narrative right it's like the first way that you a narrative that doesn't serve the first the first response to it is just its inverse yes exactly and you have to try and break past them which is what you were trying to and and again that doesn't serve what do we mean that it doesn't serve well it's it's not we have a sense that it's not working now that's always a value judgment and all of our value judgments are limited because we are limited creatures but there's a sense of it not working in the dead reckoning sense that i feel that this you know it's it's when at some point let's say let's use the alcoholic the alcoholic hits bottom that they are finally convinced at some point even with tiny limited amounts of agencies that they can't go on this way and and i think you know this is jordan peterson's language this is vervecky's language being is good and i'm going to embrace being what i mean by that i'm gonna embrace life i'm gonna go on i'm gonna stop drinking all the time i'm not going to embrace the the rationalist scheme of the coat the drug hit with the bullet chaser i'm going to embrace being rather than non-being and i'm gonna sober up i'm gonna go to a 12-step program i'm gonna try and be a better father i'm gonna try and be a better husband yada yada yada yada talk about with your example of parkour that neither the white supremacy or the white oppression model explains what actually emerged and was created in that situation so you'd have to listen to the full conversation between them and of course rave goes into parkour and its history and i would i would argue that parkour almost everything we do elicits either a little and it's either a little transformation up or down good or bad broadening or narrowing it's basically c.s lewis's argument in mere christianity is that everything we do is either bringing us closer to god or further from god now again when i say it that way it's uh it sort of sounds like theism but a lot depends on what you mean by god and that's part of why i'm going to put these two videos back to back and go into it yeah by these kids who yeah you know yeah and you know and they had agency they created this yeah yeah and uh and it and it works it works as a tool to to bridge right and i think that um it works as a tool what we use tools we use tools to achieve ends and goals and it works as a tool to bridge and so parkour for some people becomes a very powerful practice and then once you put a word on it there's it's going to become symbolic in some ways and there's going to be beliefs that come along about it too it's going to be a powerful thing for transformations towards betterment in their lives that in some ways like uh it's you can almost view parkour as a kind of analogy or a potential precursor to how can we build these tools that function it's like i um because you would say well parkour has made my life a little better but it's going to have to go beyond parkour and again you can see this in let's say the 12 step a a program where first you start out you got to stop drinking and now some a programs and some sponsors will be you know that that's that's in a sense the frame and for the alcoholic the frame is don't drink whatever you do don't drink cheat on your wife um screw over your boss and bezel but whatever you do don't drink but very quickly it starts to grow and if you work in the 12 steps you realize you're not only going to have to make amends about the damage that you've caused in other people's lives because of your drinking you're probably going to have to make amends because of some other things you've done in your life that drinking may be enabled or encouraged or facilitated but it was something deeper and more wrong in you that did those things you can't blame it all on the bottle so so parkour well parkour is has been very useful but now i'm going to have to go a little bit bigger and now because of the nature of what we mean by god now you are increasingly going to be in danger of this word and of this long tradition in humanity of well you might you might be you might be embracing the world as a meta divine realm or an in impersonal arena but if you're relating to it the machinery of your mind in the spirit of finesse is going to lead you to personalize it now atheists will say that oh yeah we're just predicting but but there you get your beliefs but it's not it's not it's not personal oh but it feels personal but now now we've got a dogmatism here and dogmatisms aren't bad certain dogmatisms are are really good but we've got one and you'll never you'll never be free of them you know god doesn't whether god exists in a sort of external metaphysical objective sense it kind of there's that word again objective doesn't matter because the representation of god with the meaningfulness of those things has to exist for us on some level and and this part is is the legacy of peterson and again i've spoken with rave and you know peterson's a big influence in rave and if we're not addressing that and if we can't address it in a way that can write in the believers and the non-believers then then we're just stuck with war i guess yeah but that's why i think what's that's why i'm so attracted to your project because you know as much as i love and respect what peterson's done he kind of flirts at the edge of saying it's neither yeah yeah he rejects the atheism and he describes christianity in such a way that it'd be very easy to be non-theistic but he doesn't go to the point of saying i'm actually approaching this as a non-theist yeah and i've as you know i've criticized him for yeah not doing that because i think you can make a very clear case that uh that young is a non-theist for example um okay let's jump to the other video okay this is the bishop baron alex o'connor cosmic skeptic conversation now i listened to this when it first came out that was in april and i thought about doing a commentary on it and i almost did but then i didn't because there's always a big competition for my salience landscape and it certainly isn't infallible but recently i've been talking to brett sockled again and brett someone basically on twitter has made a comment oh you and brett should talk again because this is this is phil phil phil likes going through the archives of my videos and watching all the conversations which that's dear near and dear to my heart because the conversations are my favorite videos and so then he he'll go through like all the videos that i have with one person all the videos i have another person so he just went through all the brett sockled videos and he said oh i really like those you and brett should talk again so he was he's on twitter and so he's like you know paul van deetzee notified that notifies both of us on twitter you two should talk again and it's like i'm always happy to talk to brett and brett's very busy and so he doesn't often often have time to talk to me but then i said i'll talk about i'll talk whatever you want to brett and brett said i want to talk about the bishop baron alex o'connor conversation so i said to him i said well you and i both listen to it and find some salient parts that you want to discuss and i'll you know i'll figure out the the the technical stuff and and we'll do that so i've been listening to this again and again this verveke rave kelly conversation which happened a little while someone recently sent me just this little clip of it and said oh this this fit this really speaks to me and i thought oh okay good so then i listened to it it was short but now all the non-theism ask yourself here if bishop baron is a non-theist then because i resonate very much with something alex just said about dawkins do you know your your countryman he died only about 20 years ago now herbert mccabe the great dominican theologian one of the great contemporary tomas i think and mccabe often debated atheists publicly in england but he always made one stipulation that the atheist would speak first and then he'd respond and invariably he would listen to the atheist make the presentation and he would say i completely agree with you and what he meant simply was this that atheists serve and i mean this very seriously a very important function and that's to debunk forms of idolatry so there's a very good example the crude presentation of god as a being as some some big being alongside of others where the mainstream of our tradition has consistently denied that of god and when you fall into that trap now there's a very crude version of it the big man with the white beard but there are less crude versions of it that are still just as problematic when god is construed as one competitive being among many a lot of the problems that the atheists put their finger on emerge and i mean now going back to foyerbach and marx and jean pauldsard and company when god is construed competitively competing for us on the same ontological playing field a lot of the typical atheist reactions occur and they're right they're right to put their finger on that and say that god doesn't exist and so i'm with mccabe a lot of the time with atheists i'll say yeah good i agree foyerbach you know if god is simply a projection of my idealized self-understanding isaiah knew about that he called it idolatry ezekiel knew all about that if god is just opium for the masses that to assuage our suffering well of course that's a that's an idol we put a crucified criminal at the heart of our religious imagination you know sart if god exists i can't be free but i am free therefore god doesn't exist well he's right if god is a great competitor to my freedom so i say thank god for all those atheists who who rid us of certain idols okay so you gotta let the bishop have his say and he he got quite a few illustrations in there now now this again ties deeply into this whole conversation about god number one and god number two because no one is going to accuse the roman catholic church i mean they're the ones who the old man in the sky with his hand outstretched painted on top of the pope's chapel well now now vanderkley you sound like a protestant yeah i do and i am because i think that now i am not one who wants to say i'm not an iconoclast that you know we should we should cover over the roof of the sifstein chapel with a drop ceiling it's a it's a magnificent work of art but it does in fact get into this question of the meta divine realm and what we mean by god and so a lot of this discussion of theism versus non-theism or atheism and now non-theism in fact is a modern conversation and the way bishop barron just put it and i think rightly so is that what we have done is reduce god into an idol now this gets us into a deep problem because whereas you know okay so my particular dutch calvinist pretty spartan were no no pictures of god in our church i know some pastors are sneaking some icons in to their offices right now but you know it's going to be a very different thing from going to an orthodox church and now again let's not let's not cover over the nuance here because and and i'm not saying that orthodox icon carvers are idolatrists i'm not saying that so i want to be careful about that because you know i've got my friend jonathan pageau and i've got who's a you know and i've got my friend john vervecky and these are all relationships i'm not going to take any cheap shots at them because i love them and i care for them but i'll take cheap shots at my own tradition because to a certain degree and i think calvin talks about this why does he say our minds are idol makers to one degree or another we cannot relate to god without in one way risking idolatry and that's a deep concern anxiety for for the very reasons that we're talking about here that if we're going to say fall in love with being and peterson in his writing will go for i noticed right away when i started that i had to look at what do you mean by you know what do you mean by being capital b okay that's post heidegger and of course i had to get up to speed on heidegger and and all of this stuff that i've had to learn over the last three years which has been a joy to learn but it's been work in order to relate to god in order to relate relationally with being you know again as i said just a few minutes ago even just using the word being is a reduction that risks idolatry reformed theology i won't speak about roman catholic and others it's probably there too always talks about this as accommodation that because of what we are and how we are this is necessary for us and and there you get into scalability i i need i i can't engage with the entire arena it's too big in order for me to engage with the arena i'm going to have to scale aspects of it down probably into beliefs probably into symbols and i'm going to relate with it probably in terms of practices now the way i understand a lot of the theist non theist atheist conversation is in fact the debate over the efficacy of the beliefs symbols and practices with respect to the relationship with being especially in terms of transformation because part of what modern science is about especially technology let's let's we should we often say science but we should really say technology because it's the wielding the application of betterment so again we had a tremendous storm in sacramento they they're giving names to these things bomb cyclone and it's like i know what a bomb is this was not a bomb i lived in the caribbean i know what a hurricane which is basically the atlantic equivalent to a cyclone it was not a cyclone either it's not a bomb cyclone so i called it a a wetty blowy um as a joke uh atmospheric river maybe that's better i don't know but we had a lot of rain and in sacramento is that very low level elevation and people don't appreciate the productivity of the sierra in terms of water i mean the reason the central valley is a big bowl is because it fills up sometimes and in order to not lose our lovely houses and all of the stuff that we built in this vast flood plain is we build levees and water projects the the two cities most vulnerable in the united states to catastrophic flooding are new orleans and sacramento and you know what happened to new orleans and so this is a very big deal in sacramento and so all of this technology that we wield we wield for good as we say now i've mentioned this a few times in salcelito in the bay area there's the bay area model which is worth if you're visiting the bay area and you want to do something kind of a little unusual but fun check out the bay area model because it's a now i'm expressing my dutch roots because dutchmen there's tons of dutch water engineers and they love to play with these kinds of things they built a model before they had computer modeling they built a model of the entire water system in the bay area because at some point they were considering damming the bay why would you damn an estuary they were considering damming the bay in order to keep all this fresh water because california is all about drought and flood and fire that's that's our ecosystem so they they they didn't know how to computer model it so they built this huge physical model and they they don't need it today like they used to but they keep running it just because it's fascinating to come in and they it's at scale and you can watch the water flow and and they have a little representation of san francisco and the golden gate bridge and and the delta and this whole estuary and it's a wonderful thing maybe maybe maybe we'll have to do a field trip an estuary field trip to the the bay area model but we have to bring things down to relate to us or we can't wield it or manipulate it we can't do the practices or find the symbols because symbols are of course also compression mechanisms by which we can get a handle on talk about wielding get a handle on a world too large for us and so as bishop barron said part of the reason we're having these conversations is because well we've had to reduce god and the reduction of god into a manipulable grippable form is popular and so in some ways bishop barron in a sense says okay i'm taking i'm let's let's let's side let's try to avoid the reductions of god that are setting up the atheist arguments and so in many ways i see barron is very much participating in this argument about non-theism and saying let's first try to get some things right now all along i have believed in these conversations that what we're really talking about is the efficacy of our practices involving practice symbol and beliefs we're we're recalibrating and trying to work on those things and this is all a part of the long calibration of the two registers of heaven and earth and where they meet now let's listen to a little bit more of this yes and as has been said before many a christian even say well i don't believe in the god that you don't believe in either in the sense that often it's a god that neither side really wants to believe in right but but why why do you believe in god and specifically the christian god bishop barron because perhaps if you could make if you like the positive case and then we'll we'll hear alex respond to it and perhaps he can make the case for why he believes atheism makes more sense this is our central question on the show today christianity or atheism which makes best sense of who we are how would you respond to that overall question then well again we could look at some of the classic ways aquinas call them paths i like that much better than you know arguments or you know absolutely convincing rational demonstrations i think ways it hits it much more accurately now even before we go too far in this well demonstrations you're hard pressed to read you shall not put the lord your god to the test from the book of exodus without perceiving that demonstrations is also one of these risky business part of the business we probably have to get involved with but yet risky business i think you look at it both sort of path is a better word now we look at origins, protological, eschatology, last, first things, last things where does a contingent world come from or more precisely how do you explain contingent states of affairs the endless appeal to others now i'm not sure i would have taken this tack that this is a good question but i think it's a good question because it's a good i'm not sure i would have taken this tact at this point in this debate but i'm not in the debate but you have to understand that bishop barron isn't just a really nice priest never mind a bishop who makes nice videos you know when i when i read brett sockel's transubstantiation and saw just how many footnotes were to bishop robert barron suddenly it was like oh no wonder he's so smart he's he's a you know he's a legitimate scholar he's he's been to school far longer than i have other contingent states of affairs won't work you must come finally to some non-contingent ground now i'm summarizing that famous argument in just a couple of lines but something like the quest for a foundation for a world that is a radically even essence that's radically non-self-explanatory that exists but doesn't have to exist now that goes back to the beginnings of philosophy and the earliest philosophers were on that quest and i think now i don't think this tact leads the conversation in a great way for a while they're going to get bogged down in contingency and necessity and all of these things i want to jump ahead to um i want to jump ahead just a little bit more equineus now they're gonna like i said they're gonna get into contingency and uh what what are foundations etc etc there's whereas there's a there's a place for all of that i find that for many people a part of what goes on in this video is that alex o'connor wants to be reasonable and what i find a little humorous and not uncommon with people who want to be reasonable is that once you make that your frame you're going to have to stick with it and whereas christians who want to make god their frame are going to have to stick with it and fail dramatically so in how many different ways in their life uh rationalists i find making some awfully irrational statements which i will point out a little bit later here but let's let's jump in where i think you know pat after some of where i think the conversation gets lost a little bit through of the unconditioned into our ordinary description of the claim that there's a context provided by reason for the claim that god has spoken that wasn't mean to say god has spoken i i rather like paul tillich's description of the breakthrough of the unconditioned into our ordinary experience now i know vervecky has read plenty of tillich and really likes tillich i know vervecky has read plenty of tillich and really likes tillich and this i think is where the conditioned unconditioned conversation gets a little bit more on track especially with respect to rafe and john talking about transformation so when the 12-step program uses uh a greater power and when they talk about the fact that let's say i have you know i have become power powerless before alcohol and i need a power greater than myself to liberate me you're setting a lot of stuff up there and you're using narrative in order to do it and for us the phenomenological experience of transformation which is what rafe and john are transformation which is what rafe and john are talking about is this sense of god speaking well what do we mean by that well if we think about god not simply as god number two an agent within the arena but god number one and god number two god as agent and arena there seems to be i i've tried everything to get over this addiction i've done what i've could there there wasn't anything i need a power greater than myself to get over it that's very agentic that's very god number two and it's this this experience of something non-contingent breaking through to bring this transformation that affords me more and more agency and puts me on a path to life whereas i was dead i was dead and now i'm alive i mean tons of christian language in this in this frame that's why a lot of contemporary theologians don't use classical arguments they'll talk often about limit experiences at at the limit of our knowing at the limit of our capacities at the limit of our attainment we often look toward that which transcends those limits right hagel's line about to know a limit as a limit is already to be beyond the limit that's a great line that's a that's a justin's justin's listening hard that's a great line at the limit we we gaze into what transcends that limit are there some people who have experienced the breakthrough of the unconditioned that the unconditioned being itself if you want god speaks god breaks through our ordinary experience faith is the sort of epistemological move that corresponds to that event that event the now i would i would like to nuance that a little bit faith has an epistemological aspect that moves towards that event but faith isn't itself exhausted by the epistemological aspect of faith and and this gets into you know something obviously that has sort of hung up christianity in the modern realm and again it is in the modern realm and you know the big fight between calvinists and arminians that well faith is is faith works now when you get into this question about faith and causality of salvation and all of the stuff that's carried by those words an aspect of faith is obviously epistemological but it's also when you get down into sort of my little dead reckoning test do you trust jesus more than yourself do you love the lord your god and your neighbor as yourself it are you are you reciprocally broadening in that is your capacity your competency your agency in terms of bringing shalom to this world growing and strengthening as you go are you are you growing in joy all of these things and so that's part of because part of where they got here is because alex o'connor wants to use this this question of faith is something you don't have evidence for and i've i've heard esther o'reilly just came out on twitter today she didn't come out as gay she she came out as herself and so but the problem is i've learned esther's name now i've disciplined myself to always call her esther so as to sublimate the other persona the name she was assigned to at birth so but esther's parents now i can talk about esther's parents because they're semi-famous people because her father dr magrue trying to think of his first name now i forgot talk to peter bagosian on unbelievable and you can find an episode of that where they get into this whole faith business and and on one thing sort of the atheist slam down was faith is something you don't have evidence for that's not really true you do have evidence but the evidence faith it does have an aspect of i don't have it's exactly what the bible says it is it's something that we we have hope for it's something we long for it's something we lean into and again in a sense we have to really get back into the the narrative the dramatic the physical drama has recently been sort of a fun thing theologically drama has recently been sort of a fun thing theologically for certain theologians because what drama what drama gets into is again the meeting of the physical and the meeting of the two registers and again the the point that we're in right now is a recalibration of the enlightenment and of the modern to to try because you know we've got a sense that things were out of sync you know before before the the enlightenment and the protestant reformation the story verse was a little bit too out of sync a little too powerful for the the the physical verse and now the physical verse is a little too powerful so it's always this recalibration so so faith is the faith is again one of these boundary waters where we're leaning in do i trust my parents i certainly trust my parents because of evidence that i've seen does that mean my parents won't disappoint ah but now i've added a new element now i've added my expectation now i've added the upper register now i've been mad now i've added the imaginary now i've added the will because expectations as the 12 steppers will tell you are preconceived resentments why because you'll violate my will if you don't do what i hope you'll do what i expect you'll do so you know faith is a faith is a complex dynamic bible witnesses to those moments it seems to me uh now poets see now we're now we're knocking on the door of some neo-orthodoxy here is the bible the witness to see this is oh gosh the theology is still important is the bible merely the witness to revelation or is the bible revelation itself and this was prolegomena with fred closter at calvin seminary back in 1986 and of course calvin seminary a little bit more conservative than neo-orthodoxy wanted to push back on witness to neo-orthodoxy but you have to understand the point that neo-orthodoxy is making with respect to their context but neo-orthodoxy is always looking over its left shoulder whereas calvin seminary is always looking over its right shoulder and to give fred closter his due see i would be more in fred closter's land because i would say the bible continues to reveal god and that way it's not simply a witness to revelation although it certainly is witnessed to revelation god continues to be revealed through it so and bishop barron wouldn't disagree he's a he's a roman catholic bishop who is actually a an obedient bishop um which frustrates some to the person that he's obedient to point in that direction often too but the bible witnesses to people that have had the experience of the breakthrough of the unconditioned but i i feel like uh interesting as it may be this is this is now that breakthrough of the unconditioned suddenly we're going to worry about well what about the because if the unconditioned breaks through this is sort of where we get back to wittgenstein and and hans georg mule and well if if the unconditioned broke out all would be decimated right that's right and so part of the mystery is the hiddenness of god and the distance of god even while god is arenic and agentic and this is actually those issues is where the rest of the mire of this conversation is going to sort of be stuck in but if you understand that that's why this is getting stuck in this mire you can have an understanding of well maybe why what we can learn from it is off track from the original point which is to say look i mean yeah you i think what you're making is a distinction without difference here you say that faith needs to be distinct from reason otherwise there's no point in having the term right we're talking about something that's distinct from the average kind of here's a reason for believing something so i part of the problem of the reason here is that reason also is sort of a shape changer in this conversation and well reason is a really broad word as is faith and so things can get fudgy pretty quick i believe it and you've said well no it's not that i kind of use reason to come to this conclusion i just have a context of reason from which i arrive at this belief is i think the terminology you used i i'm failing to see the distinction here in other words the question is quite simple it's like when it comes to something some proposition which you would say you need faith to believe well and of course vervecki would be all over this propositions that'd be a religious claim or a claim that a person you've met is is making you either have sufficient reason to believe what they're saying in which case you're relying on reason or you don't and part of what's always gets smuggled in this is once you use that word sufficient there's an evaluation going on okay well how do you make this evaluation do i have sufficient reason to imagine that sacramento won't be flooded and i'll drown in my bed yeah can i say that that will never happen no do i have faith in the good people of the you know one of the former elders of my church is retired chief hydrologist of the state of california when he selected property to build the church back in the undeveloped area of sacramento he took the high ground does that mean that he doesn't have faith in his project no he does but they used to put him on the news and they'd ask him questions is sacramento going to flood and he'd say things that the news people were like well the floods things seem to be within the parameters of the system spoken as a good engineer so faith reason actually this isn't a particularly good part of the conversation i'm gonna zip forward again because some other things i want to get to i finally what let's bring justin in here to straighten this thing this is this is this is justin's role and he plays it well my help here alex is just for you to to kind of explain just just to help move this on here is what what would be for you a reasonable evidence for god if you like and if that were presented to you would you still say well i'm not believing by faith at this point i'm simply believing by reason in god what what would that sort of a reason have to look like yeah well see i'm not sure exactly well i'm i know what the reason would kind of look like which is some form of sound valid argument in favor of god's existence if the ontological sound valid argument oh these are rock solid things and all this other stuff is just up there in the air words words rock sand argument uh is sound then the conclusion of the ontological argument is true you know it's it's as simple as it gets now i find this interesting because i mean really it's simple if it was simple would we be racked up on it for centuries and lots of people it's actually fairly recently that this analytic style of philosophical thinking has been applied to religion and traditional systematic theologians were at least originally quite hostile to the introduction of analytic philosophy to doing theology and they say that the reason that this is is because you know it's modernity religion requires narrative it requires poetry it requires this kind of faith-based thinking that bishop parents analytic philosophy you know reason alone can't really grasp that this i find to be telling right we have someone coming along and saying listen i i am going to accept what can be reasonably shown to be the case and systematic theology essentially rejecting it on the basis of it not being able to to properly handle the content of their beliefs i find it systematic theology is an expression of modernity incredibly telling that when we try to apply this kind of analytic style of thinking to theological thought the response is never to try and show why um actually you know we can we can provide an analysis which shows that this is in keeping with our reasonable logical thinking but rather to say that actually you know the methodology is is inappropriate to use in this case and we should be using this vague concept of faith instead which i still haven't heard precisely defined from from bishop baron which would see now a lot of what i think okay so what are we trying to get at here and i think a lot of it is exactly what we've been talking about in some of the other videos i'll play it again because it's good and eventually these three distinction will also help us to answer the second question eventually if you're still relevant today let's start with the first distinction the distinction between philosophy and religion one way of defining kent's goal in philosophy was to use philosophy as a major tool for enlightenment and enlightenment meant to move philosophy away from religion and to somehow even replace religion with philosophy okay what did we want to move away from and why well what experience what other experiences did we have that said oh if we can do that with that maybe we can do that with this and he thought that um philosophy hadn't done a very good job at this unlike the other sciences which had originally been a part of philosophy but then in modernity kind of separated themselves from philosophy and became natural sciences unlike all these sciences which made a lot of progress philosophy had basically made no progress at all it couldn't establish certain generally accepted truth it didn't bring about any technologies either in natural science or in the social sciences and that's what he called the scandal of philosophy that it basically didn't really do its job to tell us something certain about very important things okay so what's going on in this other video now it's really quite interesting because basically o'connor is complaining that well religion religion hasn't panned out so we'll use philosophy philosophy hasn't panned out either what do you mean panned out well given us what we want well what do we want that's a very helpful question to ask well what do you want i want well then just start there and see how far it goes and keep thinking about it and keep asking yourself if you can get beyond i want there to not have been a coronavirus i want there to not have been a second world war and all of the lives lost oh that's good i wanted there to not be a russian revolution and all of the people killed by stalin either starved or sent to gulags or or then over to china and the cultural revolution and panam pan and you know i i was watching a football game last night and one player had end racism on the back of his helmet and i thought what kind of speech is that who's he talking to you know there's a guy parked out in somebody decided that the best way to weather the storm was to drive off of the completely empty church parking lot and drive into the undeveloped land out which of course in sacramento turned completely to mud so his truck is now stuck okay was that reasonable was that philosophical and truck sucking who are you talking to what how are we we what do we want well we want we want what we want what's isn't that what woody allen said the heart wants what it wants is that good i mean philosophy i'm not saying philosophy is evil or bad and it isn't helpful sometimes but it hasn't given us what we really thought we wanted listen to the industrial revolution on the rest is history that was a terrific episode all of this stuff changed oh no i got guys probation officer texting me hang on it's a homeless guy's probation officer and he wondered how he did in the storm and he knows that he's always around here so he did fine anyway back to the video would be quite helpful actually if uh rather than kind of talking around the subject as i think we've been doing here i think it would be helpful to the listener and to what is the subject well okay well let's go back to vervecky and rave what what do what do we want we want reciprocal broadening we want our agency to to grow but while i may want my agency to grow if i've got some morality i don't want it to grow at the expense of others and i have a sense that if my agency grows actually in a good way then our communal agencies will grow and we'll all grow together and the world will be better and and and and and me if we could have a sentence perhaps that sums up what what faith is as a as a dictionary theological definition now i really wish at this point that bishop barron had just quoted hebrews 11 call me protestant faith is confidence in what we hope for and assurance about what we do not see i think that in many ways says it about as well as could be said now again this i think part of the reason why bishop barron might not have wanted to use this at the moment was because it kind of opens you up to this charge that faith is belief in evidence now first of all let's take the word belief off and let's say trust trust without well sufficient evidence well you got your value judgment in there that you snuck in so uh trust without often it's not trust without any evidence it's the whole the whole narrative the whole drama the whole moment of faith is all about leaning into something that you don't have time or ability or means in order to have the sort of foundational assurance that that somehow in your imaginary world you think you actually have for all of the things that you live on such as the electrical grid and the water supply and the fidelity of your car or the aircraft that you take and and and and and and and you have faith all over the place and it's not without any evidence but you simply don't have enough time in your life to gather evidence but okay back to the video i mean there's a response to the revealing god give us that again bishop barron faith is a response to the revealing god the response of the whole self in the presence of the god who reveals himself okay and now to put this back in context of vervecky and rave this revealing is in this transformation that they're talking about and and in the transformation so there's so i would argue that let's say in parkour wraith has seen something of the revelation of god god now don't forget when i use these words we've got all of these years of medieval catholicism and then we have the enlightenment and then we have you know these hard lines parkour has parkour is as a revelation for wraith of the god of the universe i don't think that's in any way illegitimate because a sunrise is a revelation of the god of the universe but now let's let this go a little bit more now that's not repugnant at all to what we were doing 20 minutes ago in talking rationally about god in terms of philosophical proofs i think those are very effective ways to approach the mystery of god but then there's the claim the strange claim from the heart of religious traditions that god has spoken which means god has revealed something of himself beyond what the mind on its own can grasp now his distinction right in there is important because of course you can read paul in romans which we'll get to in our adult sunday school class about romans one where god has revealed himself to the world but now on the sort of summations of general revelation of god number one but then god has also revealed himself in a special way in a unique way that shouldn't that shouldn't strike us as unamazing if you understand again what christianity tries to see god as and what i think you know i'm hearing from wraith and john towards a better definition and an agreement of what we mean by this word god god now the mind can understand it it can take it in think about it faith seeking understanding etc but make it more specific i mean that's a cliche that when we talk in spaces like this our minds sort of lean to but it's and it's absolutely apropos because this thing that faith is in terms of a leaning into that's what faith does so okay i'll get i'll get back to survivor because i've been watching that so everybody's having their little meeting who we're going to vote for and then everybody's lying to each other everybody knows they're all lying to each other but how do you test whether or not someone is going to really be a faithful ally to you you watch the vote will they do what they say that's in some ways faith seeking understanding it's i'm going to act as if you're true and i may be betrayed or i may come out on the other end specific in the christian context we're talking about the incarnation we're talking about the trinity two realities that reason can't on its own grasp but were given to us reason can't on its own grasp yes but also these do come to us through reason and this is the slipperiness and fudginess of of reason were revealed to us and faith is the response of the entire person to the revealing god we'll come back to this this claim at the heart of christianity that god is love and what the claims are at the heart of an atheist perspective on the universe i want to move us on in the next section gentlemen to just at least briefly touching on issues around our actual experience of life obviously the pain and suffering that often accompany it we're in the midst of a global pandemic and and how both of your perspectives as a christian and an atheist bear on that you're listening to the big baron i agree and we're about thanks for we're asking christianity or atheism which makes sorry about those explosions i said they caught me by surprise in my ears too i was just fast forwarding through the commercial best sense of who we are bishop robert baron and alex o'connor have joined me bishop robert baron the founder of the word on fire catholic ministries reaching millions alex o'connor's people a lot about some of the intellectual arguments the nature of faith we've even delved into the trinity in the course of today's show we've covered an awful lot of ground folks didn't really delve in just got kind of mentioned but um i suppose at a practical level most people if they accept or indeed often reject faith it comes at a more experiential kind of level they're not necessarily thinking about the argument for god or against god of aquinas or richard dawkins um it's it's often you know most people's journey involves some experiential element to it um as i and and so when i listen to raf and john talk you know they're asking questions about participation okay so parkour for raf and some of the other practices that he has pursued have been revelatory for him he feels that that these have afforded transformation or reciprocal broadening they said we're living through a pandemic where people are asking big questions around the nature of life suffering and everything else and i suppose at some level i see um i see people both rejecting faith and being drawn to faith during this pandemic uh people who you know when they see suffering it actually they throw themselves upon god and others who say well i i want nothing to do with god if this is the kind of world he creates um okay i mean does atheism i gotta make sure that my cursor's up here when i hit the button now that little transition in there is not unimportant they throw themselves on god they leave god they now we're sort of at the crux of this whole set of beliefs and symbols and practices and because they're they're they're making judgments about efficacy i went to church and it didn't work what do you mean by it didn't work i didn't i maybe a a cured me of alcoholism better than church or maybe i went to i've been through rehab eight times and it's never taken or i just don't want rehab i don't want sobriety or so there's lots going on here per se alex have anything to say to this issue or or is atheism more just as you've said a kind of a point of view on one issue and people will have to kind of deal with the issue of pain and suffering in whatever form they can if they do happen to be an atheist and i think he i think atheists sort of like to say well atheism is just the abdication no no it's not really historically it's it's saying these groups of beliefs symbols and practices are not efficacious in terms of getting what we want in some ways it's analogous to well religion hasn't gotten what we want so we're going to pursue philosophy and that's going to get us what we want or we're going to pursue technology or we're going to pursue cocaine or we're going to pursue parkour we're going to pursue something because going to church didn't give me what i wanted because going to church was a a means to an end of transformations in my life that i had a sense or desire for and and wasn't able to find in some ways atheism is sort of a rejection of the historical beliefs practices and symbols that broadly speaking many have or individually someone has participated in and then decide no these don't work atheism doesn't claim to have any explanatory power okay it's a no as i think i think john rightly pointed out what we can say is that we would we would expect if there is a if there is a world in which there are conscious creatures which you know i recognize some people think is unlike oh expectations expectations are preconceived resentments clea given atheism generally um but if if that's our premise what would we expect to find well we'd have no reason not to expect there to be all kinds of unpredictable and seemingly arbitrary suffering it's not me who has to do the explaining here you know and and you're right justin that during a tragedy like this you find that people come to religion and people go away from religion but that's that falls within the realm i think of uh of a psychological discussion it's like people might come to god because they find it's a good way to to deal with the immense tragedy of the suffering that we're facing okay now wait a minute you just sort of bypassed it said well it's a psychological well does it work or doesn't it work well what is the goal well is the goal that i feel better i've told the story before when i was a missionary in the dominican republic and check that off in your bingo list someone would go to the doctor and the doctor would give them three prescriptions and one would often be tylenol one would often be an antibiotic and then maybe there'd be a third one and then they'd go to the pharmacy and these were very poor people and so in order to fill the three prescriptions this would cost this much money and the poor haitian would look and say i don't have that much money which is the cheapest well tylenol their acetaminophen give me that one so they take the acetaminophen the fever would go down they would feel better but the infection would not be treated that's sort of the argument about christianity well christianity will make you feel better okay well how do we know how do we know what's true oh now we're barking on the upper register here and and atheism has basically wanted to sort of say and this has been a common thing actually you go to you go to a lot of practitioners and they'll say this isn't a religion but there's going to be beliefs symbols and practices all the way through this and so i don't think you're going to avoid the religion quite so easily no atheism we're not we're just saying that doesn't work well work for what well again all the way back to the beginning what do we want why does cunt want to look at philosophy because religion hasn't worked well what do we want well i can point to some symbols we want the kingdom of god on earth or we want the kingdom of heaven or we want utopia or we want you know in fact we we almost can't talk about any of these things without grabbing out religious symbols that's a tell but that says nothing about whether or not religion provides a sufficient explanation for why it's happening or justification for for why it's happening because here's oh so you want religion to play your game and to measure up according to your standards because that's exactly what you've just said we want religion to to measure up to philosophy standards oh okay it's sort of like saying well i want american football to measure up to religious standards does watching football on sunday save you i'd be like no but i like it that's the problem in order to assert that there is an all-loving god who is supervising this and because you know i'm not the one here who is claiming that this is being supervised that somebody okay did you which god are we talking about here it's god number two we're back to sam harrison jordan peterson we just had bishop barron talking about god quite clearly and now it's god number two now in all fairness christianity is god number one and god number two but this then is the point of skepticism which again you can watch my conversation with j.p marceau and john vervecky do we believe that there is a good conscious governor of the universe given the evidence we're seeing now again that's a it's a philosophical question in some ways you can frame it that way but it's also a deeply human question and his evaluation is no okay well everybody can we've all got these conscious faculties up here we all make our own evaluations and he's making an argument that's fine make an argument somebody is watching this somebody knows that this is occurring and somebody's allowing it to occur if we're going to assert that there is a benevolent being who is allowing this to occur then it must follow that there is morally sufficient reason for this to occur in the united kingdom just today we passed a hundred thousand people who've been done who've been killed by the virus and the christian has to say that this is morally justified and they're welcome to do so with reference to theodicies by saying that you know this is pain people like to speak kind of abstractly about how pain and suffering might be necessary to obtain certain goods or it will be compensated if you're actually a parent you know quite reasonably that pain and suffering are in fact tools to achieve goods in your children because and i'm not talking about abusing or beating your children i'm just meaning can i eat ice cream all the time no that's not fair i don't know where you got your idea fair but it's for your best interest and so no you're not eating ice cream all the time i mean this is not a difficult example to come by if you've raised little homo sapiens it is in the afterlife or something of this sort but we have to say specifically on an issue like this that yes this specifically hundred thousand people you know have to i mean people just bandying about these necessities i don't know that we have to please please tell me in your in your universe well christians have to because that's part of their internal game okay well let's talk more who have died of covid have done so because god allowed it that's the first thing that needs to be admitted by the christian and most and again all of this agency talk watch my conversation with watch my conversation with brett suckled go back and listen to everything that bishop barron has said again it's like well we've forgotten what we talked about over here and now we're still going to pin it over here christians have no problem accepting that the difficulty comes in christians have no problem accepting that he's obviously not the pastor of a church part part of the entire job of the church is to help christians accept that i mean we do prayer requests ever every sunday and someone you know will someone come in next week and say pastor my prayer wasn't answered actually i've been praying for rain so careful what you ask for in proposition which is that it's justified this needs to happen or this should have happened or at least justified another evaluation there's no kind of uh moral qualm with this having been allowed to happen that's the problem there's no moral qualm again you're not the pastor of a church had a room full of people with moral qualms and it's a little church and to be fair and and and can i just from you alex just understand is this a major reason why you don't believe in god the problem of evil is for you a major objection to god yeah call it not an active cause of my atheism but a sustaining cause it wasn't the reason why i left the faith originally but it's one of the reasons that uh prevents me from from re-entertaining the the idea i mean as as we've discussed there are plenty of seemingly plausible arguments to say that there's a necessary being at the bottom of contingent chains in the universe that there's a a being who sustains things that there's an arbitrary first cause or something like this but to say that this first cause is a loving god who will preside over the kind of suffering that we see not just in the human context of something like the coronavirus but also the hundreds of billions and trillions if you include sea life of animals who are going through suffering that we wouldn't even be capable of imagining i speak for the krill there seems to be no explanation for this i like to play but that's a very serious argument and that's an argument that human beings have been wrestling with from the beginning now to sort of differentiate it from religion or belief in meta beings or things like that really doesn't hold any water because the entire history of religion and poetry and almost any kind of literature and conversation going way back into the ancient world in fact goes into the question is it just arbitrary is it just power again back to oh my pile of books fell over messy office clean your office vander clay this little book is it a meta divine realm in which powerful beings have their way that scale all the way down to us and powerful beings have their way or is there in fact because he's brought to this entire experience of humanity in some way that he's not telling me why an expectation that it would be good that's such a funny expectation to hold c.s lewis in fact addresses that in mere christianity saying the evidence of that expectation is in some ways he doesn't say it this way but i think it's true in some ways analogous to the ontological argument because we somehow expect something from a universe we've never been in oh nuts i'm running out of time am i long-winded or what okay so this is a huge question that we're trying to you know we're taking on the small questions yeah do it where where are you going to begin with this uh bishop baron well how about with equinus you know in the in the summa when he poses the question utrim deus sit is there a god and equinus famously puts up objections first right well two of them we've talked about one is that nature is a self-contained system there's no need to go outside of nature to explain what's going on within nature that's objection one objection two and thomas that's c.s lewis miracles the whole show um states it i think more elegantly than anyone in the in the tradition and i include the atheist tradition thomas said if one of two contraries be infinite the other would be altogether destroyed so if there were an infinite that's just brilliant i i hadn't heard that before and it's it's absolutely brilliant and bishop baron is exactly right that's the most elegant way i've ever heard it said at heat there'd be no cold that's his example but god is called the infinite good therefore there there should be no evil if there's an infinite good but there is evil therefore there is no infinite good that's a good argument that's an elegantly stated argument and it's what has been argued for millennia right it's the perennial objection now i'm sure everyone here knows the classical response rooted in people like augustin repeated by equinus that god doesn't cause evil but god is so good that he draws good out of evil that might not have existed without evil he permits evil to bring about a greater good now can we see that sometime sure i have to pause this and i've got a whole bunch of things we'll see if i can finish it this afternoon i hope so because i do want to land the plane on this because it's it's also interesting so we'll see if i if the video ends now you got what i got oops got a few more minutes i mean there's obvious examples in our ordinary experience of of evils that actually produce a great good can we very often not see it well yeah of course i'd say even typically we don't see right away oh yeah that's the reason why that was permitted so do we hold as theist that god is providentially ordering the whole of the universe now again when you use that word theist there's a lot of god number two in that word and we can't help but hear it in any other way because we hear god as agent and and this is in many ways what's at the bottom of it and where i'm probably not gonna have time to go back over this so maybe i'll try and land the plane now when i look at this conversation and when i have conversations with my friends raf and john and when i talk about christianity a lot of it is i mean john here talks about um he talks about basically loving being and i think peterson goes that way too that you have to somehow believe being is good and there is a sense in which i think that brings us to the brink of necessitating the personification of being because is my car good or bad well i say my car is good when it runs well when it obeys me as a person is being good can being be trusted can we approach being with faith now there's plenty in the world that says the world is dangerous the world is sad our expectations will often be let down but part of where the christian faith goes is of course well what's at the center of the christian faith it's it's not just the testimony of saints who have experienced transformations of their being with respect to belief symbols and practices it's the audacious claim of the christian faith that there is a definitive example who's not just an example but by approaching him relationally transformation can occur now of course we'd have a conversation about pluralism is transformation only found in jesus well it depends on what transformation because i've already said you can find transformation in parkour you can find transformation in a a you can find transformation in a gym membership now of course in christianity they'll want to say membership now of course in christianity they'll want to say to a degree all such all such of those transformations is transformations that are leveraged from jesus because jesus then becomes this or he becomes this frame this organizing principle against which all other things are judged so i i have to land the plane here because i've got appointments for the rest of the afternoon but i hope some of my talking was helpful here and maybe john will listen to this before our conversation wednesday and because we want to talk about the sacred and there's a rough draftness a dead reckoning of this that we we always have to deal with but it's not without its connections up and down it's not arbitrary so maybe maybe this is helpful maybe just because i had to cut it off anyway i'm sure i'll come back to the if if bret and i can find time we'll come back to more talking about the cosmic step thick and maybe i'll we'll see if i have time this afternoon after my after my appointments we'll see