https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=AJIkZHsAaoc

 at how you use the word navigate. I see what you're saying, but this is too good an opportunity. What is a car? Too good an opportunity to ask questions that I've been wanting to ask you, which is what exactly is a church? Because it seems to me that the atheist argument would only, quote unquote, work. It's essentially a deconstruction argument, right? It would only work if it at least kind of rang true, right? There's a way in which the salience of that argument, particularly when it happened, and the reason why they got the kind of attention they did and the platforms they did was because they were saying a lot of things that sounded true to a lot of people, that resonated with a lot of people, right? And you know this, but for the purpose of this conversation, I live in Nashville now, born and raised in Southern California. But in one of these neighborhoods, that was a traditionally black neighborhood. And on this street, there were still six or seven black families, but little by little, it's a neighborhood that's becoming gentrified. You know, Nashville's one of those cities that everybody, every time I tell people I'm from California, I always feel like I should apologize. I came here before all the rest of them did, so at least a little bit before most of them did. But watching within 10 blocks in either direction, there are probably at least 12 to 15 churches. It's extraordinary how many churches there are. On every corner, mid-block, little ones, big ones. And you can imagine 50 years ago, what Sunday morning must've looked like in this neighborhood as people put on their finest and walked to church, and how much a part of this community these churches were, and the sense of community. And then one by one, they're knocking them down. And I think I sent you a video of one of them. It was just tragic to watch the wrecking ball literally shatter. You could see inside the sanctuary as the walls came tumbling down. And I'm not even sure exactly why I feel sad, but I know I feel sad when I watch that, right? And now there's townhouses going up. One of them is gonna be preserved. I think some people came to their senses and said, before, maybe we should at least try to preserve some of these more historic spaces. So one of them looks like it's gonna become some kind of private school. But you often say something about your dying church, something you've been saying almost since the beginning. It's always stuck with me, like that particular phrase. Besides seeming, I've got the fixer in me. I'm like, well, let's fix it. There's gotta be something. Anytime I hear something's broken or struggling, my first instinct, well, what can we do about it? And so it feels a little pessimistic or fatalistic to me somehow. But getting to know you and having visited, I've been out to Living Stones and I've spent a little time, some of your meetups and gotten to know you a little bit. I see what you mean. But what is a church if it can die? There's a sense anyway, that if an institution is healthy and thriving, that at least it's able to sustain itself and perhaps even grow. And this is kind of a branch to the conversation, what makes a Methodist a Methodist exactly? These are obviously distinctions that matter to somebody at some point. In some cases, people killed each other over these distinctions. Yet now it feels more like a franchise. Like the people who go to that particular denomination, do they know why they go to that particular denomination? Is it just because it's nearby or that's where all the cool people go, where the young people go, where they like the music? What exactly is a church? Church shopping. I go where all the young people like. If I'm fascinated by all the people who lose interest in churches into their teen years and early adulthood. And then there's a point where they start a family and they said, oh, maybe we should get back to church, wanna raise them in the right environment, which sounds to me like you're saying church is good for kids. Sort of an interesting instinct, but that does seem to be a point where a lot of people take interest again, and then they go shopping and they try to find a church that feels like a good fit. We probably even encourage them to do that. I think you probably do, right? But there's something about something that you picked that makes it almost impossible to be enchanted by, because you chose it. You're the agent, you decide. It's not that different than finding your future spouse on Tinder. You have a catalog and you can flip through the pages, remember those, and you can pick a picture you like, and you can say, that's the one, and you can design your life. There's something about when we decided that we don't fully trust our choice. Even if we did meet that way, we might be tempted to come up with a shared story between us. Like, well, we'll tell people we met through mutual friends or whatever. Well, why do we have that instinct? Why are some origin stories better than others? Probably because they have some sort of sense of providence about them. Like, well, it was fate, or it was, right? There was some reason. And so I've seen this kind of idea of unchosen relationships floating around a bit in the Twitterverse. That the sort of, the liberal project was to give us the full freedom to, well, navigate our life based on the choices that are consistent with our preferences, our values, or whatever, right? And who's against that? Who could possibly be against that? Certainly not me. I'd probably be pretty reluctant to give up most of the freedoms that I have living in this country. On the other hand, if the only relationships you have are ones that quote unquote work for you, then why on earth would you take on the burden of, well, going to a church where people annoy you or whatever, right? Or that, where there are too many old people, whatever, right? It seems to me that this ability to design your life runs right up against this idea of being enchanted by things that are sort of outside of your control. I don't have an answer to that exactly, but it does seem to me that there's something, something seems off to me when someone says, well, we went shopping for a church and we found the one we liked, and that's where we go now. And I'm thinking, so that sounds an awful lot like a club of people of mutual interest or something, right? And again, I'm not saying that that's a bad thing exactly, but I don't know, it's jarring because I have these ideas of what I think a church is and that just doesn't sound right to me. So essentially, it seems to me that the meaning crisis is something like disenchantment across every domain. Like we know too much, right? Think about something like the camera, media, our capacity to watch each other, watching each other, right? Even social media in the way, like I remember the first time I used, I guess it was Skype, the first one of these that I used. And I'd never had the experience of like seeing myself while I was talking to somebody else, like something as basic as that, right? Like when would you have done that in any other time in history? Maybe like if you were on the phone and like, we're looking at yourself in a mirror or something, like how would you even do that? Who would do that? Right. I don't watch myself talk on the phone. And then suddenly you can actually see how you're coming across. So you're not just watching their reactions, you're watching your own and then introduce social media. And now you have everyone else watching, everyone watching each other, right? And children are coming into the world now where FaceTime with grandmas is totally normal, right? And I don't think it's an accident that the guy who invented the camera, the very first camera, the very first photo ever taken was a selfie. I mean, it makes sense in a way, right? Trying it out. So, but the kind of, if the story of the fall is an allegory for self-consciousness, well, we're now living in a world where we're all hyper self-conscious. Like we're constantly seeing how we're coming across and how we're being received and how others, right? And we're watching their reactions, right? And the optimist in me says, this is probably in the long run a positive, right? It's some kind of like upleveling of consciousness or something, right? But in the meantime, it's like if human beings need something to believe in and we kind of don't really believe it if we can see our fingerprints all over it, right? We need it to be something that like we didn't engineer or control. In other words, we need to be enchanted in some way. Something that sort of lifts our gaze above the horizon and makes us think beyond our own lifetimes, for example. I wanna live in a society where old men plant trees under whose shade they will never sit, right? But why would anybody do that, right? They have to believe in something. If we've demystified and disenchanted everything, then what, right? And it seems to me that that's something like another way of describing the meaning crisis. And then we watch ourselves instrumentalize everything we do, right? So even the institutions, well, once their status to be gained or once it becomes a profession, being a pastor is a profession. You get degrees that say you know what you're doing, right? And you bring that piece of paper to prospective employers and well, now to some extent you've been captured, right? And the ways in which that either increases your status or lowers your status or increases your income or lowers your income. If pastors start with a small church, but everyone knows they're looking for a bigger market, right? Like, I mean, everywhere you look, we're watching ourselves instrumentalize everything. And it seems to me that the only answer to that is something like you said earlier, people can be really disappointed. And now we're watching everybody be disappointing at scale. And shockingly, we've lost our faith in each other. So it seems to me the only answer to that is we've got to find ways to restore our faith in each other, something like that.