https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=eTxWuF8BhRM

 Why are we told to wash our hands? What do you hope for out of washing your hands? It's cold and flu season. Wash your hands. You won't get sick. What might you lose? Is hand washing religious? Now in this story, I've got to continue to have this issue, don't it mind? In this story, in Mark 7 it starts like this. Now in the Pharisees and some of the scribes had come from Jerusalem gathered around him. Now what's happening? Well Jesus is increasingly getting the attention of people higher up the status hierarchy and they're concerned about the following that he has. They're concerned about what he is saying and what he's teaching and now attention is directed on his disciples. They noticed that some of his disciples were eating with defiled hands, that is without washing them. For the Pharisees and all the Jews do not eat unless they thoroughly wash their hands, thus observing the tradition of the elders. And they do not eat anything from the market unless they wash it. There are also many traditions that they observe, the washing of the pots, cups, and bronze kettles. This is part of the reason that many scholars believe the Gospel of Mark was intended for a non-Jewish audience because otherwise you wouldn't have had to have this explanatory comment right there in the text. So the Pharisees and the scribes asked him, why do your disciples not live according to the tradition of the elders but eat with defiled hands? We're going to have to talk about that word. But before we do I want to deal with the statement that I often make that everyone has a religion. Now a lot of people who identify as atheists say they don't have a religion and part of that is a disagreement over the definition of religion so I'll let you know what I mean by a religion. What do I mean by that? Almost everyone has an idea of what is wrong with the world, what we are in danger of or from, what needs to happen to save the world, and who needs to do it so that the future will be better than the past. Everyone walks around with this and I think this is at heart a lot of what a religion is. Some people say, well religious is about supernatural stuff. Well religions can be about supernatural stuff and most of human history it has been about supernatural stuff but religions I think are about our view of the world and how we want the world to go according to what we believe will save the world. Now in the first century when the events that are recorded here in the Gospel of Mark happened they had what I call the first century Jewish culture war. The Romans were occupying this region of the world and imposing slash offering a lot of Greek ways to the population that much of the population resisted for religious reasons. And there are different approaches to how to deal with the Romans in their land. The Romans, the Herod, the aristocracy basically saw that the Romans are in charge bringing Greek ways. That was the newest better ways to do things so if you can't beat them join them and you might as well get out of the program and be Greek just like everyone else because all the wealthy, cool and smart people are are living in a Hellenistic way so why don't you you backwards people? And so there are people that accommodated and went along with it. There are Essenes, there are groups of people that said nuts to this head for the hills and they lived in caves way out in the desert and they they prayed to God that God would God would destroy the Romans and all of these people that are occupying God's promised land and that God would destroy all the people who were complicit and compromising with those hated Romans and so they lived out in the desert. Then there are the Zealots who were taking a more active role. Well they killed the pagan and corrupting Romans and so they were active revolutionaries looking to get rid of the Romans and and get them get them out of God's country. I don't need these headphones on, I don't have any video on that I'm playing for this. And then there's the Pharisees and the Pharisees very much were moderates and they they pray for God to bring a rescuer and in the meantime they resist and they resist culturally and so they fight a culture war and so the reason these scribes and Pharisees are coming up to the Galilee to look at Jesus and his disciples is they want to know where he fits with all of this. They want to figure out how does Jesus fit in to the culture war. He's not killing Romans, he's not joining Romans, he's not knifing Romans, he's not living in a cave in the desert so he's none of those options and he's got a huge following which they see as a as a real opportunity and he's working miracles. So in the Sunday School class we've been looking at the Gospel of John where John, where Nicodemus comes at night to kind of feel out Jesus and I think part of this is because people want to know if Jesus will join the Pharisee team in the culture war and so they're they're looking for him and they're curious about him and his miraculous power obviously has their attention and they want to know if maybe they can form a political religious alliance with him. So the Pharisees and the scribes asked him, why do you disciples not live according to the tradition of elders but eat with the defiled hands? Now the tradition of the elders were practices and regulations that went alongside the Torah which was the first five books of the Old Testament but they very much saw this in the light of their culture war and in the light of their religious and political hopes. Now if you go to the book of Deuteronomy in chapter 28 you can find a nice list of blessings for obedience that if you obey the covenant all of these things will happen and they're wonderful nice things. You shall be in the city and be blessed by the fruit of the field, by the fruit of the womb, by the fruit of the ground, by the fruit of the livestock, on and on. A nice little chapter of blessings there. But you go a little bit further and there's a warning against disobedience and there's lots of warnings and you can see right away that they basically initially mirror the blessings. You'll be cursed in the city, you'll be cursed in the field, you'll be cursed shall be your basket and your kneading bowl, cursed shall be the fruit of your womb, the food of the ground, an increase of the cattle and the issue of your flock. But the curses go on and he says very clearly the Lord will cause you to be defeated before your enemies and that's very much how they felt in Jesus' day. They were defeated by the Romans and they were under Roman tyranny. They had no political autonomy or that there was no political expression that they could really use to oppose the Romans and the curses go on. If you do not serve the Lord your God joyfully and with gladness of heart and an abundance of everything, therefore you shall serve your enemies whom the Lord will send against you in hunger and thirst and nakedness and lack of everything. He will put an iron yoke on your neck until he has destroyed you and very much the people saw themselves living under these covenant curses and so the tradition of the elders was used by the Pharisees to tell the people this is what we must do for God to change his mind about us and send us a liberator. And of course some people were eyeing Jesus and his power and wondering could this be the liberator? But their mind was very much set on what the liberator would be and do. So they're watching Jesus and they watch how he will respond. Will he validate the book of Deuteronomy? Will he validate the tradition of the elders? Is Jesus a loose canon miracle worker? Is he powered by demonic forces? Is he crazy? His disciples are kind of a motley crew. They're not really what they might look for in disciples. They would look for nice young men like the kind that Nebuchadnezzar picked out of the population with Daniel, Shadrach, Meshach and Abednego to hone them. Jesus' disciples are too old and too diverse politically and and not observant enough religiously. And so the disciples seem culture war soft and they're wondering if Jesus is too. So they ask him this question and the answer he gives them is not what they expect. He said to them, Isaiah prophesied rightly about you hypocrites as it is written, these people honor me with their lips but their hearts are far from me. In vain do they worship me, teaching human precepts as as doctrines. You abandon the commandment of God and you hold to a human tradition. Well this is this is not what the Pharisees are expecting or wanting from Jesus. They're hoping for a potential political alignment but now he's calling them out. But he doesn't fit into any of the other categories either. Then Jesus said to them, you have a fine way of rejecting the commandments of God in order to keep your tradition. For Moses said honor your father and your mother and whoever speaks evil of father and mother must die. But you say that if anyone tells his father or mother whatever support you might have for me is Corbin, that is an offering to God that is set aside not available to help the father and mother. Then you no longer permit anything for your father and mother thus making void the word of God through your tradition that you have handed on and you do many like things. So Jesus is basically calling them out and saying you're really selfish people who use your religious traditions not along the spirit and heart of those traditions which was generosity towards your parents and instead you use them for your own greed. That's a pretty alarming accusation. His argument is that the hedging of the Torah done by the tradition of elders was merely a human tradition so it was not obligatory so his disciples didn't need to follow it. And so Jesus tolerates his disciples lack of observance. Now one of the things I've always noticed here is that when these questions get brought up to Jesus and they do a number of times they don't target Jesus with them so it's kind of uncertain whether or not Jesus is observing them. But Jesus makes a second point. He basically says that the rulers are corrupt hypocrites. They use these traditions to elevate their wealth and status at the expense of the law that was given and what the law was given to do. But then he goes further. Then he called the crowd again. So first he was directing this at them just one-on-one. Now he's going to talk to the crowd about them. That's a whole nother level. Listen to me all of you and understand. There is nothing outside a person that by going in can defile but the things that come out are what defile. Now you don't have to be a Pharisee or the teacher of the law to understand that Jesus has just crossed a line because the mosaic law is pretty clear that they are things you are and ought not to eat. You're not to eat pork. You're not to eat shellfish. And now Jesus is basically saying you can eat anything and the gospel of Mark is going to make this clear. When he had left the crowd and entered the house his disciples asked him about the parable. It's very interesting that they called that a parable and shows you a bit of the breadth that the Bible has about what is called a parable, basically a teaching. He said to them, then do you also fail to understand? Disciples are kind of like yeah we do and we're kind of scared to ask. Do you not see that whatever goes into a person from outside cannot defile since it enters not the heart but the stomach? Jesus is doing some anatomy here it seems. And it goes into the sewer. Thus he declared all foods clean. Now the NIV or the NRSV puts that within parentheses. Obviously there's no parentheses in the ancient Greek but the modern editors see this as a parenthetical comment by the author of the book rather than a quotation from Jesus. And in a modern Bible you have things like question marks and quotation marks, none of which were available in the ancient Greek and so modern editors put them in for you. And he said it is what comes out of a person that defiles. For it is from within, from the human heart that evil intentions come, fornication, theft, murder, adultery, avarice, wickedness, deceit, licentiousness, envy, slander, pride, folly. All these things come from within and they defile a person. Well what does Jesus mean by defile? Well a defiled person could not approach the temple. Someone who is defiled is unclean and they are inappropriate at least temporarily or more or possibly permanently to approach the God. Now there are lots of stories in the Old Testament about defilement and the consequences of it. The fire of God could sometimes come out or the earth swallow up or snakes break out in the camp or one thing or another. But what happens in the Old Testament sacramental system basically is that the fire of God, these things become offering and that's sort of the connection between this korban, it's an offering. These things become an offering and they're tested by the ordeal of the fire of God and you see that with the sons of Levi when they tried to introduce strange fire in Leviticus 9 and 10. How many times does God break out into the camp? But all of this stuff is usually about the machinery, the physical expressions and actions of what's going on in the camp. Now Jesus says it has to do not so much with what you do but your intentions, why you do it. This is a major shift that's happening here and and it's something that that well that actually churches will come round and round around to. The Protestant Reformation sort of picked this up and made a similar accusation against the Roman Catholic Church and and these things really get complicated because the heart is understood not as simply a pump but as the the source of human motivation and agency. So some of what we see here is sort of a split between two ways of viewing the world, materialism which is the dominant view that we have today in a scientific world or Gnosticism which was a very common view in Jesus' day and something that in fact continues today. Materialism says that matter is foundational and ideas, norms, spirit are derivative by our brains making mind. Gnosticism says that spirit is foundational and the material world is temporary, maybe a product of a second-rate God. And so what we're really left is this question of physical or relational. Does matter matter and what is matter for? When we say it's the thought that counts are there limits to this? Now I think some of what Jesus is doing here is working a line and what I mean by working a line is that he's he's cutting close to something and he wants us to help see something that that has a tremendous amount of power to transform what's happening and you're going to see this full-blown in the book of Acts and in a number of Paul's letters in the New Testament as they work out the implications of this teaching of Jesus. God wants obedience in flesh. Now the Gnostics would say well it doesn't matter what we do in our bodies it's only what only what we do in our heart that counts and the Apostle Paul will come around and say no your body is important too. God wants obedience of the heart our intentions matter and so it's it's not the case that well I can do anything outside here and and it can be disconnected from my intention that's what Jesus is calling out in this instance. Flesh matter should reveal heart they're deeply connected heaven and earth should be one. Jesus says and essentially heart moves flesh sort of like my mind is moving my hand. Mind is the source of matter. God is spirit and wants to be worshiped in spirit and in truth the Gospel of John says and he made the world and he ordered it by his word and so what you see in Genesis 1 is that the world is good not made by an evil god and that in fact it's all supposed to be one thing subject to God's command heart and flesh together. Now the world does need saving I think that's obvious to most people it needs saving in the flesh and it needs saving in the heart and our efforts seldom produce the outcomes we desire we struggle even to really do outcomes well but all of this comes down to the question of what is matter for and I think matter is for glory that the whole earth is full of his glory the angels cry when Isaiah enters the temple and on Good Friday we see Jesus say my God my God why have you forsaken me as Jesus is hanging in all flesh hanging on a cross his flesh was not incidental and the abandonment by God was certainly understood in the crucifixion but also felt I would think in mind by Christ and then on Easter Sunday morning Jesus has flesh with scars touched by Thomas and so heaven and earth are one in his resurrected body and mind our heart in one in Jesus resurrected body as they always were this is in fact in many ways what we see as an undoing of the fall that the mind of God and the heart of man be reconciled and that what God wishes for his material world be played out on the earth on earth as it is in heaven as God desires so that where does that leave us how should we live well I would say that matter is for glory so wash your hands your body is the temple of the Holy Spirit what happens in this world in the flesh matters to God but the heart matters to God as well there's no divorcing between them you eat in freedom basically Jesus is saying and I'm happy for that because I do like bacon and I do like shellfish and shrimp wrapped in bacon is awfully delicious and so we have freedom but freedom should be used for God's glory and according to his vision for the world