https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=7w5ZP0j59CA

 Hi, this is Paul and this is the one, two, three, fourth video I've made today. It's a big day. I'm only, only two of them get released, rough draft gets released tomorrow and then I have a video for Monday commenting more on the Jordan Hall verveky thing. But I wanted to talk some, say something about Peterson's Twitter ban video and it's in the light of the Daily Wire notice and a lot of the good comments that I've received. Fool of a Took had this to say, funny I was just talking with friends about the gradual seemingly accelerating audience capture of Jordan Peterson, but this move to Daily Wire plus feels like an emphatic stamp of full capture. To me it feels like a significant loss. Jordan Peterson has been in a position to raise the quality of cultural conversations across several fractious realms. Unfortunately, it seems the basest critical feedback influenced his trajectory far more than the highest critical feedback of the latter. I've seen plenty, but what I can tell Jordan Peterson did not choose to engage with for whatever reason. I pinned, I pinned Burn Powers comment here which I thought was also interesting. You know Paul, I'm not at all surprised by Peterson's move. He always had an aspect to this in his post 2016 work that had a handout for dollars. I think his self-authoring program or his book tours. I'm not begrudging him this, but it's always been there. What I think I have the most concern about is slickness. The Daily Wire has a certain kind of professionalism that leaves me a bit cold. I don't mind listening to Shapiro or Walsh or the others now and then, but after a while it starts to blur into a kind of well-made package of conservative propaganda. I'm not saying Peterson will follow suit, but looking at some of the camera work I've seen thus far, too many angles, fake handheld shots, lighting that is codes gorgeous for commercials as opposed to lighting that signifies meaning and artful care. I suspect that the temptation is there. I'm less concerned than you are with using his material. He talks about some of the copyright aspect. Really interesting variety of comments on this video all across the board. Mark of course left an enormous comment, which is fine. Thank you, Mark, which is good. Some people urging me to take sides in the culture war, stop sitting on the fence. Other people disappointed in this. This is just the maximum grift. Again, the comments were really fascinating to read in the light of this. Then of course the Twitter ban video came out. Many of the points that he makes are points that he's made about other things and points that I agree with. I use just the tail end of it in my commentary that I just made on the Peugeot, Vervecky, Jordan Hall video. Part of what really stuck out for me in this was, again, as Bern had said, the slickness. Now Jordan's always had a, well, always. People dress up to go to Jordan Peterson events, and I think that's absolutely appropriate. Church has an interesting tradition with respect to dress and events too. This is quite a studio, and the production values are very high. Let's just play a little bit of it. If you haven't seen it, I can't imagine you haven't seen it, but this is just a taste. Now, teleprompter probably all dressed up, nice studio, dialed in sound. I am employing this awkward and impossible naming style because it is now apparently mandatory and probably doing it wrong nonetheless, as you're doing it wrong is the whole point of what is being made mandatory. But also... Now, after watching this and thinking about it a little bit, it reminded me of this video. Now I couldn't find this video in Jordan's channel. I'm sure I commented on it back then. Not everything is on Jordan's channel like it used to be, and this, of course, was... Well, I'll start playing this. I'd take a bit of time to respond to... I thought I'd take a bit of time to respond to something that happened in the media today, in the aftermath of James DeMore's Google Medal. I know the coverage it's received. A journalist named Steve Kovach wrote a story for Business Insider called, Silicon Valley's liberal bubble has burst and the culture war has arrived. In that article, which discussed the memo, he characterized myself and Stefan Molyneux, a well-known YouTube personality, as far right. What his article said specifically was that, and I quote... Now, again, you can tell a world of difference between this. This isn't the video itself. This is a click channel video of him. So I can't vouch for if the click channel has any of its own manipulation in there. But those of you who've been around Jordan for a while know the questions and answers. This was Jordan sitting down in his own office, and this is what started it all. He tells the story of watching C-16 go through. He, of course, testified to Parliament about C-16. If I remember the story correctly, Tammy was gone and usually he'd get up and type out a screen if he couldn't sleep, but he'd been playing with YouTube, so he decided to get up and turn on the camera and let it fly in terms of C-16. That one's probably still out there in the clip universe. I couldn't find the C-16 video, but here's a little bit of the suspender video. Now here's what's happened with Bill C-16 and the surrounding legislation. Free speech is the mechanism by which we keep our society functioning. It's influenced by the consequence of free speech and the ability to speak. People can put their finger on problems, articulate what those problems are, solve them, and come to a consensus. And we risk losing that. Now you can say there should be reasonable restrictions on free speech, and that's the case. You shouldn't be allowed to yell fire in a crowded theatre. And reasonable people can discuss and debate what those restrictions should be. But we can't debate the fact that putting restrictions on free speech is something dangerous beyond comprehension. And that's what we're faced with. Now, we've had laws passed in this country that regulate what people can say. Sorry, what people can't say. And that's reasonable. But it seems to me that we're in danger of crossing a line. With Bill C-16 and its surrounding legislation, it's the first time I've seen in our legislative history where people are attempting to make us speak their language. That's not something that I'm willing to do. Now, the radical left activists are trying to turn this into an argument about sexual politics. And it's only nominally about sexual politics. It's about language that's designed to control our freedom of expression. I've received many, many... Peterson! Peterson! Peterson! Transport! Transport! What are you doing? How dare you? Go back and explain! Damn! Should find the other video too, because it's interesting, because when he's in a mode like this, I mean, it's very similar. The mode he's in here is very similar to the Twitter ban mode, but again... I'm trying to make a point. I've essentially been banned from Twitter as a consequence. I say banned, although technically I have been suspended. But the suspension will not be lifted unless I delete the hateful tweet in question, and I would rather die than do that. And hopefully it will not come to that, although who the hell knows in these increasingly strange days. What was it that I said that caused such a fuss? And that fuss is just beginning. So, again, Bern's comment on Slick sort of caught my attention. And then this video of a different Jordan. A different Jordan. I have 150 lectures on YouTube. There's 500 hours of live music. Do you really think that you're worth all of that time? So look, I will answer your question, okay? I've studied Nazism for a very long time. It's been four decades, and I understand it very well. And I can tell you that there's some awful people lurking in the corners, and they're ready to come out. And if the radical left keeps pushing the way it's pushing, they're going to come. That sounds very much like a threat. Would you like to disavow the physical violence, trans people were physically assaulted at this rally in your name. Would you like to disavow that violence? Yes. So you wish that didn't happen, and you want to... Absolutely. I love it when people can't take yes for an answer. Post this online that you would like people to not, to be more accommodating of trans people and people of color at your events in future. I would like there to be no violence. I'm a person of color, and I felt very accommodating. I felt like my voice... I'm also Muslim, and I feel like this guy... I'm a person of color? I love it when people... You wanted to disavow. You wanted to disavow, and this is the disavow. I am not an advocate of violence. I'm speaking out the way I'm speaking out, because I think this is a route to no violence. And violence is lurking. And you can say that that sounds like a threat. There was no violence at our protest, though. There was violence at your protest. So what does that say about our views? It's not my protest. Violence! Asking me continually frayed questions isn't very helpful. You actually want to have a dialogue. Shades of Kathy Newman coming. You have no idea if I'm your enemy. You have no idea about me. You won't use my pronouns, so I'm pretty sure you're my enemy, yes. Yeah, well, I know you think that, but I don't believe that using your pronouns is going to do you any good in the long run. I think it'll do quite the contrary. What the fuck? Is that your medical opinion? Is that your medical opinion? You are aware that non-binary people are valid in the American Psychological Association. Is that your opinion? Yes, it is. No, it's not. It's about non-binary pronouns. No, it's not. I'm saying that that's what I'm about. Were you there when I spoke? I've been here for this whole thing. Okay, well, I don't know that. It's a genuine question. Look, I think that's what's happening is that we're pushing over a line we shouldn't cross. The newest legislation is requiring people to use a certain language. You are aware that that's being put in place so that we can't get fired. We need to be written into the Canada Human Rights Legislation or we can be fired for our gender identity. Well, then why did you make a fucking video about it? I've been denied housing as a trans person. These rights would protect me. You're denied housing? I've been denied housing. From the state? From the state or for the open market? So you've been denied housing from the government? It's illegal either way if we had human rights. From the government? Or have you tried to get a house like everybody else and they said, no, you're weird, you can't work? No, if the state has done that, that's a problem. But if someone doesn't want to live with you, that's their right. They said, no, you're trans. So no, if I had... I don't really think I am a retorotician, just so you know, just so you know that. And you know, it's very hard to listen to you. I mean, it's very hard to attend to you because you rattle on with your ideological speech. It's not ideological, it's personal. I'm being contact with you. It's not personal. You haven't said a personal thing. I'm talking about something that affects my... There's a therapist noting, no, I understand what personal is. So, again, just look at, you know, the question about profelicity. We can use that word. What's happened? What does the handling, the packaging... And part of the problem is that if you decide to to have the handling and the packaging be, make it look like this, which of course, there's a certain genera in a Pepsi commercial that tried that, didn't go so well. And my favorite moment coming up in this video. It's generally ignored by the modern postmodernists, does not make me far right. I'm seriously unhappy about being carelessly lumped in with people I despise and have spent my life fighting. He wrote back and said, thank you for your response. So the article is truthful and accurate. How would you like to be characterized? One of my favorite Jordan Peterson moments of all time right there, the look. The article is truthful. He wrote back and said, thank you for your response. So the article is truthful and accurate. How would you like to be... And it reminds me of when Michaela made the comment about when Jordan responded to someone about not a real boy. And of course, Michaela grew up with all of these Jordans, but, you know, Byrne's observation, the observation of the daily wire, the YouTube ban video, and this already got picked up by Tim Pool. Jordan Peterson has been unleashed by the daily wire. Now that they've signed him and he is probably financially secure, he's just going... It was pretty financially secure before that. I think his books are doing pretty well. Recently, Jordan Peterson was suspended for Twitter over comments he made about actor Elliot Pade. And so we go. I think he's going to be a good actor. I think he's going to be a good actor. I think he's going to be a good actor. So we go. So, yeah. Before, after, before, after. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know how I feel about it. It's only the first day. I loved reading your comments on the daily wire. Lots of, again, too many to mention. And just if I didn't heart your comment doesn't mean I didn't like it or appreciate it. There's tons of... There are so many perspectives. Oh, Sarah Folmer. I guess we're witnessing the move from authenticity to profelicity. Peterson is now more focused on curating his profile than on being authentic. I like the way my husband phrased it. I'm afraid Peterson is becoming the man we were all kind of hoping he wouldn't. Clay C. Jordan should be at Cambridge getting new ideas and working on Exodus. I think this is just going to be another show on daily wire. Not an exclusive takeover of all things Jordan Peterson. I don't imagine Jordan will stop doing his own independent interviews and podcast talks. I think he's probably right. It's not like Adam Carolla's show on daily wire stopped him from doing his podcast. Jordan Peterson is playing the daily wire schtick quite well in his Twitter ban video that just dropped. It doesn't fit him as well as his suits. The daily wire schtick is humorous and comedic sort of pugilism. It stems largely in part, I believe, from Jeremy B.'s headship because that is definitely his public M.O. The magic happens the more everyone animates the straw man buys into the worldwide wrestling fight and panics in the match. Panics that the match could be lost. It makes me think of creating an egregore. The phrase speak of the devil or Peugeot's revenge of the scapegoat discussion. Also of all the daily wire crew, I think only Claven pulls off his ribbing with excellence and high degree of character and hope, Romans 5, 3 to 6. I haven't watched him for a while, but he used to have a silly intro on his videos that indicated as much. I've never quite understood how, why he remains in that crew. I'm a gullible fellow who gets has been sucked into these political courtroom arenas before and can become and can become quite mooky. So I prefer to stand aside and watch. Ha ha. I know my weaknesses, Quentin. Chad 9. I feel like Jordan has entered a phase of stasis. I've encountered many epiphany moments and after the initial rush of discovery, a viewpoint I hadn't considered, the person who made the observation tends to repeat themselves and I slowly lose interest. There's a place for continuing the conversation, but they rarely recapture the epiphany generating moment again. I think there's a lot of truth to that. Yep. That's Jordan's take on page. Jordan joins daily wire plus seems like a stasis moment. Signing onto a platform that will support him, but won't seriously challenge him. A lot of comments about will he be challenged in that space. Again, I've said this a number of times. One of the guys in my meetup said right off the bat, Jordan needs to keep getting into new fights because every time he has a fight, he basically levels up. But I don't know that this way of addressing Twitter will have the same dynamic. You know, the the fight with the times when he first came back from his, his let's call it medical leave. I mean, that was another, I mean, he was so clearly, he was so clearly mistreated. And again, I think Twitter, that's the tweet you ban him for. But that's the way it is with these platforms. You get banned for why? You know, someone in some office somewhere probably had it building up. And then some high status person wrote him and said, we can't stand for this and bang. I mean, that's the way it happens in institutions. It can happen in churches in similar ways. It's a funny egg rigor that builds up. Surprised to hear the poo-pooing of daily wire. On one hand, we want and need more wholesome alternative to the mainstream, but not those a-holes. If a psalm is being sung, but not the instrument you prefer, be glad someone is trying. Looking forward to your honest take on DW content. Yeah, well, if, Burn says I shouldn't have any problems making comments on it. I did, I did give them my money and because I'm a Dutchman and figure if I do a month to month, I'm going to pay for it, they more than I go for the whole year. So I wanted to watch the, what is a woman video and haven't seen it because I'm not subscribed. So I'll maybe I'll watch that with my wife. Because when I look over at her, I see a woman. And I've been seeing that ever since I first laid eyes on her. I appreciate the wariness and critical take of these comments, but one has to remember that it is a bloody miracle that this man is alive and has any energy or brain power to do what he does. Yeah. Thanks be to God and I shall pray for him and his family that they be protected from evil and be led to the fullness of faith. Wow. I find Jordan Peterson much more compelling when he is relaxed and open. Yeah. And, and for me, the, I mean, this speech, well, he's projecting and I mean, part of that is just a mannerism and I certainly know that as a preacher. But the, the suspender video where he's listening, I find that to be a much more, a much more compelling, compelling Jordan. Oh, I lost my, I lost my comments there. And Jordan Peterson has been drifting into the right wing grifter mode for some time now as political arguments are more and more becoming carbon copies of what the right leaning media is preaching and the weakness of his thinking is bare to all. Of course, I've got people who are, feel different ways about Jordan in my channel. Moses, my friend from Chicago who I met. It's weird because it sounds like, especially from many comments, I'm afraid to think of Jordan Peterson exactly how people already think of Jordan Peterson. Two replies. Hmm. I imagine if Peterson joined the new CNN preach to the nation, not to the choir. Jordan Peterson is a strategist. The conversation with Rubin seemed so strange in light of the Jordan Peterson rule number eight. I think about telling the truth and not lying at least. Interesting. Interesting. Anyway, oh, Grim Grizz, when the ship meets the water from Captain PVK, a bunch more comments from Grim Grizz. Insert Clint Eastwood GIF. You calling me out with this title PVK? So I'm going to go ahead and say that. You calling me out with this title PVK? South Park prophecy plus. So anyway, I, yeah, this video, the Twitter ban video. It's, it's a part of Jordan. He's always been there. You can find it right away in his speech at the first protest, but he can also shift pretty quickly into this mode. And again, I think context matters. And this is part of what I mean about the tragedy of him losing his university platform. Because if you're, if you're surrounded by screens. Instead of, I mean, if you're surrounded by screens, it's very different than from being surrounded by university students before COVID. Who, who will challenge you and, and, and, and one of the things about dealing with people in real life, instead of in this weird YouTube space, Twitter space, is that when you say something hard, you watch it land and people either take the blow or they power up, you know, it usually goes one way or another. And so hierarchies bind and blind, losing the connection with audience, having mostly fans around you. Yeah, this is, this is the way this goes. And then the slickness is Bern said, so I'm, you know, I'm still, I'm still sort of processing this, trying to figure out what this means is this is, is daily wire plus the beginning of wave three. I think probably. So yeah, great comments in this morning's video and can't wait to see what you have to say about this.