https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=Oa-BLjm-idA

 Hi, this is Paul. I just finished making this commentary video on Moses striking the Red Sea to blood and Jordan Peterson as a public theologian. And I stand behind my assertion that for a short list of public theologians in the English language world, Jordan Peterson has become one of the most important public theologians. Now this is surprising because he's a psychologist. We normally wouldn't count him as a theologian. He's a strange sort of public theologian in that he's a public theologian who's also a seeker and he says some very interesting things with respect to belief in God. In this video, I read a little bit of this article that was out of Current Magazine out of Canada off of a speech that was given at Redeemer University, which mentioned Jordan Peterson along with this discussion of public theologians. So, Peters- and again part of my contention is that Peterson has managed to talk about this in such a way that he actually brings it to the fore in the public conversation. And now I've got my own thoughts about the way he does this, but it works in a lot of ways. The evasive way that he handles this question keeps people asking it. And it's sort of like Justin Briarley noting in his book that this bus campaign of atheists in the 90s about there is no God, just get on enjoy your life, actually brought into the public consciousness the question of the existence of God. Now part of what I want to talk about in this video is that Peterson is right in that this question is not the simple thing we imagine it to be. So let's play some of this and Peterson will start sort of the way he usually starts to answer this question with his usual dodges. Oh, I gotta fix my settings. God or not. So let's just get it on the table. Do you believe in God? I don't think that's any of- I don't think that's anybody's business. I think it's the most private question you can ask someone, but then I would say also what's the right response to that? By their fruits you will know them. So and Pierce Morgan clearly understands that this is a direct quotation from Jesus. How's that? Well let me ask you a different question then. Do you think there is a- Now Morgan, I don't watch a lot of Pierce Morgan, but he's something else and Peterson certainly likes him or Peterson wouldn't have gone on the program. Peterson pretty much decides which programs he wants to go on and which ones he doesn't and he usually goes on the programs of people that he figures aren't going to kneecap him in the way that he's been kneecapped before by some media institutions. By their fruits you will know them. How's that? Well let me ask you a different question then. Do you think there is a God? Oh I'm terrified that there might be, Pierce, how's that? And you know I'm- See he usually starts sort of with this and then he goes into it and what he says after bears listening to. Not trying to be a smartass when I'm making that comment either. Like they say it's an old testament saying I believe that the fear of God is the beginning of wisdom and that's actually about as true a statement as you could manage in such a short phrase. And you know people have congratulated me. I was at the Buckley Institute last night. They were congratulating me on my courage and I think- and I said this last night. It's like you guys don't understand. It has nothing to do with courage. I'm just afraid of different things than the people who lie. And I'm afraid for example of what happens when you lose control of your tongue. And I said that back in 2016 when I first opposed the Canadian government and people were you know congratulating me. It's like well you're so brave to stand up to the government. It's like I'm nowhere near as afraid of the government as I am of what happens when people lose control of their tongue. I studied totalitarianism for well since I was 13 years old in depth and I know what happens when people lose control of their tongue. Now okay let's get back to this public theologian question. Maybe I should just pull up the article here. The article nicely points to Reinhold Niebuhr. Now many of you probably don't even know who Reinhold Niebuhr is. If you know the Serenity Prayer from AA, he wrote it. Reinhold Niebuhr in the middle of the 20th century in the United States he was sort of the vanguard of a theological movement called neo-orthodoxy. In many ways a lot of Martin Luther King Jr.'s theology was very neo-orthodox. Neo-orthodoxy came on the scene earlier in the 20th century sort of through Carl Barth because it was it was felt that modernists had sort of lost their way and so neo-orthodoxy was a way that people could try to apprehend crunchy biblical faith without losing status like fundamentals like fundamentalists and some evangelicals who believed in things like miracles and the second coming and the virgin birth and things like that which had sort of been dismissed by felt had been dismissed by the scientific era and it was no longer plausible to believe in such things. Jordan Peterson in some ways is sort of cutting that same path in that he's cagey with respect to answers that would necessarily trap him as a fundamentalist or an evangelical but he gives answers in such a way that that leaves open the possibility of what is usually dismissed by modernism. What happens is everything goes to hell and I don't mean I mean that metaphysically I mean might even mean it theologically but you can just say don't even bother with that but what's fascinating let's just mean it practically but what's interesting is I completely agree with you and in some ways that's similar to a neo-orthodox move it's it's in some way similar to a Bartian move in that you can you can sort of avoid the fundamentalist or evangelical corner and for this reason a lot of people criticize him because well if you're going to be a real if you're going to be a real Christian you ought to be able to get in that corner and take the blows lose the status but people don't generally say that to Peterson because he's clearly taking plenty of blows for other reasons and so people aren't necessarily going to call him a coward. And you are the most open book of almost anyone I've ever interviewed right to the point I asked you if you believe in God I didn't actually know what you were going to say but for some reason you're reluctant. I guess Pierce Morgan hasn't done his homework. Why are you reluctant? Well okay let's let let's walk along well because it's a it's not a and again you can find especially some speeches he gave in Australia he seems to speak about this in Australia more than anywhere else which is really interesting. It's not a well posed question it's too complicated an issue to be dealt with like that you step into instant traps just by accepting the question so I'll show you what I mean. And so that again is sort of the move that a lot of neo-orthodox made that they're going to avoid the traps but they still want a consequential God whose whose commands are consequential. Oh the first thing I would say is what do you mean by believe? Like do you think that a statement about the existence of God is something like a scientific theory? Do you think it's a list of facts? Is it a factual question? Does God exist or not? Okay so he's taking on sort of the the split between the three P's perspectival, procedural, and perspectival procedural. I can never remember all four opposite of propositional. Not is it a factual question like you're asking about whether a cup on a table exists or a plate on a table an artifact? And that's not a small thing because again of course what we've been talking about in this channel for a long time God is not yet another thing in the universe and what new the new atheism did was sort of made God a super thing in the sky. Room what do you mean by this? What do you mean by believe? I'll stake my life on the proposition that God exists. How's that? Bold and clear and you know it's fun when Peterson gets punchy. Well is that an answer? Well that's the right answer. I would ask you is my supplementary do you ever pray? Always. Who do you pray to? The spirit that protects you from hell. But that many people would say is God. Hey sounds good to me and so you might say well I said I pray always so what does that mean? I'm trying to say the most the clearest words I can say and I do that by paying attention. I'm paying attention. I'm listening to the words and feeling them as I move along thinking is that a firm foundation in the morass? Is that a bridge over the abyss? Is that word the right word? I do that when I'm writing. Now very much again similar to neo-orthodoxy not so much necessarily in the content or the approach but in waiting into a culture that has been deeply impacted by existentialism and those answers are very much sort of pitched to address existentialist dilemmas. I do that when I'm talking and I do that because I don't want to be in the abyss and the pathway over the abyss is the truth. Now with regards to belief in God you might say I know that you're not particularly religiously inclined at least that's the theory. It's like well you have a character Pierce. Everyone has a character. You could say that would be the spirit of Pierce Morgan and then we might say well let's inquire into that spirit. If you were a hedonist then the spirit that would be Pierce Morgan would be your hedonistic whims and that would be your God. I would say if you're a noble person then your spirit is something elevated above your mere whims and then it's the spirit that's inculcated within you. It's a consequence perhaps of your socialization but in a more sophisticated way it's actually a consequence of the spirit that you've allowed as a consequence of your choices to dwell within you and that spirit has a nature. It might be allied with the truth. It might be allied with falsehood. If it's allied with the truth it's a manifestation of what is being considered traditionally the logos. The more you're aligned with the truth the more your spirit is an avatar of the logos and that's just it's true. It's religiously true as it turns out but it's also technically true. It's technically true. See I had a debate. I'm by no means an expert in neo-orthodox theology. I'll say that right now partly because when I went to Calvin's seminary they did not want to deal with the neo-orthodox. We did not read Karl Barth. If I'd gone to Western seminary over in Holland Michigan we would have read a lot more Karl Barth but in terms of understanding where the neo-orthodox dealt with these questions and how they did there definitely is some resonance between that and of course Peterson is 70 years later you know 60, 50, 60 years later than Niebuhr but you know Niebuhr I mean the guy who writes the serenity prayer now there's a deeply impactful application but the ironic thing and maybe this is partly due to Aaron Wren's positive neutral and negative world maybe Jordan Peterson is a public theologian for the negative world. I'm making that case in the new book. Right so I had a debate with Richard Dawkins about this who was a bit disingenuous for me because he sat with me for a whole show seemed to enjoy it thank me very much for it and then called me a fool afterwards in some podcast so I know you've had a few run-ins with him and it doesn't surprise me but what I said to Dawkins was because I was raised a Catholic I was given spiritual guidance for several years by Catholic nuns and I do believe in God and the reason I said to him is that no human brain can really explain to me or anybody what was there before nothing so if you believe in a big bang theory well what was there before that because I don't think any human brain has that power to explain or answer that question to me it makes perfect sense there should be some being entity something which is superior to a entity something which is superior to a human brain and I'm I would think that someone with your brain would think that too because there are questions we simply can't ask. Okay three things about that so the first is that's the argument by design that things are so complex and sophisticated that that cries out for the hypothesis of something like a creator I'm not a big fan of the argument by design. Which is really fascinating. You can see its advantages but it isn't the primary argument as far as I'm concerned so the the big bang proponents have a problem because it's a tenet of the big bang theory that the laws of physics themselves break down at the point of the singularity and that would be the point just before the big bang and when you say the laws of physics the existence of space and time even is unknowable prior to the big bang you're basically and he's made this argument for a number of years now. A miracle at the beginning of existence and so if you get to have your miracle there's no reason the religious types can't have theirs you might argue about what the miracle needs to be and I think that's an argument that has to be had I don't like the argument by design I like the argument by conscience better so the argument by conscience. If you read mere Christianity C.S. Lewis's book C.S. Lewis begins that book with the argument from conscience basically saying that people might differ on what they believe is right and wrong but very few dismiss that there is a right and wrong and sort of and sort of a moral realism. Conscience which is another string of classic theological thought is that something dwells within you that aligns you with the spirit of reality and it's the still small voice within that was identified first by the prophet Elijah and again I with the controversial video I made about the woman at the tech conference and the little talk she made he does take now the contemporary turn inside rather than up and out which is which is interesting to note. It was part of a transformation in the religious viewpoint in historical terms that moved the notion of God from something like Baal a nature god the god of storms and earthquakes of what would you say remarkable and awe-inspiring natural phenomena to the voice within that can if you attend to it align you with the structure of reality itself that internal voice being a manifestation of God and I think that's an extremely powerful argument and I think it's right and I'll tell you something about Dawkins work that's very interesting so and it's so interesting because at the beginning he's very cagey and now he's just you know giving it out right here but again he's giving it out in a way that transcends these the sort of battleground that was left with a decade of yes or no about God that sort of marked the evangelical non-evangelical sphere. Dawkins has pointed out that an organism has to be a microcosm of its environment in order to survive and I would say the con the voice of conscience within us is the most unerring manifestation of the microcosm within and I think you can make an extraordinarily powerful biological case for that and I've done that in this new book so I think Dawkins argument I think Dawkins argument invalidates his his epistemology. Yeah I agree. I really believe that. But what do you think I mean you've had moments. Did Pierce actually understand what he said? Yeah I agree it's like but what Peterson just said there is kind of a lot and we're very much going to want to read the book and get a sense of it but yeah I agree. Okay. Your life in recent years what would imagine you have faced the prospect of potentially dying and in those moments in those moments what have you felt and what do you think happens to you? If you do die or you had died what what did you imagine might happen to you? Well I had lots of moments moments years in the last few years where dying would have been an absolute relief and had that been accompanied by the complete cessation of my being I would have been perfectly content with that. There are things that are far worse than dying so if you're only terrified of dying you've hardly begun to plumb the depths of existential catastrophe. Death is fairly. You just don't have an imagination. What could be worse than dying? What could be worse than dying? Well you know it's funny that he says that because of course I think as a culture we are continuing to grapple with the question of suicide and suicide of course is where people make the choice that dying is better than living but you know Morgan this is an excellent interview I mean he is he is a cagey interviewer he really is I mean he's not pulling punches and he has a way of asking these questions in a you know it's don't sit across from this guy too readily and and not think it through. Being a prison guard at Auschwitz? But you still be alive even if you're witnessing horror it's not death that the... After all the nice things I said about him it's almost like you're still not getting it are you? Oh no I'm thinking perpetrating it. Right you mean how about how about being an Auschwitz guard how about being an Auschwitz guard who really enjoyed his job? How about that that's worse than death as far as I'm concerned. Right. I mean that. No no I see that. That's hell man. Yeah it's a living hell. That's hell. Yeah I agree. But do you think there is but do you think there's an actual hell Jordan is it is there somewhere that people like that go to which is hell? Oh definitely now what what relationship that has to what happens to you when you die I have no idea I mean I don't think anybody's in a position to speak about what's truly beyond our ken let's say I don't think we understand consciousness at all we don't understand time we don't understand the relationship between finitude and and and and the infinite landscape that surrounds us that's all a great mystery and I tend to leave that alone because I try not to speak about things that I can't speak about but does hell exist it's like study history and see if you can figure it out for yourself I mean does heaven exist nothing there's nothing that's more obvious than that hell exists it should be noted that when Jesus talked to this brings up the whole universalist conversation which is a very big one in this corner but when Jesus in the new testament the two words that that come up that are usually translated as hell into English Bibles are Hades so if you look at the story of Lazarus and the rich man the rich man goes to Hades and Hades can have different levels and also Gehenna which is the valley of Henan outside of Israel which had been a place where ancient kings had burned their children and was used as a garbage dump and so you know I know people might be thinking Jordan is being evasive here but not necessarily does heaven exist Mao's China was hell right but does so you're talking about hell on earth but do you believe there's a hell after death like I said I can't I can't I don't speculate about such things I don't that's where my ignorance finds its what would you say that's where my knowledge finds its limit I'm concerned enough about what I'm doing right now right here and and so again I've talked I mean Jordan has a particular sort of natural theology and that he has right when he says do you believe in God that's too personal so does he have speculations and ideas about these other things probably is he going to talk about them publicly no well why not because I think he wants to this is all part of his idea about how he should use language and speech and that he wants to speak as a psychologist and I mean there's a lot of caginess to this but if you sort of understand what he's doing again it is there is a degree of alignment with something like neo-orthodoxy which is really interesting and leaving the rest of that and you know I'm so I have to leave it at that the hell that I see as a potential on earth is sufficient as a deterrent and it's of sufficient reality you know you can ask well is it eternal well I would say well look all totalitarian states are variants on a theme let's say and that theme persists all archetypal stories are eternal everything that happened in the bible happened and is happening and will continue to happen forever it's part of the and and that of course informs if you listen carefully to his biblical biblical lectures what he just said here is pervasive through it eternal human story it's hyper real and and heaven and hell are part of that what that means in the final analysis I don't know I mean you asked I think you asked in there you know hell is real is heaven real it's like well heaven is as far away from hell as you can get that's a good way of thinking about it I've spent my whole life trying to determine how you get as far away from being a camp guard at Auschwitz who enjoys his job as possible and one of the things one of the things I've realized in recent years for example is that you are far from that if you're engaging in your interactions with the world in the spirit of voluntary play you know and we're playing during this conversation and Joe Rogan plays on his podcast all the time and if you're in a playful state with your wife your marriage is optimized and the state of play is the opposite of tyranny and that's why it says in the gospels that if you want to enter the kingdom of heaven you have to become like a little child so you want to reinstate that that open-eyed wide-eyed acceptance of life that is the precursor to voluntary play you want to develop your character to the point where that's part and parcel of your life on an ongoing basis and that's allowing that spirit of the logos to inhabit you that's another way of thinking about it you can you can certainly aid that with prayer you know people don't this is public theology he's being asked to answer these questions now of course public theology is always debated but this is public theology he is a public theologian and he has a platform unlike any other religious figure now rick warren before oberg fell sort of flips things and took a lot of evangelicals and non same-sex marriage affirming christians out of the public space well you know someone might argue well rick warren he played it he prayed at obama's first inaugural and giglio of course got in trouble because they decided to not platform him at obama's second inaugural but i think it's really hard to argue that there is another public theologian who's got a higher profile and is in many ways more influential right now than jordan peterson and i know that bothers a lot of christians certain kinds of christians especially and and and and there's obviously a a culture war valence to this but who's on the other side oprah don't understand people think of god as the joke is a cosmic butler you pray to have your wishes granted it's like he's not a genie you want to you want to pray it's like pray about your stupidity here's a prayer that'll work for sure you want to see if prayer works here's one this will work sit on the edge of your bed ask yourself what bloody stupid thing do i continue to do that's making my life more miserable than it has to be and everyone else's life around me that i could give up that i would give up and but you have to really want the answer so you open yourself up in humility to a revelation you'll get an answer is the serenity prayer practical is what he's saying here now practical it won't be one you want that's how you'll know it's true but if you act on it then your life will improve and that's a proper prayer yeah that's that's what you do like in a metaphysical sense the christian insistence that you should be aware of your sins you know which is incensed in this sense an existential burden is also the idea that you should attend to your own inadequacies and admit to them because in doing so you open up the possibility that something better can make itself manifest within you and there's no doubt that that's the case that's for sure that's true but you have to do it in humility and you have to be looking that's why you're supposed to take the moat out of your own eye instead of worrying about the beam in your neighbor's eyes like this is public theology it's what it is there's something about you that's stupid you can fix and god will tell you what it is if you want him to so to speak there you go you know i make these videos and i i usually find some things that i think are interesting that would be fun to talk about things that i've watched at least once or twice and i thought this is important i want to sort of and i usually have an idea of where i'm going to go with it but i never really know and this was kind of surprising it's and i'm sure when i write it there's a lot of smart people in the corner who know a lot of theology and it'll be kind of a debate but yeah i it's an interesting thought so i can't wait to hear what you have to say about it