https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=h_3wpfOG14A

 Is Jordan Peterson a Gnostic? My first answer is no. My second answer is that depends how you define what a Gnostic is. Labeling someone as a Gnostic is one of the sloppiest ways for Christians to try to tag someone and place them outside the Christian realm. Now, Jordan Peterson does not intentionally place himself within the church. He doesn't go to church and his answers on whether or not he is a Christian is ambiguous. This morning I read a little piece. I have my Google, my little Google search device telling me when a Jordan Peterson thing pops up. It's been very active lately. And so this morning on The Federalist, I read this article by a campus minister entitled, Is Dr. Jordan Peterson a gateway drug to Christianity or just a high brow Joel Osteen? Wow. I couldn't let this one go by. When I did a little bit of talking about origin, I wanted to do a lot more talking about origin and Gnosticism because this is the second time Gnosticism has come up. The first time it came up in what was generally a very good documentary on Peterson. But that little knock about Gnosticism and I thought, why? We'll get into that a little bit because there is a connection between Jung and Gnosticism. But let's first get into what Gnosticism is historically because I think that will help the conversation. To do that, I want to use Philip Carey. Philip Carey is a professor of philosophy at Eastern University. That is a Christian college. He has his master's from Yale. He has his PhD from Yale and he's been teaching at Eastern since 1998. He has written a number of books, a lot of which on Augustine and Platonism and you can see his curriculum vit tie here on the page from Eastern University. I've been enjoying a great courses series by him lately, philosophy and religion in the West. I found it very enjoyable. I really like the great courses series. Some of you say, well, this, you know, shouldn't listen to this Vanderclay guy because he's not a scholar and I'll tell you right now I'm not a scholar. I'm a pastor and what that means is that I'm a practitioner. I work with people and so I'm dependent upon scholars for a lot of my information and so I do a lot of reading and a lot of research to try to make sure that to the degree that I can. I have good information. So let's listen to Philip Carey a little bit, give a little bit of background to Gnosticism and what Gnosticism is. Lecture 11, the development of Christian Platonism. In our previous lecture, we were looking at the specifically Christian concept of God, the doctrine of the Trinity and Christology. And we noticed that this doctrine developed against a Platonist background. The church fathers appropriated or maybe stole some concepts from the Platonist tradition, but they couldn't entirely adopt the Platonist scheme, that scheme of mediation that we saw in Plotinus. And this is typical of the Christian tradition in the first thousand years or so. Now Plotinus, in case you haven't, if you don't know who he is, Plotinus was a neo-Platonist. And Plotinus was very important, especially in terms of Augustine's theology. And so all of this is really good church history to learn. And yeah, so I'll let Carey continue. The Christian intellectuals of this time were deeply attracted to Platonism and yet found that they could not go all the way with the Platonists. The attraction was like this. Yes. Christian intellectuals took it for granted, as most of us do today, that God has to be something like a Platonist first principle. Eternal, unchanging, beyond this world, transcendent. But it went a little further than that in ancient Platonism. He has to be beyond suffering. He has to be beyond change. We can't possibly affect him. Now you can imagine a bunch of intellectuals with that kind of philosophical commitment suddenly having to deal with the phenomenon of Christ, a crucified man whom they identify with God. So what ends up happening is that when they have to think hard about the philosophical problems connected with the being of Christ and the philosophical problems therefore raised by the Christian Bible, the Church Fathers had to give prominence to a more dynamic, notion of God than Platonism would have allowed. They emphasize dynamic interactions within the Trinity, the Son being begotten by the Father and that sort of thing. It's an eternal dynamic, but it's still a dynamic. It's something that happens even in eternity. They emphasize things like God suffering. They didn't really want to say that God suffered, but their Christology required them to say it. Now they retained the Platonist emphasis by adding that God the Father did not suffer, only God the Son. But still, God did suffer. That's crucial to Orthodox Christianity. It's not what you would expect from a Christian Platonist, but the Church Fathers had to say that. They realized that in order to do justice to the Christian Bible, they had to say that about Christ. And this is why if you look at my sermon that I did in Sola Scriptura, I think this is the way that the Bible helps keep the thread in Christianity, helps keep the narrative thread cohesive, even as Christianity is engaging all of these other philosophical systems that it uses, that it has to interact with. And this is how the Bible actually helps Christianity become trans-cultural. Now, notice this is really a different attitude, a different spirituality than what we're familiar with or what we take for granted today. For many of us today, Dietrich Bonhoeffer, the 20th century German theologian, spoke for us when he said, only a suffering God can help. Whereas in the ancient world, the presumption was the exact opposite. Only a God who is immune from suffering, beyond suffering, can conquer suffering and death. And it turns out that it looks like we got a little bit of both in the Church Fathers. We have a suffering God, but God the Father doesn't suffer. We have both things going on, and how you make them all fit together is a crucial issue of Orthodox Christian theology. Now, this Platonist urge to escape from suffering, to be alive, to be able to do something, to escape from suffering, to be allied with a first principle that is beyond suffering, forms the spiritual background for Christianity in the ancient world. And Christianity has to figure out what to do about it. And there's a long history of the Christian tradition being attracted to this notion of immunity from suffering and having to reject it at one point or another. And that's really the history of the development of Christian Platonism. The first attempts to combine Christianity with this desire to escape from all suffering, these first attempts really took us outside of Orthodoxy. They took place really before the development of the Orthodox tradition, and the first attempt of all, called Gnosticism, was rejected as a heresy. The second attempt is what I will call a pre-Orthodox Christian Platonism, and I associate it with the name of Origen, whom we've already met as the architect of subordinationist Trinitarian theology. So let's look at that first form of Christian Platonism, Gnosticism, G-N-O-S-T-I-C, the Gnostics. That comes from a Greek word gnosis, G-N-O-S-I-S, which means knowledge. An agnostic nowadays is someone who claims to have no knowledge of God. These word Gnostics, they claim to have a special secret knowledge about God, about how to escape from this world of suffering, the material world, the bodily world, where things die, where we have suffering and passion, and all those things which Platonists want to escape from. The Gnostics claim to have a special knowledge which would allow them to ascend up to heaven, and these are the first Christians to be absolutely taken by the notion of ascending to heaven. Their souls would ascend, of course, leaving their bodies behind, and they would ascend to a realm populated by what's called aeons, a-e-o-n-s, the Greek word for age. But these are actually something like a cross between biblical angels and Platonic forms. They're eternal beings in a playroom out, it's called, a fullness, a heavenly realm above the visible heavens. The visible heavens are evil for the Gnostics. They're populated by archons or princes who are trying to guard the material world and keep our souls locked up on earth, and we need this gnosis as a sort of a secret knowledge that will open the key to get past these evil guardians, get past the visible cosmos, get past the visible heavens, and up into this super heavenly world where we leave bodies behind, leave behind suffering, and never look back at that awful, filthy, painful material world. Okay. Let's talk about this a little bit, because, again, if you want to look at kind of the essential elements of Gnosticism in the ancient world, and this was a heresy that the church had to deal with in a significant way. In many ways, this was a tension between neoplatonism that was already prevalent in the ancient world and Christianity, because, in a sense, the monotheism of Christianity was an attractive element to people who were already enamored with Platonism. But now there's a dualism, and the dualism of the ancient world thought that, well, the forms—okay, you can think about Plato here—the forms, every instance of love in this world will decay and break down, but love itself, thinking of it as a Platonic form, will never break down. So the idea that the Gnostics had was that they had a secret knowledge, which is why they're called Gnostics. They had a secret knowledge that allowed them to escape this world of decay, this world of pain, where they could go to heaven, and Philip Carey talked about these spiritual beings that they would be with, the ions that were up there in the heavens, and then, what did he say, the archons that were slightly below, because the heavenly realm that we could see, the visible heavenly realm, was still here, subject to change and decay. Now, if you listen to this and you read the Bible, you can very quickly see the tensions that there are between the worldview of the Bible and this worldview of the Gnostics. Now, to be frank, a lot of American evangelicalism is more Gnostic than Jordan Peterson is. Why do I say that? Because if you ask a lot of evangelicals in the United States, and probably in other places in the world too, the point of Christianity is to give you a way to get out of this world of pain. And so, Christians like singing a song, this world is not my home. Now, for reformed Christians like me, I see this basically as kind of a Gnostic heresy. Now, I wouldn't say that's full-blown Gnosticism, but this idea that we have to escape the body and our soul goes to be with Jesus, and when you stop the story there, you pretty much are in danger of remaining a Gnostic. And the point of Christianity is that Jesus didn't die on the cross and go to heaven to be with God, and so we suffer here in the world, and we die, and then we go to the heavens to be with God, and the world just continues to decay or whatever down here. That's not the Christian story. The Christian story is Jesus dies, Jesus is entombed, Jesus rises from the dead, the stone has to be moved away, he leaves the tomb, he visits his disciples, he's got wounds in his palm, but he eats a fish, Jesus is resurrected into a new material creation 2.0. That is Christianity. He ascends into heaven to sit at the right hand of God the Father. From there he shall come to judge the living and the dead. This is the Apostles' Creed. This is basic Christianity that many American evangelicals, and you know, you wonder why they would celebrate Easter anyway, because the celebration of Easter is to celebrate the resurrection of Jesus. If you're going to be a real Gnostic, you stop at Good Friday and you celebrate it because Jesus got rid of his body, now he's back up in the heavens, but the problem is that that makes the incarnation of Jesus unintelligible. And Paul addresses this in 1st Corinthians that, you know, to the Greeks the incarnation of Jesus is unintelligible. Why would why would the logos become flesh? And so this was the Gnostic heresy. Now is Jordan Peterson a Gnostic anything like this? I think it's a silly tag to put on him. Now here's the difficulty, so that's my first answer, no, Jordan Peterson is not a Gnostic. My second answer, it depends what you mean by Gnostic, because what has how this word Gnostic has coming to be used in conversations within the church now, it means that it means a certain kind of Christianity that gets disconnected from materialism. And so it comes to mean it's kind of become a synonym with a synonymous with new age Christianity. And now part of the reason for this is, I understand why it gets tagged in there. Ross Duthought, the, you know, a writer at the New York Times sometimes uses it in this way. Ross Duthought has made the comment that Oprah Winfrey is the high priestess of American Gnosticism, and I understand how he's playing with that term. First of all, let's first say when we're using the term in this way, we have disconnected it from this ancient heresy. And so let's first acknowledge that. And then let's say, okay, in what way is, for example, New Age spirituality Gnostic? Let's jump over, let's minimize my little audio book here. One of the things I did in my blog, one of the things that I've, one of the major pieces that gets tends to get a lot of hits in my blog is I went through David Brooks book, The Road to Character, which I think was, which I think was an excellent book, culturally, a culturally important book for the moment that the United States is in, because the US has been, the US has been moving in terms of its culture from Adam 1 to Adam 2. And if you haven't read David Brooks book, The Road to Culture, it's very much a worthwhile book reading and I've done a lot of writing, I did a lot of writing about it on my blog. Now, he, in chapter 2, he talks about the big me as a transition. I'll begin reading here. The elder George Bush, who was raised in that era, was running for president. He, having inculcated the values of his childhood, resisted speaking about himself. And as the speechwriter put the word I in one of his speeches, he instinctively crossed it out. The staff would beg him, you're running for president, you've got to talk about yourself. Eventually, they cowed him into doing so, but the next day he'd get a call from his mother, George, you're talking about yourself again, she said, and Bush would revert to form no more I's in speeches, no more self-promotion. This was the little me, the self-effacing generation of the, that fought World War II, and it's been replaced by what David Brooks calls the big me. Over the next few years, I've collected data to suggest we've seen a broad shift from a culture of humility to the culture of what you might call the big me, from a culture that encourages people to think humbly of themselves, to a culture that encourages people to see themselves at the center of the universe. Now, there's a lot of conversation we can have about Jordan Peterson and where he fits in on this spectrum. And what's interesting is that a number of people that I've been in conversation with him knock Peterson for being too modernist. And so in that sense, Peterson, and I just went through chapter three of his book last night, which has been my favorite chapter of the book so far, I thought chapter three was, I loved chapter three. But Peterson in many ways comes from the little me generation. And when he's talking about people and talking to his fans and saying, you're miserable self, he is speaking the language of the little me generation. He is not speaking the language of the big me generation. Now, and this is going to get into this crazy comment connecting Peterson with Joel Austin. So the big me generation, it wasn't hard to find. For example, in 1948, 1954, a psychologist asked more than 10,000 adolescents whether they would consider themselves to be a very important person. At that point, 12% said yes. The same question was revisited in 1989. At this time, it wasn't 12% who considered themselves very important. It was 80% of boys and 77% of girls. Psychologists have a thing called the narcissism test. They teach people statements and ask if the statement applies to them. Statements like, I like to be the center of attention. I show off if I get the chance because I am extraordinary. Somebody would write a biography about me. A median narcissism score has risen 30% in the last decades. Again, anyone who is listening to Jordan Peterson knows what side of the line he is in on this thing. And I don't mean he is a narcissist. I mean, maybe he is. The man doesn't strike me as a narcissist. The man strikes me as against the narcissistic culture. In one study, middle school girls were asked who they would like to have dinner with. Jennifer Lopez came in first, Jesus Christ came in second, Paris Hilton came in third. The girls were asked which of the following jobs they would like to have. Nearly twice as many said they would rather be a celebrity's personal assistant, for example, Justin Bieber's, than the president of Harvard. Though, to be fair, I am pretty sure the president of Harvard would rather be Justin Bieber's personal assistant. As I looked around the popular culture, I kept finding the same messages everywhere. You are special. Trust yourself. Be true to yourself. Movies from Pixar and Disney are constantly telling children how wonderful they are. Commencement speeches are larded with the same clichés. Follow your passions. Don't accept limits. Chart your own course. You have a responsibility to do great things because you are so great. This is the gospel of self-trust. Now, can you look at Jordan Peterson's work in the future authoring program and see how a generation of narcissists could be attracted to this? Yes. Can, is there some, perhaps some, can we find a way to connect those two things? Yes. But when I listen to Jordan Peterson's message, he is in many ways a cultural conservative because he is going back to the little me generation. And chapter three, I think in many ways, Jordan Peterson, I'm 54, he's 55. You say, yeah, he looks younger than you. Yeah, he's still got his hair. And he doesn't have all this white stuff all over his face. So, you know, Peterson, when I read him, he's a conservative and he's in many ways, with David Brooks saying, we need to think about the little me generation. Now, in all of this, we need to up our resolution because to just have two categories, good and bad, Christian and Gnostic, really doesn't serve any decent conversation for figuring this stuff out. I'll continue with Brooks. As Alan DeGeneres put in the 2009 commencement address, my advice to you is to be true to yourself and everything will be fine. Celebrity chef, Mariah Batali advises graduates to follow your own truth expressed consistently by you. Anna Quindlen urges other audiences to have the courage to honor your character, your intellect, your inclinations, and yes, your soul by listening to its clear voice instead of following the muddied messages of a timid world. In her mega-selling Eat, Pray, Love, I'm the only man to ever finish this book. I've never read it. Elizabeth Gilbert wrote that God manifests himself through your own voice within your own self. God dwells within you as you yourself, exactly the way you are. Now, this big me, inner self sort of contemporary thing that now Ross Duthout and others are calling Gnosticism, okay, if you want to call that Gnosticism, all right, I kind of understand what you're saying and because the premise of this is that there's a secret hidden Paul Van der Kley and what Paul Van der Kley really needs to do is get in touch with his secret hidden self and now if you begin to look at the cultural landscape you can begin to understand how this very easily gets connected with let's say the conversation about gender and sexuality. Maybe the secret hidden Paul Van der Kley has the gender identity of Shirley Temple and so, you know, even though outwardly I'm a 54 year old, six foot four, 225 pound man, inwardly I'm Shirley Temple singing about the good ship Lollipop which is really an airplane. So, you know, and so that in a sense is kind of what people are talking about with respect to Gnosticism but if you're listening to Jordan Peterson at any length at all, it's abundantly clear this is nowhere near where he is going or what he is into. Now, archetypes bear a certain amount of resemblance to Platonic forms and yesterday I listened to really an excellent YouTube done by Bishop Baron which, you know, some people say, well, you just want to be Jordan Peterson. Well, I think I'd rather be Bishop Baron. I mean, I listen to this guy and I think, wow, this guy knows a ton. That isn't to say I'd like to be Roman Catholic but I'm really impressed by the dude and he does amazing things so I'm a fan but Bishop Baron did a really interesting thing on modernity and morality and I don't know if he got Nietzsche right in that video but, you know, Bishop Baron is right in terms of, you know, so you have Plato and then you have Aristotle and then, you know, that then in Aristotle gets into the formal cause and that just kind of gets chucked in this new age thinking that imagines that my true self is somehow has to be discovered by me going inside of myself. Now, here's the difficulty. By this point in human history, the switchboard, think about one of those old switchboards in the 1930s with all those things they would plug in, there are wires going all over the place right now and for many of us, and for many Americans, they pick up their worldview on this infinite smorgasbord buffet. I'll take a little bit of Platonism if that feels right. I'll take a little bit of Aristotelian forms if that feels right. I'll take a little bit of Hinduism and a little bit of Buddhism and I'll add a dash to Christianity and I'll wear a golden cross because my mama was a Christian and I liked her and this is how people construct their worldview and they walk around and they hear these ideas and say, oh, that sounds nice so I'll grab that. Now, there's a lot of things going on beneath the surface that we can talk about that really track how all this stuff holds together, but if we're actually going to have productive conversations, we need to try to use our words carefully and just saying, we should dismiss Jordan Peterson because he's a Gnostic. Well, I don't know, first of all, which Gnosticism you're trying to connect him with. He certainly isn't terribly connected with ancient Gnosticism. I don't see him at all in alignment with this contemporary Gnosticism that Rost who thought is talking about. So what on earth do you mean by Gnosticism? And then Joel Osteen, in what way is Jordan Peterson anything like a prosperity preacher? That simply makes no sense. So I don't know, you know, I don't want to be too hard on the guy who wrote this article, but, you know, I read it this morning and I thought this is the second time Gnosticism gets tagged. Now, as I'm going through Jung's autobiography, Jung's study of Gnosticism comes up. Now, I don't know enough about Jung to understand where Jung gets to the Gnostics and what he's doing with them. Jung also understood alchemy and if you, again, listen to Jordan Peterson's interview in Transliminal 2015, you know, Peterson kind of helped me understand a little bit about what Jung was doing in alchemy. You're really down into the weeds by the time you get to that point. And so just kind of a casual drive-by article that says, now let's read it, because of his understanding of rationalism and psychological emphasis, Jordan Peterson prepares the soul for more for Gnostic spirituality than Christian orthodoxy. And I think, first of all, you're getting Peterson wrong. Second of all, you're getting Peterson's audience wrong because the people who are, you know, many of the people, not all of the people, because I'm not a right-winger you in the American political spectrum, many of the people who are interested in Peterson hate the big me of the American transformation. They're conservatives. They voted for George H.W. Bush. They feel, I'm amazed how many times in the YouTube comments someone will refer to me as Pastor VanderKlay. Now, almost nobody in my church does that. They call me Paul. Why? I live in blue state, liberal leaning California, Sacramento. You know, people ask me what they can call me. I say, call me Paul. My parents gave me that name. It's a perfectly fine name. Some people say, well, I'd like to, you know, for reasons of respect and formality, may I call you Reverend VanderKlay? Absolutely. May I call you Pastor Paul? It's kind of the evangelical, you know, what to call a pastor. Call me Pastor Paul. Call me Paul. Call me Paul VanderKlay. Call me Reverend VanderKlay. Some people even call me Father and I'm not offended even though I'm not Roman Catholic. It's okay. But to say that this, he is leading people to gnosticism, he is, even if you identify it with Oprah Winfrey, this gets everything about this conversation wrong. Okay. Now, I've got a sermon to do and an adult education thing to work on today and the last thing I need to do is get all excited about this, but I am. And so I thought, I'm going to get this darn thing off my chest. Now, some of my friends have said, yeah, I know why you like Jordan Peterson because temperamentally, you're like the guy. I think he's higher in neuroticism than I am. I'm really a pretty happy guy, but I get obsessive like he does. And I read this, I read this, I read this piece this morning, first thing in the Federalist and it really got under my skin, partly because this is the second time I've seen gnosticism associated with it. So please, if you're going to use the word gnosticism, let's first talk about gnosticism historically. Second, if you're going to use gnosticism in terms of New Age spirituality, and again, I can understand the connection to it, I don't see any way in which Peterson is knocking on that door at all. And when you hear what he has to say about New Age spirituality, it's not anything close. You know, right now there's a lot of articles coming out about Peterson and the truth is that most people live busy lives and especially most important people who are doing writing and stuff, they live busy lives, they see a little bit of Jordan Peterson to write a book review, they page through it and so on and so forth and then they take their first impressions and they throw it up there and fine. And so a lot of the stuff we read about Peterson is going to be like that. But probably if you're watching my video, because you're obsessed with watching Jordan Peterson videos, it's probably because something he's been saying is interesting you in your internal Jungian cloud of witnesses. And so my admonition is follow that up, read the sources. If Jordan Peterson is making you interested in the Bible, read the Bible. You know, find someone who knows a little bit more about the Bible than you do to talk to. Now I'm going to get into, continue to work on my commentary series on his biblical thing. A lot of people have brought up the question of his interpretation of the beatitude, blessed are the meek. I think Jordan Peterson gets that in terms of a grammatical, historical exegesis of that passage. It's just wrong. I understand why he gets there and so if you find some of my comments you'll see how I've treated this. I'll probably do a video of it sometime. If he gets to the Sermon on the Mount, I'll probably deal with it more at length. But okay, so again, this gets into the question, why, and I get this a lot, why do you as a pastor pay attention to this man? I think he's making an important cultural contribution. He is getting people interested in Christianity that have been alienated from Christianity for some big reasons for a very long time. I think he is engaging the question of how contemporary Christians put their entire world together in some really interesting and fresh ways. And so I'm interested. I've been blessed mightily by listening to his videos. Now, judge me or critique me how you want. Call me a Gnostic if you want to. You know, it doesn't really bother me. I've got very low neuroticism and very high. Just about all my other scores are high and what that means is temperamentally, I'm a happy guy. I'm hard to offend. I'm not impossible to offend but I'm pretty hard to offend. So what irks me is that this is just a drive-by article saying he's a Gnostic and what probably the reason this irritates me in terms of my own agenda, because yes, we have worlds of motivation within us. It's going to bring a lot of Christians to say, up, he doesn't hit my bar in terms of who a Christian should be. Well, congratulations. That's probably most of the world. And if you don't listen to anyone who doesn't hit that bar, well, my friend, you probably can't vote for, I don't know how many politicians and you probably shouldn't be getting medical advice from your doctor and you probably shouldn't be pumping the oil that's been found by geologists using systems that you don't believe in. So, well, this is a pretty ranty video and I should stop now but I just, is Jordan Peterson a Gnostic? No. Second answer, that depends how you define Gnostic. But if you define Gnostic like a new age person and you could maybe put Joel Osteen towards that, Brooks kind of does in his book, still no, because I think it's a bad definition of Gnosticism.