https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=LUiK3XrzEdQ

 So, Ron, you and I have never met and we've just shared some brief emails together, although I have seen some videos you did about eight months ago on Jordan Peterson, and I actually thought those were some of the best, especially at that point in his exposure, some of the best commentary in terms of orientation on who he was and where he was coming from. But I didn't know anything about you and I still don't know much about you, so why don't you tell me a little bit about yourself? Oh, well, I teach in British Columbia, University of the Fraser Valley in the Department of Political Science, Philosophy, Religious Studies. I have been teaching for about 30 years in the area. It's in the central Fraser Valley, just a little east of Vancouver. I was on staff with Amnesty International in the 1980s. So those were very busy years. My interest in Peterson and many other people, like Erasmus, for example, comes from the fact, sadly, so too often people are biased on important issues and the ability to be self-critical and to deceive the other person's perspective. And then that's a fairly... Yeah, you're breaking up quite a bit. So let's go back to Amnesty International. Where did you serve in Amnesty International? Well I was Pacific Director throughout the late 1980s, early 1990s. And then I was a chaired part of the Middle Eastern program for Amnesty International for Canada. And so obviously when you're dealing with human rights issues that Amnesty deals with, usually the people who are working with the victims of two political ideologies that can't seem to be outside of their own agenda, and then people who are trying to think a little bigger, a little more meaningful act for justice and peace concerns, they become the victims of these clashing ideologies of the left and right. Yeah, yeah, yeah. So now you're teaching, and I noticed it's in political science, religious studies, and philosophy. Philosophy, that's all one department? Yeah, so it's a big humanities. Classical education usually, at its best, brought together political philosophy, philosophy itself, and religious studies was always a part of what it meant to think meaningfully about the human condition and the relationship with theology, philosophy, and what that means in public responsibility and public life. So political science or elements of that are political theory or political philosophy. Okay. In a sense, it's just the old classical humanities brought together in a department in which many departments are fragmented into little silos of distinct disciplines. We've tried to maintain a more classical approach to education, which is grounded in historic humanities. Yeah, yeah. Well, that's, I've never heard of a department doing that, but I very easily see the reason for it and the wisdom behind it. As a pastor, part of what I enjoy is, I switch, I'm a master of no discipline, but I touch many of them because you're dealing with whole people and whole situations. So early on- Go ahead. Yeah, well, obviously from your position, you're dealing with the wide range of human which crosses any academic discipline. The human journey, people, and then they dip into a religious background theology, but then how we think about wisdom is very important, how we think about public life, how we deal with the tragic and unpredictable thing. You have to be very interdisciplinary to be a pastor. I also noticed while I was, before I met with you, that you've done a fair amount of writing on religion. Are you, do you identify as a Christian? Do you participate in a Christian or a religious community? Yeah, I come from the Church of England or in Canada, it's Anglican or in the United States to be Episcopal. Okay. Yeah, so my roots, I come from a family, some are bishops and priests and scholar bishops and go back to the, what's the Anglo-Canadian tradition that I was sort of, my mother's milk, Christianity and its moderation, its breadth, its richness, both its Catholicity on one hand and the other hand, its respect for the Lutheran, the reform sides as well. It's always tried to be Catholic but not Roman and reform but not schismatic and that's never an easy balance to walk. That's part of the genetic code of the Anglican way. Okay. Well, I think that's, nobody's ever quite put it that way to me, but I think that that's really helpful to me and it's what I've seen in some of the Anglicans whose work and writing I really respect. Now, in some of the earlier videos that I had seen, you talk about Peterson, you mentioned that he started coming up a lot from students and I've heard this, I know a number of academics who first, Jordan Peterson first came on their radar because their students started talking about him and you mentioned students wanted to write papers about him. How did all of that unfold for you? Well, I think, you know, I've been teaching 30 years at University of Fraser Valley and I've never had more students interested in one living person as Jordan Peterson and then that goes from one of the papers when you do class presentations. I've been presently editing a book on Jordan Peterson. We hope to have all the essays in by December but I've also asked about six students to reflect and say a thousand word essays on why are they drawn to him? What is he speaking into culture where there's a lack or there's a void and how is he doing it in a way that sort of wins and woos them in a meaningful manner? So, yes, I would say definitely the, I mean, I was aware of him in the broader cultural, Canadian cultural issue before students began to sort of get on the horse and ride it, but certainly the growing number of students who are attracted for diverse reasons to Jordan Peterson, his, I don't think I've had, there has been any other person on the Canadian public scene who has drawn that many people in that shorter period of time. Yeah. I mean, we have larger public and elect individuals in Canada like Charles Taylor and George Grant and there's many others but none quite as thoughtful but as popular at the same time. Not populist in a thin or shallow sense but popular in that he takes important ideas, makes them accessible but also speaks into the void in our culture in terms of where it's polarized politically and says you need not go right nor left. There's a nimble center here if we're going to be thoughtful but people on the right or left who usually are frozen or embalmed in intellectual positions, they either caricature them depending on what side you're at which says a lot about the low level of intellectual discourse. Yeah. Well, and one of the things that I've noticed is that a number of academics, at least I think about probably get in trouble but why not? You get to a certain age and you don't worry about getting in trouble so much but James K. Smith on Twitter, a number of individuals, he's a philosophy professor at Calvin College. I don't know if you're familiar with him but I heard in him and I've heard a number of other academics speak pretty dismissively of him that it's just this moment, the impact is too shallow, the content he's putting out is unworthy of serious attention from an academic and so it's interesting to hear your take on it which is also my own how deep this will go in time, none of us of course know but it was my opinion quite early on that his work and especially the phenomenon around him deserved attention. Do you get pushback from other academics as you poke around at this? One predictable means that certain intellectuals or academics used to dismiss someone as they say he's thin, he or she is populist, they lack a certain depth, they're speaking to the people who are not trained, good university degrees. That's a bit of an ad hominem argument. There's a more sophisticated of maps of meaning, just look at say Lev Pol or his children's stories and say well he's not a particularly profound thinker, well read Born Peace or Anna Karenina or Resurrection or Erasmus himself, you could read his adages, his more simple stories or parables or you say the same thing with Jesus too, this guy isn't too profound, there's more to him than that so a lot of it depends on what you're reading, how you're reading, you'll learn more about any thinker. Any good thinker will write and speak at a popular level but there's also the more sophisticated and the task is to follow the markings or the cairns of the popular to the sophisticated rather than dismiss someone because you just stop and linger at the markings or the cairns of the popular but that's a typical academic way of not engaging someone, you just dismiss them, they're populist, there's a lack of depth, there's a lack of sophistication or they're just surfing the wave of a trendy cultural issue and then you just with a wave of the hand curtly dismiss someone and I find that reaction more superficial than their critique of what they see as the thinness of Peterson, does that sort of make sense? Yeah, makes perfect sense. Now when we started talking about talking you brought up a name that I've touched on in a few of my videos a little bit mostly with respect to the Reformation and Martin Luther and kind of setting up the Reformation, you brought up Erasmus in this conversation with Peterson and I thought that was extremely interesting. Now I would dare bet most of the people listening to my channel have very little idea about who Erasmus was and why he's important so could you give us a little bit of background on Erasmus and the significance of him within the story of Western culture and the church? Well, this would be just a stone skimming the surface of the water sort of whistle stop tour but I mean Erasmus is probably one of the most significant public intellectuals of the 16th century. He as it's said, I mean it's often said he laid the egg that Luther hatched and his retranslation of Jerome's Vulgate really brought the text forward in a much more sophisticated, updated textual manner but he also along with Luther for example and many Roman Catholics including what was called the Oxford reformers John Colet and Thomas More himself were very critical of the Roman Catholic Church. Its aberrations at the level of theology, public life, liturgy, centralization of authority in Rome, the injustice it was perpetuating so he was a head of Martin Luther in terms of critiquing the Roman Catholic Church and Luther was quite drawn not only to Erasmus' retranslation of Jerome's Vulgate but also his rigorous critique of the Roman Catholic Church so at a certain point it looked like Erasmus was going to be the forerunner and the pioneer and the morning star of the Reformation. Where they broke really was Erasmus held together as a good Catholic both loyalty to the church but criticism of the church and this is where at a certain point Luther could go down a path criticism but then schism fragmentation and the emergence of new denominations in Protestantism itself. The other thing which I find which would be appropriate sort of Erasmus then and now, Erasmus saw both interpretations of the Bible and then the application to real life situations there was a certain level of ambiguity and uncertainty and so this was his big clash with Luther. Luther would often accuse argued that sola scriptura, I'm for the Bible alone against the Catholic Church with its traditions and it's yes the Bible's there but it's you know it's councils, it's synods, it's various reads and Erasmus could say to Luther he said you know we're on the same page when it comes to authority of the Bible. Our debate is not about the authority of the Bible it's about the authority of the interpretation of the Bible or what we call deuterocanonical authority. I tend to see that there's various ways of reading certain texts and of course Erasmus had done magnificent work on the fathers of the church both East and West and so he understood that in troubling texts whether Romans or Galatians you know epistles or Revelation there were various ways of reading a text and the tradition itself reflected that whereas Luther you know he from Galatians and Romans he just said this is the key this is the essa as it were of the text justification by grace and to do to do and Erasmus could say yes that's there I'm not denying that that's there but there are other texts which can give you alternate reads and it's this multi-layered way of reading a text and seeing different voices in this case in the New Testament and so he accused Luther of reductionist exegesis in that sense or rather than allowing the text to come out in an exegetical manner and so Erasmus to his credit he this might be the third thing is he refused to buy into either tribes the emerging Protestant Reformation at the time whether Lutheran or Reformed or Anabaptist Mennonite or various forms each convinced their text was correct and then because he continued to critique the Roman Catholic Church and as it slipped into the Council of Trent and the whole Tridentine tradition which polarized it against the reformers he refused to buy and then he got put on the index and was not taken off the in text until Vatican II and Pope John the 23rd and so he was an ironical thinker who was able to transcend the tribalism of any of the clans or denominations or theologians of the time and he would say sort of yes and no to each of them but he was too thinker both politically, theologically, exegetically to sort of buy into any and he was always trying to harmonize and say listen you're you all see but you see through a glass darkly so don't absolutize your own perspective because that will just continue to fragment the Church and the Catholic and apostolic Church and so in that sense he's an interesting forerunner because his context was one is fragmentation and ideology in his case you know theological exegetical denominational and similar one sense to Jesus so he's got the Pharisees, he's got the scribes, he's got the Sadducees, the Zealots, the Essings but he didn't buy into any of their agendas and so where does a wild bird like that fit, can't caged? Does that sort of make sense? Yeah, now it's interesting to me I was oh a few months ago maybe a couple years ago but the older I get months and years start to come together but I was you know doing a deep dive again into Luther and just going through a biography of him and just noting again how you know Luther posts these 95 theses in Latin in order to spur some theological conversation they get it gets translated by some of his students and put out to pamphlets in German which of course is going to have a different political effect and and reading the biography of Luther I noted how in a sense Luther seemed to have the type of temperament that when you pushed him he pushed back and then you pushed harder and he pushed harder back and you see so you see Luther over time his views getting increasingly extreme and and that's where in many ways the contrast with Erasmus gets interesting because obviously Erasmus decided early on you know he's not going to he's not going to fight the Roman Catholic Church he's going to keep his peace with the institution and he's going to work his his agenda of reform from the inside whereas Luther you know you've got the diet of worms you've got the the politics of the Holy Roman Empire going all of that just pushes Luther you know the harder they push on him the more he pushes back you know the politics get engaged his you know his his political agent you know squirrels him over at a castle he doesn't want to see him get taken out but actually when I was you know in later on coming into the Jordan Peterson conversation seeing temperamentally more of an alignment between Luther and Peterson and that it's often the case that Peterson begins talking as an academic he's you know he's qualifying things and then someone pushes on him you know even with the the pronoun incident that that really launched him into public life and I'd watch people push push Peterson and every time I'd see that I'd think you know I have a I have a brother-in-law from from Manitoba and so I've got a sense of these northwestern Canadians and you get the sense listening to Peterson boy if you push him he's going to push back you push him more he's going to push more back and so actually I was thinking more in terms of Peterson and Luther be just in terms of temperament but you're making a you're making an argument that there's something to be learned about Peterson by looking at it from the lens of Erasmus so so how do you see that? Well I would say what I would say there is that for Peterson like Erasmus there are various ideological tribes lined up now we are just in many ways secular Lutherans or secular Puritans the idea of ideology has never stopped it just gets now translated into politically correct issues politics of the left and right so it's just the secularization of Protestantism but the idea of ideology continues now just as Erasmus in the 16th century was willing to critique the Roman Catholic Church both in its pre-Tradentine form and certainly well he had died before Trent began but then he was put on the index with that he would also be willing to critique Luther obviously Calvin came a little later from that but he didn't buy into either of the tribes in this case theological or denominational Jordan Peterson is you know much the same he gets launched or the craft leaves the cove with his critique of what was going on in terms of politically correct speech he doesn't he doesn't and of course there's a whole ideology back of that that's just the tip of a very very large intellectual iceberg of progressive liberalism or trendy liberalism in that sense which claims to be on the one hand open-minded and about diversity and tolerance and pluralism but it's as close-minded as the alt-right that it critiques now Peterson of course if a person thinks of either or right or wrong it's sort of a Manichaean way of thinking light darkness good bad then the alt-right picks him up and says well if he's critiquing the trendy left he must be on the right but Peterson's is critical he's too sharp a speaker to buy into the alt-right and its reactionary tendencies and in that sense he shares in an Erasmian way of refusing to buy into the ideologies of right left or even sensible center in that sense now as you rightly say sometimes when you're cornered the you know the sword comes out and you start doodling and so as a temperament he probably you've got these two things he's transcending ideology like Erasmus and to what degree can Peterson like Erasmus maintain an ironical approach in the midst of the conflicts and what degree does he get drawn into the conflict and become part of a problem rather than part of the solution does that sort of make sense yeah yeah you know the the big the big news this week on Peterson has been the tweet where he weighs in on the Brett Kavanaugh drama and he sends out a tweet and I noticed that that it's often as is often the case with any combustible news bit it's without the conversation between Brett Weinstein and Eric Weinstein which Peterson is in a sense following and Peterson just puts out a line out there that basically says well if if you know Kavanaugh should step down if he you know if he is appointed and that then sets off a firestorm within this whole Jordan Peterson tribe and when I listen to your take now in terms of looking at Peterson via Erasmus that then seems to make more sense of Peterson in his in even though he gets adopted by these tribes he is going to try and maintain his independence from them and in fact be willing to say things that may alienate allies and tribalists that align themselves behind him yeah if a person uncritically genuflects before a tribe in its chieftains and there's a whole agenda here if you dare criticize it you must be on the other side without saying no it's quite possible either to critique a tribe I'm in and still belong to it or critique it and not be on the other side as well and I mean Peterson sees himself in some sense as a classical liberal and elements of classical liberalism are about critical I mean classical liberalism comes out of the terrible religious wars of the 17th century whether we're talking about you know John Locke and later on male and 19 people like this they were very wary of I mean they recognized clearly that we are finite infallible which means we see through a glass darkly and they saw the implications either religiously 16 17th century religious wars and the tragedies which emerged or you secularize that just the fragmentation of different intellectual families and once you start from the premises were finite infallible it means we we see in a limited way and so classical liberalism has tended to hold high an aspect of it in terms of critical thinking and that's quite and this is the irony is that a lot of the say on the left they see themselves as liberals but when you critique them you must be on the right so they to me I've often it's not very liberal but liberal not to critique liberalism but when someone comes to do it then they must be on the right and you want to say no you can do it within liberalism itself because critical thinking's a part of that heritage and tradition and in that sense Peterson is just emerging he's you get this implicit religious thinking and I'd be interesting to see where he goes and particularly works in the bible and other things like this I mean he's in a journey as anybody is as they're trying to make sense of the pilgrimage through history and time that's just part of what a thoughtful person does and it's not easy given you know all the different perspectives out there theologically denominationally but in that sense his classical liberalism puts him in a place in which he's confronting liberals who are not liberal anymore because they've frozen in terms of how they're dealing with the hot button issues in the culture wars and so rather than saying you know that's really a part of classical liberalism why don't we welcome his critiques they just dismiss them as being on the all right and so in that sense when liberals dismiss them they're not very liberal because they're denying the importance of critical thinking yeah yeah yeah I think again again he's come out and said you know one source I'm drawing from draws from many others as well myth and you know historic thought and Dostoevsky and Kierkegaard I mean there's many other sources but one of the many sources he's drawing from is classical liberalism and so it's ironic that often the people who oppose him the most are liberals when in fact the very organ or faculty he uses critical thinking is part of that liberal tradition itself and how does that sort of make sense that makes it makes perfect sense now one of the one of the interesting things about Erasmus to me is his as you as you mentioned earlier you know in in the context of this renaissance humanism that that turns into you know that continues to go throughout europe this this enchantment with the text and the and the classical you know classical latin and learning greek and and Erasmus comes and offers a fresh translation of the bible in latin and and for us today who are awash if you you know who are awash in biblical translations but in that time for him to offer a fresh translation of the latin that in in certain elements challenged translations of particular texts upon which roman catholic dogma had been built you know that that was a very that was a very revolutionary and especially for his time gutsy thing to do because as you can see in the martin luther case doing things like that could lead to a chain of events that gets you killed and and so how does that piece fit into your picture well certainly with Erasmus his you know critiquing the vulgate the conservative the roman catholic conservatives turned because it was like for many people in the 50s the king equaled you know the authentic text itself rather than seeing this is just a you know more modern interpretation there's other ways of translating a text itself so on so on the one hand sure what Erasmus was doing he was calling into question almost a thousand years of an established text in latin the gerome vulgate and he said there's problems serious problems because uh i mean Erasmus had the languages this is why he adored gerome even more than augustin in some ways because Erasmus was a textual critic augustin was it an exegete he'd also philosopher as well theologian obviously but so Erasmus was very interested in gerome because they were philologists they were scholars of language and gerome like Erasmus knew the lat knew the greek knew the hebrew and so uh but for conservatives who said this is the established text then what Erasmus was doing he was upsetting almost a thousand years of catholic established you know authority um and this is why the the new reformers that were coming along Erasmus was their key guy because if reformers the bible was really central to their thinking and legitimately so in the 16th century but then the question was whose translation of the bible can we trust and why not only alternate translations but alternate reads or exegesis of texts uh as well and so that threatened to undermine at a textual level people like luther luther and many reformers i mean there had been earlier reformers uh but they lacked this the sheer sophistication of Erasmus in terms of scholarly training uh and so he he was like a mount everest in terms of languages and translations and there were lesser translators but in Erasmus and then not only did he just dwell as it were in the world of translation but he was an activist he was very interested so what's the relationship of this text to life in the church life in politics life of liturgy life of peacemaking war and peace issues i mean his confrontation with pope Julius and many others was that these were these were war hawkish popes and you could find no justification for this type of aggressive religious nationalism in the bible this way oh you froze emerging anabaptists okay go back a little bit um talk about his conflict with the pope because you froze right there and that's a pretty cool area yeah Erasmus's clash with pope Julius who was very much a warlike pope um he argued very clearly that the you know you use the beatitude sermon on the mount and loving the enemy and walking the extra mile with those who persecute you and he actually one of his his um his colloquies he got he has the pope coming coming after his death to heaven and he meets Peter and Peter won't even allow the pope in um very significant uh and so this would have come in as an affront to faithful catholics that here's the pope the vicar of christ uh and Erasmus was very clear and these are his popular stories his colloquies there's there's many many colloquies and then his aphorisms or tales for children sort of or parables as jesus would do them um so yeah his he was he didn't live in a scholarly ivory tower he was always asking what's the relationship of my translations my exegesis to the pressing evishes both for an average parishioner and the issues they're facing but also at the very sophisticated levels of theology and the major universities and seminaries in europe at the time so he was always going back and forth between theory and praxis and theory application and uh but grounding it solidly in the best of the text as interpreted by the fathers and then applied to 16th century conditions which gave him a real authority because he wasn't just talking about a private experience he wasn't just talking about a tradition he wasn't just talking with the bible he was looking at bible the best of the tradition in a because the fathers didn't always agree on stuff east and west and he looked at the dialogue within the tradition as they tried to make sense of difficult and then applying it applying it in 16th century context and so it gave him a certain authority rather than just say a reformer the bible or certain certain reformers not all reformers just the bible they would look at key fingers augustin bernard aclair san calvin bernard aclair well in the institutes is very important uh bernard but um but uh yeah so harassed nailing the authorities to the wall when they claimed to you know speak for the church or for christ and and they were doing the very opposite in their thought in life so it warmed him to the reformers because this was the reformers agenda yeah why do you think erasmus i mean why do you think erasmus in a sense could get away with this in a way that luther couldn't i think you've got two different temperaments and also two underlying ways of seeing so for an erasmus as i mentioned earlier he he believed there were certain non-negotiable things one was loyalty to the church that doesn't mean you were uncritical and so his argument you could not reform the church if you left the church no more than in political parties if you leave a party to reform or apart and get you just splitting either the right or the left left politically he was also more ironical than luther as a temperament so he was often confronted um uh but he would he would respond at his best and a more okay so how can we work these things through together i want to hear where you're coming from exegetically theologically politically liturgically his um so he had a mind that was more nimble that's why i sometimes refer to the peterson thing whereas luther this was the way you interpret if you differ with me as it were i throw my you're the devil so it's throwing the ink against the devil yeah since yeah i most of my introduction to erasmus even though once i say this i know some of my friends are going to listen to this in the reformed camp and say you got to stop listening to brad gregory and his work on um because he's every time i mention him some of my friends and reformed historians say don't listen to brad gregory um you know gregory's vision of erasmus was was that he was not only erratic in that he was seeking peace but he was also much more of a gradualist imagine that over time the church will reform whereas as luther you know even in terms of his you know his conversion moment with the thunderstorm in the woods i mean luther was much more apocalyptic in that you know it is now it is it is black and white it is cut and dried and you know this must be you know now is the day whereas erasmus is much more we'll keep working on it is that fair absolutely absolutely erasmus was ironical and incremental trying to have the big picture over periods of time whereas for a luther it was a black and white way of seeing if you disagree with me then you're compromising the faith you're a judas and we have to we have to bring the reformation as soon as possible so very very different temperaments very very different ways of seeing how reform takes place very different ways of approaching the bible very different way of dealing with those who differ with you that's why the person who followed luther was malanxin who realized pushed a dualistic either or way far too hard and malanxus was trying to build a bridge between erasmus uh and luther and of course luther was not too impressed by that because luther came to detest erasmus when erasmus would not follow him i have a whole couple of chapters in my book on erasmus wild bird and he could be very nasty rhetorically and you know he would use the most hateful language towards people who dared to differ with him almost as if he equated his own interpretation with god he almost was god on earth you know and he becomes the moses of the reformation and that those are those are criteria of cults in some ways yeah yeah well and luther has that quality and and that when you know at least my reading this isn't from gregory but from others that that luther thought that well you know here here's the bible and we're going to apply reason to the bible and it will be self-evident to everyone my interpretation and we'll all together follow and then he's a little a little bit struck when karlstad and a good many others well they're doing like luther but they're coming out with different interpretations and well what do you mean and so you know then suddenly luther has enemies on many sides you know not just not just the catholic side and it sounds like but go ahead yeah one of the i think ironic things about what we call particularly religious conservatives today they tend to see liberalism emerging in the 17th 18th century whereas in fact liberalism is birthed with the reformation and and luther is going to appeal to liberty and equality and these are actually the erasmus noted he's 1517 he of the christian man and um erasmus is then the reformers each using those principles are going to interpret the bible differently because luther just thought his interpretation was the only one but of course you hit the calvinists you hit the lutherans you hit the anabaptists and then the question is okay we all hold the authority of the bible sacred but we're all interpreting and applying it differently so now what becomes the authentic christian interpretation of the text whereas the classical catholics which erasmus came from he said be wary of allowing those principles the genie out of the bottle because they're going to go in a variety of directions and there's going to be nothing that finally you get someone like gates senator cannot hold where anarchy is and they saw very clearly the protestant reformation was the birth of liberal anarchism since with everyone becomes authority in terms of their own denomination and if you disagree with that authority you start your own you know and it proliferates like rabbit warrants in in that sense and so yeah this was a shock to luther he thought well you know i've trained everyone's going to be on my side well no and erasmus warned him about that and in the clash between erasmus and luther and exegesis it was very clear that there are different ways of exegeting a text both one is very simplistic reductionistic i.e. luther and the others more nuanced refined looking at layers weighed as as as you listen to the voices of the mothers and fathers of the church in the patristic and medieval era and so yeah so that that whole birth of those principles in the 16th century late 15th century philosophy voluntarism and um nominalism erasmus was acutely aware of where those principles would lead when applied by people like luther and others in the 16th century and and so his commitment to loyalty yes critique yes to good biblical exegesis yes read the heart but it's done you can't say you're reforming the church if you leave the church and start your own denomination that's not going to reform anything and so he was he was astutely aware once erasmus he said to essentially to luther the bible really is not your source of authority at the deeper level your real source of authority is the rights of the indian you see fit you cut out just the wrong time in that one the rights of the authority is the source of your right you are the individual yeah the yeah the rights of the individual all being equal using their freedom as they see fit in good conscience to interpret the text each person who apply those principles to the text they're going to interpret the content yeah and what's the real opposition to the reformation is that it was where it was going the centuries yeah you're just cut out there and now it's so there'll be some gaps in it but bits and pieces i can usually pick up what you're saying unless you're unless you're frozen now too no i hear you okay okay you know it's interesting because again when i'm thinking about peterson and erasmus and luther one of the you know one of the differences and correct me with them if i'm wrong you know erasmus took great offense at the at the um when i say militant i don't mean that as a metaphor the pay the you know the pope's leading armies um erasmus also um did not fit in a monastic lifestyle luther you know luther was you know was a monk and a professor and then a pastor and obviously a church leader whereas erasmus erasmus stayed a scholar and and never was responsible for leading a congregation or for or as a leader of a group of people that will that will also in many ways afford a certain amount of let's let's call it um you can you can leave a certain amount a certain number of things kind of in solution there in the ether whereas it's often if you're the leader of a movement you have to make decisions okay i i might see all of this variability and flexibility but this is what i must do now and and that's a difference one of but but one of the things if we you know ping i mentioned you know you noted charles taylor you know one of the one of the key insights i picked up from charles taylor in a secular age was the idea of the reform going from a two p a two speed system where you had monks and spiritual athletes who could could be the great saints and then you had common people who uh they you know it's kind of a nature grace dichotomy where now they'll muddle through and they won't know too much and they're not too bright but they'll they'll live off the spiritual excess and the excess merits of the saints and the system will be okay whereas the reformation comes through and very much you know we're looking at a one speed religion and that of course via calvin in calvin's geneva i mean we're looking to make you know the entire city the city of god so you know where is erasmus in that because it because it sounds like in many ways you know with many others who who didn't leave the roman catholic church um you know he's working at reform from within is he much more of a one speeder or does he still recognize the two speed well i would say well i would say with luther and calvin he would share the importance of the laity this is why a lot of his work was written for your average thoughtful person but this is why i think people like the clerics the bishops archbishop yeah he's a very much a part of that bridging the clerical lay arguing that at one point he would also to some degree argue in fact it's the clerics and sometimes the monks who have so deformed the faith that's led to cynicism amongst the laity and a longing for something i mean he was very critical of the monastic tradition he knew it well and he knew the monks and he knew the monasteries and he knew the conflict he wasn't critical of all of them but he realized there was a lot of duplicity going on there and hence his his desire like luther like a calvin like the anabaptists to say this has to make sense average labor and i'm going to write books that speak to the average lay person in their journey i can also do the sophisticated stuff if you want and he did that he was you know he was a crem de menthe writer at the highest level high mucky mucks in that sense so he shared he shared i would also say you're right that he didn't he didn't have a parish but his parish was europe and some people and some people are called to the bigger parish and to reform the bigger story which that didn't mean that he could avoid difficult issues he would erasmus was in the thick of the fray throughout his whole life in particular as he began to mature so the you know the the tensions that uh you know the pastor the priest or rector of a parish may have some of those decisions in principle he had to struggle with exactly the same issues just at a bigger level with the the leaders the makers the shapers of europe of what he saw and he was in that sense a spiritual abba to many of the emerging leaders within europe at the time and so many came to him and sat at his feet and um and many of course opposed him luther and and others the as i mentioned early many the early anabaptists when he was at a basel and then the reform movement in basel challenged him he had to go to fryberg but many you know they deeply respected what he was he was trying trying to do so um yeah very much you know as you're mentioning unlike taylor erasmus would argue you know the monastic tradition was pretty corrupt and i know it well oh oh zoom just failed us for a big like unlike taylor um erasmus says the monastic movement is pretty corrupt i knew it well and right then i dropped you and i really want to hear what you have to say oh it's a yeah so i mean the danger is sort of as taylor would say you know can i you idealize the monastic tradition as those who are sort of the the ascetic mountain climbers who are doing the real work in your laity well you know they'll find their way but we're not and they can you know live off the merits of our work erasmus would say well that's just simply not true from a sociological perspective he knew the monastic world there were good abbots there were good monks but there was also a lot of duplicity at the minute and that's part of where luther comes along or calvin comes along or the anabaptists come along and say yeah you talk about this you know this more elevated life of the monks the ascetic tradition and spirituality but there's a lot of duplicity there too and if we're going to reform the church it has to bring together both lay and clerics so it's not as simple as you know sort of the monastic life is more developed more mature more sophisticated whereas the laity they'll never quite get it but you have the sacraments for them you know and give them a little bit of food that'll keep them going but we're on the high octane duel as monks yeah erasmus wouldn't buy into that dualism yeah in that sense he's now it's you know we're going about an hour so i want to land the plane here but you know as as this conversation has developed i've just you know you've kind of opened up i'm thinking okay yeah jordan peterson and where he's at and all of that thing and then we've got luther and erasmus here and you know been digging up a lot of points on the luther side but some of these last ones on erasmus side because one of the interesting things that has fascinated me about peterson has been what will he do with respect to institutions because he's been you know tremendously critical of the academy and he's been making noises about you know doing an online academy where we can get some kind of credentialing and some kind of accreditation so that you know there can be some things and so in that way you know he's a sense going his own way but you know unlike his colleague who said early on because when he said it and this piece that he wrote oh he looked to buy a church when i read that i thought of course he looked to buy a church but now in a sense he's a he's a celebrity pastor and he doesn't need a church anymore because he's he's he's much more of an itinerant evangelist going all over the world with his little book tour and if you've ever been to any of his little book tour events it's not a book tour it's an itinerant evangelist who works out his his gospel message at each venue and continues to tinker with it that way as a preacher i can very much understand him but now peterson with respect to institutions seems much more erasmian in that he whereas it's clear i mean if you watch peterson at one of his at one of his evangelistic crusades after the show for those who have gotten the vip access you get to go forward and shake hands and myself and some of the psychologists who are with me in my meetups have noted you know the just with a great degree of awe actually how he can work a line of 150 people and for the 30 seconds or a minute or two that he has with these people really give those people his undivided attention as a preacher who shakes hands with people after the service i was i was in awe of what he did there because that that is pretty amazing but now peterson is trying to touch individuals lives it's got his individualism but he's and he's looking at well alternate to the university but he is he's not setting up the billy graham evangelistic crusade organization he is he is staying he's kind of continuing to live as a scholar you know above things he's not starting the petersonian church of toronto so where do you see that in either the erasmus reflection here or just your thoughts on peterson on this matter of institutions Well I would say if he breaks from the important role of universities and tries to because in one sense universities have just become the new secular churches in that sense and if he and the professors are new new priests in that in that sense so if he breaks from u of t where he has taught and that sense he shares more of that lutheran dna or genetic code you know i'm not being listened to i'm being opposed i've tried to reform it hasn't worked i have to start my own institution in that sense he would be much more lutheran in and part of that albertan context from which he grew up is very very much republican in that sense of we as a province are distinct from the rest of canada and i won't have time to go into that albertan tradition of the mannings and where our own right of centre conservative parties emerge that's the albert that's part of his part of his origins and and part of unpacking that would also be interested if he does sort of leave u of t and start his own i think yeah i would say what he shares with the erasmus is a nimbleness of thought at an intellectual level he doesn't buy into the ideologies of right centre left he shares a liberal respect for you know critical thinking both of the right or the left now what he does with that institutionally wrote at a sociological level return whether he's more lutheran because really just secular lutheranism just fragments and fragments into different communities these institutions uh in that sense uh there's there's a mother load there's much good in it you stay within it does that sort of make sense yeah yeah yeah i i do hope i i do hope Peterson does stay within universities because oh you just dropped out there and i really want to hear i know my audience is really going to want to hear what you have to say right there you do hope he stays within university definitely no i i think it's absolutely essential he stays within university life because the thinking the challenges within universities are very significant for the future students for a culture for a civilization and to break from that he loses that whole momentum and that whole richness that university life offers and he's following more a protestant trajectory almost an albertan trajectory and so i hope he has the maturity to realize that universities are absolutely foundational yeah he may disagree with them but Erasmus disagreed with the roman catholic church but he didn't leave it uh he and so peterson could play a very significant pivotal role in opening up a broader forum of discussion in public universities if he stayed within him if he leaves that game's over yeah and that would be a tragedy intellectually and culturally yeah well it's interesting because just looking at what he's done with this you know this supposed book tour this is this is the biggest non-book tour i've ever seen it's really a road show and and i do wonder how he can come back to the university in terms of i mean just the the size of his following you know okay so you're going to roll in his class well how because you're going to have all of these individuals who are going to want to be in his class um they're they're not university students and so and it's in this sense that the you know the questions of of the form and the institution of university as educational deployment system versus what happens when you get a guy who's now become you know a popular icon but and you know we'll see what happens with his popularity too but it's i mean there's a lot of interesting questions that i have no idea where any of this is going to go yeah and you know there's the tragic flaw i think of luther and many of those followed him is they did not know how to work within complex communities in their case the church so they find the denomination and as a result of that we just get multiplicity of denominations and but underneath there's a certain way of seeing reality if i interpret reality right you disagree with me you can't be reformed i start my own tribe i hope peterson is not just a clone of luther in that sense a secular luther and who doesn't know how to work within the wealth of good university life and the complex nature of discussed yes there are problems yes there's political correctness but there wasn't the roman catholic church too that luther faced or i mean erasmus faced and the way they dealt with it was based on two different ways of seeing reality and how you work within historic institutions and i think he'll become a lesser person if he leaves and his uh he will it will also feed into a reactionary mentality i think there is potentially more in him than that but deeper into his soul to find it yeah well that's really helpful and i'm we're at about an hour so i'm going to stop the recording but don't go away and um but i i've sure appreciated this rom this has been this has been fascinating and i again i've thought about peterson and luther but i never thought about peterson and erasmus and and kind of the contrast between luther and erasmus kind of adds some interesting colors to this entire fascinating peterson episode that we're still very much in the middle of yeah well he's part erasmus and part luther and it depends what part is going to sort of drive the chariot of his future that's right that's right so thank you so much and again stay on i'm just gonna i'm just gonna stop the recording