https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=E-oQ1NyIWQM

 Hi, this is Paul. What you're about to see are a couple of clips. I'm going to make a few comments and I'm going to play a clip from the last Friday's live stream where I was talking a little bit about metabendarity. I'm still not sort of settled on that word. I don't think the word there's anywhere near enough agreement about that word. We're just sort of trying to figure out what's beyond what what's sort of the next. What are some what's what's the matrix of next issues in Christianity as modernity continues to recede post modernity has its impact but winds up being not terribly fruitful and what it means, especially in a place like the United States and to a to a certain degree, the Anglophile West. How does Christianity sort of shape and in the in the Friday clip I wasn't terribly clear, which is not unusual for me. But I think that I think the main issue is sort of the relationship between the personal, which in many ways, a lot of the contribution from Jordan Peterson, Jonathan Peugeot, John Verveke is the recognition that it's really the recognition that the phenomenologists had with respect to whatever's out there that is not under our control, but still subject to our perception. That we approach and is deeply shaped by the personal as we get there. Now we try to, we try to deal with that as we get into different levels of perception. But it's in many ways sort of the relationship between the personal and what I often call the monarchical vision. What is the monarchical vision? It's when we try to engage things as they are. Now of course, there's a long history of philosophy trying to deal with engaging things as they are. Part of what happens with, I'd say contemporary skepticism, a la combinatorial explosiveness, that we have a degree of humility about what we are able to say that is definitive. Now of course, I think the big, the big, the big promise that science gave was that we can say definitive things in the third person. Things as they are. But those, even something like, you know, does the earth revolve around the sun? Well, it depends on whether you're seeing the situation from the sun or from the earth. So it's all of this stuff that we talk about and we've been talking about for a good amount of time. The second clip comes from Luke Thompson's page where we talk about orthodoxy. I had a wonderful conversation about orthodoxy. And I think, as I mentioned in the little clip from Friday, I think a lot of stuff has come from sort of the, because it's pre-modern and it didn't sort of go through the crucible of the Protestant Reformation as the Roman Catholic Church did. The sort of pre-modern orthodoxy. Orthodoxy went through other crucibles, but there's sort of a chaos in orthodoxy that I'm picking up. And Jeremy speaks well to it. And Luke is sort of testing those boundaries with respect to that. And of course, Sam keeps being the smart guy that he is and poking at inconsistencies and says, what about this and what about that? What about this? And then it goes into then me exercising the dog, throwing the frisbee. And then I sort of end it with Lance and Michael sort of going back and forth. So that's where the clips are going. But I thought that they were really important. I wanted to keep them. I know Luke has, so maybe all of the live streams have 100 and 300 or 400 views on them. Not a lot. But I actually thought this conversation was tremendously helpful. And again, for me, the real value of having a community here, even an online community where we can talk through these things, I find super helpful. I just finished this morning and my conversation with Gavin Ortland, which I'm super happy with. I'll be releasing some clips of those as the days go by. And probably later this week or early next week, that conversation will come out to the full channel. It's in No Wait No Ads. If you really can't wait for it. If you don't want to spend $7 to see it, just wait till next week. It'll be untouched. I still have a little fancier thumbnail, but beyond that, it's exactly the same conversation. But interesting points about Protestantism on the internet. But yeah, again, just a lot of deep appreciation to everyone who sort of opened up their cameras and coming online and coming into live streams and participating to figure all this out together. So here are the clips. Well, for me, the phenomenon is just the fact that things that you weren't allowed to deconstruct are now being deconstructed and there's nothing they can do about it. But my question to you is, what is the place that people are going to build and not be deconstructed? I think that's what your project is amongst others is what's going to be left the last thing that's not deconstructed or what's going to be. I don't know. Everything's weird right now because the other question I had is what institution and what person in popular life is free from that phenomenon? That the guy like I know people personally that like they're stout people, they're people. But it's like, there's a guy that you can rely on that you don't you could deconstruct, but we don't do that with with this guy. I don't know what that is in our society. What institution is left or what person's left that we go, we don't deconstruct that. Well, it could be that what what happens is that institutions and personas finally just don't exist. And it could be a version of, let's say, Nate Hile anarchism, where I mean, part of what's interesting with Dog Bark talking to this atheist is it's sort of like having an argument with Dale's squirrel. It's not going to and I think it's it's that kind of secure faith that people find attractive. Now you can sort of raise it up and say, well, these are my objections to it. Well, that's fine. You know, I've got plenty of objections to my own beliefs, but I've lived with those objections long enough that they're kind of like the squirrel over there. It's like, yeah, it's over there. But I'm not I'm not going to change because I know what that is and I know what I am and I've made my choice and I'm going to live with it. And whether or not you can agree or disagree with my choice, that's fine. But it's neither here nor there when it comes to how I live or behave. So that's I think I think the you know, so when we see Ben Shapiro or Candace Owens or Jordan Peterson or Daniel Dennett, we are seeing a now we're going to get really postmodern. We are seeing a representation of them on a screen. And there's truth in that representation. But when a part of what the Internet is doing is is revealing the fact that Jordan Peterson is three dimensional in a way that his books, his lectures, all of these things can never be. And that's sort of what's nice about the exclusive Daily Wire conversation with Daniel Dennett, which would find out that he liked to play with an erector set and he wanted to be an engineer. And and I think that's part of the reason that the TLC and the Randall's conversations are getting traction is because we are seeing in three dimensionality. And let's say the first personness or the personalness that all of this other stuff that is that entire debate up here is all in the third person. And we have now adopted a certain degree of skepticism with respect to everything up there. Now, the truth is you can't live without this and you can't live without this. And what modernity said is that this means nothing and it's only this. And it's like, no, no, it's just not true. And so now what we learn is that actually life is lived in community between in the middle and much more in the second person. And that's sort of where I see the conversation heading towards. And that's part of your project is just the relational aspect. Right. Exactly. And that's a lot of what is just challenging in general is making people believe what they know is already true. But if you go out and garden with your family in the backyard and turn off the Internet, there's your bomb for what else? Right. But it's not as fun or sexy. And and so there there were a question in there about the meta modernity conversation with Brendan Dempsey. There was a good I didn't get a chance to respond to it on Twitter or might make a video about it. But I mean, the so Brendan Dempsey is trying to figure out okay how can we sort of get beyond the modernist postmodernist impasse with respect to Christianity. And and people are trying to locate, let's say, meta modernity up in the aspects that are all in the third person. So this is what we're going to do with with biblis and history in the Bible. And so we're going to have all of these meta meta modernity is going to have we're going to be able to frame the dogmas and doctrines and perspectives of meta modernity. And that's what it will be. And I think, no, that's exactly wrong. Meta modernity is going to be extremely chaotic. And this is going to this is going to really disrupt confessional systems in churches. And so when I, you know, one of the most interesting conversations recently and one of Luke's live streams was this question of orthodoxy and and I when I look at a lot of the people going to orthodoxy now I see a lot of meta modernity in that. Okay, I'm not it's not necessarily my profession, but it's my practice. And, but then of course Sam is basically calling BS on a bunch of this it's like, no orthodoxy actually does have structure. Yeah, but it's in other ways it's sort of super pre modern. And in some ways, we're talking about let's say Catholicism before Luther. Carlos Iry makes a good argument that Luther forced Catholicism to change in many respects. So I'm reading through Carlos Ery's other book on they flew and it's just fascinating because, you know, from an evidentialist perspective, it seems absolutely wrong to be skeptical about let's say Joseph of Cupertino's levitations, they seem to happen to the dude, all the time. And, and to just be a stupid materialistic levitation doesn't happen therefore they never happened. If CS Lewis debunked this a long time ago he says, that's not really what evidence is and how it works. So that Joseph of Cupertino was levitating so often that it became a serious problem. Even in the very interesting mill you Protestant Catholic debates that were happening that they had to try and imprison him but every time they tried to imprison him, he would keep levitating and people would sort of keep sneaking people in to watch him leave the ground. I mean it's a crazy story. But, but to say it never happened. No, there's just way too much evidence. What we're really struggling with is we can't fit that into our structure. So the Catholics wanted to say see Luther's wrong. And the Protestants wanted to say see it's of the devil, which is exactly what some people in the Inquisition were saying. In other words, we're having problems with the structure. And so certain people who have gone into orthodoxy, let's say someone like Paul Kingsnorth, seems to be, he's got a very high tolerance for chaos in his theological system. And so for him orthodoxy sort of works because unlike Protestants that are tied into their confessionalism, well they're more tied into the liturgy and they're more tied into the apostolic succession, they're more tied into these other structures which are pre-modern. Now does that mean that suddenly Protestantism is going to go away? It's just like no, because as Mike talked with vocal distance, Pentecostals are super this way too. And Protestants, as Sam was making the point in that livestream, they're also super this way. So what we're seeing is basically the tension between the first and the third person and we're renegotiating it and that's actually where the meta-modernity is. Not so much in, oh these are the dogmas of meta-modern Christianity. No. It's really resistant to creating third person abstract dogmas. And again people are going to say, well what about the creeds? Yeah, what about the creeds? Because the creeds are this way. And then when you listen to someone like Father de Young or some of these other orthodox saying, well the creeds. That actually wasn't Father de Young, it was Jeremy in that same thing. He said, well once you write something down, and that's what we're dealing with. But the thing is you can't actually have an institution or a structure or even a significantly scaled community without using those tools that ossify. And so to me, that's exactly where we're at. What up Jeremy? Hello, hello. Alright, you're orthodox, should we be proselytizing, evangelizing? What are your thoughts? Well, I'm a, I grew up Mormon and went on a mission as a Mormon. And man, I can't, that spirit doesn't die in me. I always hang out, I go to the catechumen lessons. I've been orthodox for like three years, but I still go to catechumen lessons, I still go to the catechumen hangouts. I love hearing their stories, I love hearing how they found orthodox. Same, same. Like I think I'm starting, I think I'm going to start doing that on a channel of just interviewing catechumens on how they find orthodoxy, because everyone has such an interesting, crazy story, because most people go through a really long, windy path before they end up in orthodoxy. So yeah, so yeah, I think the way you do it, though, is a little weird. Like I don't think you can go door to door the way Mormons do, because like my pre-set is kind of like selling a cattle ranch door to door. Right? It's like, Hey, would you like to buy a 80 acre cattle ranch in Idaho? You know, it's like, it's, it's, you never know who you might find. It's true, but you're taking on a, you're taking on like taking on orthodoxy is taking on a lot. Like it expects a little, it's, I mean, that's one thing that draws me to it is it's not easy. All right, spicy take. When you do the door to door evangelism, I think it's more effective. You often get a lot of lower socioeconomic class folks. Yeah, yep. And the current orthodoxy evangelism technique that requires approximately a thousand hours of YouTube watching before you find your way to the cattle ranch is a very high socioeconomic path. And that I bet that the average catacumens education levels and also those sorts of things are unusually high. I was, I mean, the church that I grew up in was descended from a group that had in the past done very heavy evangelism, like chick check, chick track style. Here's your formula. Go out almost Jehovah's Witness level of, you know, put in your hours. Here's the formula. Do the thing. And it was during, you know, the hippie Jesus movement days. And that was actually shockingly effective. And part of me is like, that makes me cringe, honestly. Like, I don't think I have the stomach to do that sort of thing. But I would be lying if it didn't work. And the reason, like Jehovah's Witness has a couple million people because of that. Mormonism grows because of that. It's not that it doesn't work. Right. Well, oh, go ahead. Well, I mean, that kind of evangelism might get some people in the door. Like, I want to address this, Taiyo comment. And I've done a lot of that. Like, I was huge in the way of the master. I did street evangelism. I mean, you guys could probably tell from this, like 98th percentile extroversion, 96th percentile enthusiasm. Like, I'm just, I'm fired up about everything I love. And I like to talk about it. And so I'm not, again, like, I'm not, that's what I'm saying, Taiyo, is like, I'm saying that's all fantastic. If that's your temperament, Orthodox need to learn from evangelicals how to talk about what you love, how to share that. That's what I, I was just saying they don't know how to do that. Because they're not used to it. And, and, but, but like the proselytize, there's there. I do think the spirit of proselytizing and converting, which is rooted in a literalist medium, is demonic. I do think that's demonic. Hmm. Yeah, too strong. I can't, I can't help. Too strong, Luke. Too, too, pendulum swing. Hold that bar for me. I don't understand what you're saying. Luke, you need to realize you're a pendulum swinger. You're like, I was over here, now I'm over here, demonic, demonic, demonic. No, chill, chill, chill, chill. So it's like powers and principalities, though. I do think there are powers and principalities. I do think there are patterns that exist that are demonic. I think this is what Tillich meant when he said all institutions are inherently demonic, which I said also that I didn't even realize Tillich said when I said that. And how is the Orthodox Church not an institution? Like if I were to say which church is the most like an institution, Catholicism, very close second Eastern Orthodoxy. Protestantism has many things that are the least institutional. Evangelicalism is literally not an institution. Orthodoxy is literally, literally, literally an institution. What, see, did you hear what I said earlier about institutions? How do you, what do you understand an institution to be? Something like the Orthodox Church where there are people, there's positions, there's money, there's governance structures, there are buildings, there are all these legal connected things. And how is Orthodoxy not an institution? It calls itself an institution. Right. So this is, I mean, this is great. I mean, we can get some clarity here. So I would, like Rod Draher said once that, I think this was Draher who said, The Catholic Church is an institution with a way attached and Orthodoxy is a way with an institution attached. I don't know that I fully agree with that. I mean, it's just like a, I mean, yes, I agree. Yep. There's some back padding. I think that, like even when people will say that the family's institution, fundamentally disagree. If you want to say the family, if you want, I'll use an older term, a biblical term, a body. The Orthodox Church is a body. A family is a body. It's not an institution to me is fundamentally rooted in the literal. I think they're an emergent thing that came with writing. To speak to your point, Luke, the fact that in Orthodoxy, like when they signed the, when they went to the Council of Florence and came back and the people heard what they had agreed to, the people met the bishops at the docks and threw the bishops off the dock and said, no, you're not allowed to come back. Go back and undo what you just did. Right. It's not like to me, institutional really is primarily top down. And one thing I like about Orthodoxy is that it's reciprocal. It's a top down and a bottom up. How in the world is Orthodoxy more reciprocal than Protestantism in terms of being bottom up versus top down? Because it doesn't schism over literal disagreements. Because there's a top down enforcement structure that prevents schisms. No, that's the magisterium in Catholicism. I don't think you have that in Orthodoxy. I mean, the reason why an Orthodox Church couldn't go its own way is because it's owned by a bishop. Well, right. But that's rooted in a person. Yeah, but the Catholic Church has bishops and I believe there are also persons. They might be lizard robots. I'm not sure. But last I heard they were still people. Orthodoxy is super top down, maybe slightly less top down than Catholicism, but 98% of the way towards as top down as Catholicism. Yeah, well that's right. And it does schism nationally. There's a huge history. Russia is not in communion with Ukraine, is not in communion with the Constantinople. But I think here's the difference, Sam. Put me on your do not call list. Here's the difference, I think, between Orthodox, so just give me a couple minutes or five maybe. I think the Orthodox schism over tribal ethnic national identity. I don't think, I mean, you could argue maybe with the oriental, the Chalcedon distinction was literal. But the schism perfectly matched an ethnic national. Right, right. But I think this has been the transition in consciousness that happened through Catholicism and Luther and Protestantism is that they became literal disagreements, abstract disagreements because of text. Identity is no longer rooted in ethnic national identity. It's rooted in self identity to ideas. That's Protestant schism. I don't think Orthodox has even evolved that. But I think, like I've said, I think that's necessary for the evolution of the church and for its reintegration. And I think that one of Orthodoxy's superpowers right now that I don't quite totally understand how it's pulling this off is that it's like a Roshark test. That it's like a project your image of what you wish Christianity was here. And that for Jay Dyer or Sam Shamoon, that looks totally different than it looks for Luke Thompson or a whole bunch of other converts. And that it's like this blank slate, although the slate is not very blank. It's just most people think the slate is blank and that it's like, oh, it's not an institution. It's a whatever, Magicka. It's like, yes, it's an institution. So I would say that the Orthodox Church has become institutional in ways because of the overtaking of the literal, but still fundamentally it's a body. It's not an institution. There are some of that because it's playing the game of like existing in America, which is fundamentally Protestant. And the modern world is all fundamentally Protestant. But how would it be different in like Russia or Greece or something like that? I mean, I don't know. I can't really even speak to that. But even those worlds, I would say, have still become, well, overtaken or by the literal because that's just the technocratic nature of a globalized world. So when is this Golden Age? When was this Orthodoxy thing in this Golden Age? Right. I don't know. I'm not arguing that it ever was. That's kind of like the restorationist. Like we need to get back to the purity of the early church. OK, I don't think there ever was a Golden Age, but there was a faithfulness. I think Orthodoxy needs to learn faithful innovation. This is something that I actually I mean, I don't know. I think there are aspects of Orthodox theology that maybe need to learn and grow and evolve. Like some of the conversation we were having in your video with Paul Antleitner, like whatever we're talking about there. With Jesus and nomic and natural wills and wills and figuring that out, neo-Caledonianism, I think Orthodoxy is going to have to do some growing there maybe. I mean, I don't know. Like I'm just I'm speaking from what I know now. And that's a big I know change is slow and that's fine. But like I said earlier, for martyrdom or whatever, I think people need to speak the truth of what they think and then submit still to the larger body. And if you're wrong, be willing to die for being wrong versus schism. A thing that I worry about for Orthodox converts is that I think that, like I said, Orthodoxy can be a Roshark thing where you project your fantasies onto it as well as you can point out here all the things I didn't like about my bad Protestantism. And it's not like that because, well, yeah, it's not like Protestantism in many ways. Fine. But you can do the thing is it's got all the things I was always looking for and it doesn't have those icky bad things that were in my past. And that's part of the magnetism. But I think that Orthodoxy is its own thing. And I think that some people aren't realistic about what it actually is. And I worry about disillusionment after a couple of years for a lot of people who are projecting fantasies on it that it won't ever be able to live up to. Completely agree that that's happening. OK, I want to address a couple of comments here because these are incorrect. Luke just literally said not to say literally. No, I didn't. I actually said it. I wrote nothing here. Also, this is literally a literal conversation right now. No, it's not. It's an actual conversation. This isn't a literal conversation. You don't understand what literally means. We're not writing. Exactly. Well, that's that's I think I'm going to tie on to that for a second. I think that was some of the hesitancy of the Nicene Creed. Like everybody talks about, oh, the theology was established. Nicene is like, no, they were hesitant to pin it down. There was there was there's a danger in writing something down because something dies. It dies. Right. When you when you nail it down, it lives in that moment. Like we can never get back into the mindset of the Cal Sedonia of the Nicene people when they wrote the Nicene Creed. We can't get back to that. And so so you have to rely on this is where I like the argument of the Orthodox that they have for tradition. It's an oral tradition more than it's a written tradition. It's like a martial art martial arts. Yeah, you can buy a martial arts book. But if you order a martial arts book and practice in your backyard, you're only going to get so far. You need someone who's there who knows the martial art, who's adjusting and showing and revealing and sharing with you. It just watching them move shows you how to do the martial art. It's the same in orthodoxy. There's there's only so much you can capture in the written word. And most of it when you captured a written word, it dies right there. I mean, there's a spirit that's alive in it, but it's also pinned to that moment. Another thing that I noticed about online orthodox evangelism, it's like evil bad thing, orthodox not. Evil bad thing, orthodox not. And it's like, OK, so tell me how much like a charismatic church is written down. How much of their practices are written down versus practice? Right. Right. OK, so now you're making an exclusive claim about orthodoxy special, all you Protestants, Icky Bad. I think charismatics are the least literal of the Protestants. I agree. And like for any example of what you say about Protestantism, I'll find you a counter example. You know, like I don't mean to give that impression. But I'm talking about a spiritual pattern of a larger body. You're talking about particularities. I'm talking about the unity of the particularities. Yeah, but what unifies Pentecostalism with high Lutheranism? I don't know. I mean, I don't know. Yeah. Oh, there's a participation aspect to both of them, a high level of participation in both of them, right? Right. At some level, like the unity is at the level of they're both Christian religions or something like that. You know, it's like, yeah, I see like Peugeot does this a lot where he's like, oh, you know, I'm not going to criticize anybody, but I'm just going to talk about orthodoxy, orthodoxy, orthodoxy. It's like, well, you know, like 90 percent of what you just said is true of 90 percent of churches. But you're saying orthodoxy, orthodoxy, orthodoxy. And there's this sort of sectarian, I don't know. It's like this weird humblebrag thing that I'm getting a little bit sick of. No, and I can say that's totally valid. I'm going to go at the lance. You're going to take over. I can for a little bit. OK, because I'm going to leave in a little bit. But I agree with a lot of the points you're making, Sam. I mean, people just like the projection and the like de facto orthodoxy is great and contrast. Everything else is bad. But something I want to address about TLC and just about myself, too, is like I I am not anti disagreement. Disagreement is fine. Pointing out where you think things are wrong is fine. Schisming over those disagreements is not fine. That's my position. So when everyone is just like, you know, Luke is inconsistent and he's criticizing things. Yes, and we should. When did I say you shouldn't criticize things? When did I say you can't hold the propositions? So many people fucking put words in my mouth that I haven't said. Maybe I have said, but that I don't mean and it annoys the shit out of me. Please don't do that for me. Please. I like getting fired up with you sometimes, Luke. It's fun. It is fun. We care. Good. Well, and that's fine. And I know you guys are like for me, like even someone like I said, this to CW, somebody was telling him he should maybe a part like I I have no problem for people who criticize me that I know are for me. But like if you just want to like, I don't know. But yeah, there's a lot of people who criticize me who I don't think know what I'm talking about. And I mean, and whatever, that's fine, too. Yeah, we can't know what you mean. Well, I want to can I think I want to tie back to the evangelism thing a little bit. I think it's an interesting question. And the online stuff, most of it, I hate. Right. Like the YouTube stuff. Like some of it helped me. Obviously, that's why I'm here. But like some of it is really it's just what you're talking about, Sam, where it's just like, it's it's they're just Protestants. They're just being Protestants toward Protestantism. Right. Like they're just they're defining themselves. Not what orthodoxy is. My priest emphasizes this all the time. He's like, if you're not here to get closer to Christ, if you're not here to take up your cross, you're here for the wrong reason. It's not about he's like, you should look at the very good things from your former tradition and be grateful to God for the good things that you learned and for the way that it prepared you to enter the orthodox church rather than being angry at your former tradition. And I and I very much agree. I'm I'm I agree with you, Sam. I think that that's a really dangerous point of view. And it doesn't last. You're only going to you can only be angry for so long and then you get tired and orthodoxy demands a lot of you. And if you're not in it for the love, you're not going to be there. Right. And Sam, I want to like I want to validate what you're saying. Like there are there are people that are coming from for all sorts of different reasons. Right. So I run into guys that came in through the J Dyer crowd, Sam. Right. So that's that's that very much young guys kind of that sort of you know, you know, I think some of the people that are coming in and they're like, you know, they're not going to be there for the love. Right. So that's that's that very much young guys kind of that's kind of the ethos they're coming in with. Chad just had a wonderful conversation with Mary L, who if you would see, she came in a very it was almost a mystical sense thing. Like, I mean, she was just kind of over overwhelmed by it. The thing is, like the things I know right now, like I'm telling everyone, like, you know, I mean this orthodoxy is not the answer in America. You know why? There are enough of them. They couldn't consume if there were some sort of mass awakening. The Orthodox Church could not consume. There aren't enough parishes. There are no priests. This is such a different thing. Like you don't just come in and baptize people and then have build just build a bigger space like it's it's very hands on like it would destroy it. And so like it couldn't even handle it. So I do think like but I think what I see on the Internet, I would just say this and I think it's the same. I think it's the same for anybody even in a Protestant Church like what people are arguing about on Christian YouTube or whatever. Like go to Paul's church. They're not having these conversations. They're not arguing about these things. I can't anybody argued about election or told of gravity in your church lately, Paul. It's probably been 30 years. I don't know. Like this stuff doesn't exist. People come and they do. And so the difference is and Dave mentioned this earlier. Here's the one thing that I did map onto. Is that in many ways it's it's an attraction rather than a pro promotion thing in terms of the event evangelicalism. And it's very much if you'll get someone who comes in very much. It's like just start doing the things right. Hey, come to the service. They won't tell you to do everything at once. They might say, hey, try this five hour prayer roll. Oh, we fast on these days. Why don't you start trying to do that? Like it's very like it's a lot more slow or whatever. But like father, but I think what you said is very right, Sam, that and Father DeYoung mentioned this. It was out on a YouTube video, but he talks to people about this. I've heard the priest that I went talk about this because we had a little bit of a young J. Dire type and he was coming in all hot and heavy. And he kind of discouraged him. He's like, hey, if you want to if that's what you're here for, this probably isn't the place for that. You know? And so the almost the slow burn to get in the year to two years waiting time or whatever kind of figures all that stuff out. And like my orthodox priest said, if you're here because you think this is not going to go well, don't come here for that reason. Like if you're here because, you know, all this other sort of stuff like you have to be willing to want to be a person who follows a prayer or prayer roll. Praise Jesus prayer once the fast right once to participate in these services. If you're not one to live the life, why would you even come here? You know, so I but I think what you're saying is very valid, Sam, like I'm not. So you're seeing that and you see that like that. I think part of a pattern that I'm seeing and I sympathize with this a lot is that I think that Western culture has severely alienated the last couple of decades of young guys and made them feel detached and in some sense almost even rejected or scorned by their own culture and tradition. And that is a really hard thing to go through. I think I kind of felt that, but I think I'm a little bit older than like the generations that have felt that heat the strongest. And so it creates, I think, a sense of wanting to find a culture and a tradition and a history that will let you in. Because you're disjointed and alienated sort of, you could say, from your father. And I noticed this pattern in Peugeot a little bit. Like one curious thing about Peugeot is he's got a weird sort of anti-Americanism in him that is a little quirky and it rears its head sometimes. And, you know, America is Babylon the Whore and yada yada yada yada. The spirit of chemical. Yeah, right. He feels alienation from America. I mean, obviously he's Canadian, which is also part of it. But he lived in America for a long time and I think he lives here now or kind of does. And I think I'm pointing out Peugeot because I think that he's sort of a pattern for this. It's like, well, you're it's like you're trying to find a father who will love you in a way that your father didn't or something like that. And your father can be your entire culture and your history going back to, you know, whenever because father sort of represents that. And I do think that that's part of what's going on with the orthodoxy thing. And I sympathize with that. But I also worry that it's an unstable pattern of not being integrated with your own father and that I think that the healthier thing is to rescue your own father from the belly of the whale. Even if the devouring mother is trying to prevent you from doing it or something like that. So I'm excited for PVK's take on the catechism that is PVK's Father Belly of the Whale Rescue. And I'm excited to hear it. So, Sam, I want to tell you, so I'm the guy who greets people. That's just who I am. I can't get that Protestant if somebody's new there. But I also know the young guys, they're going to they're going to I'll tell you, this is amazing. It was J.B.P., Pajow, Dyer, or there was something they were engaged in that. Here's the biggest threat I see in them. The call to adventure and the difficulty, the difficulty of it is what they're they're seeking. And then a lot of the women that come, Marielle's conversation with Chad yesterday, if you want to see why are women coming to orthodoxy, and they are too, right, her story explains it. And it's much more the embodied, the feminine. You know what I'm talking about? So that you see that in them. And here's the other thing which is shocking that you see going on, particularly in the Antiochian Church. They are booming with young families like Chad even noticed the one he went to, like the demographic that every mainline Protestant church is dying to have is booming with these young families that are coming into this. And they don't do the think he's talking stuff that we did. That's not why we're here. It's really, it's really interesting. But I, but again, I would point out like the Orthodox Church couldn't handle a mass conversion in America because it would, it's, it's too weak. So I'm not telling people like, like I think like, like, Sam, like everyone has to become orthodox. I mean, I've found my way in there and I think it's the way I express it. But like, I mean, there's no way it could handle a mass conversion event. It would just be nuts. We have, we're having a five, we're having a combined baby shower for five mothers tomorrow. And my parish isn't big. I mean, it's pretty big. It's pretty big for North America. We have about, oh, we have between three and four hundred people every week. So, but, but, you know, 80% of our catechumen, we have about 50 catechumens. 80% of them are young men under 30, single men under 30. But to Lance's point, the other, the other demographic coming in. So, so I started my, my daughter is still not orthodox. My wife is orthodox. She joined about six months after I did. But my daughter kind of got turned off a little bit because of coffee hour talk, listening to young men talk about the church. She was not, she was not about it at all. And my wife was realized the mistake and was like, don't listen to those guys. Come with me. And she started taking her to the women's activities. And it's what Lance is talking about. It's a much more embodied and a much more. Present and a much more. Yeah, just well. And then there's a few women who have had mystical experiences of the divine liturgy, like seeing that everyone who's on the wall is also there and sharing that with women. And, and it opens up a whole different layer of spirituality to my daughter that she, you know, what we raised her, I raised her in a religious home. So she didn't even know the gospel. She doesn't know the gospel stories. And so we've been reading the gospels with her and learning about that. But at the same time, she's being exposed to women in orthodoxy and women coming to orthodoxy is very different than why men come to orthodoxy. It is night and day. Although I would say one theme I've seen, Jeremy, that because again, I'm, I'm, I'm being TLC wherever I'm at. Right. So I'm asking the question is what brought you here? Right. Because I'm always curious that story. The other theme is that you'll see and you'll see this across the board. This doesn't break down by gender is the shallowness of a rock concert and a Ted talk, a Ted talk sermon. They just don't want that. Like, and I think the relevance, that's what that's what Jordan Peterson so eloquently. Like when he said it's not about guitars and hippies, it's about pick up your cross and that whole thing he talked about trying to be relevant, you know, that whole relevance movement, the seeker movement. It's dead. Like there are people still show up, but I'm just saying that thing is not going to that thing's not going to be around in 100 years. I promise you that. My after we had been going to church for a few weeks, my wife said we were walking on a church one time and she said, if Christianity is true, that's what it is. That's what it looks like. And well, that's a great different experience. The word grim used. So here's the thing. And I got what he meant to it when he boiled it all down, when he went through going to the Orthodox service is he saw reverence. He goes, if you want to see what reverence looks like, that's what it looks like. And I think that's what that's that thing that I felt, Jeremy. And I think that's that thing you're pointing to. But Sam, you made a comment. Here's the other thing, which is absolutely true. You know who really fits well in Orthodox churches, Sam? Charismatics. Yeah, but so I mean, I'm hearing the thing a lot of, well, I'm not going to speak for everybody. I'm just going to speak for Orthodoxy reverence. OK, well, like, you know, any church has reverence. Let's be honest. Yeah, but I think that's not what I'm saying. I know. But it has a certain effect when you do that pattern over and over and over and over again. Well, it's people take offense to that. That's on them. It's not on the reality of the fact that because like so what so what is meant by that? Like what I was struck by was my first service. I went there, the maintenance service. You know, you're doing all the prayers before you get to the Divine Liturgy and the care with which and I could see back into the priest, the care with which I could see all these things he was doing to preprepare the elements for the preparation of Divine Liturgy and the carefulness they took with it and everything that went to it. There was this sense. And so I would say I've seen I've I've been in Protestant churches where reverence exists, Sam. No doubt about it. It's not that it's either or. I'm talking about this evangelism pattern. I think part of it, too, is that Protestants in America have a culture of sort of not bragging about their own tradition at the expense of others as sort of a politeness pattern that has emerged over the last couple hundred years of us in America. Over the last couple hundred years of us interacting with each other. Orthodoxy doesn't share in that habit. So this pattern of, well, I'm just going to talk about my church. Isn't it great? We have young ladies who are going to baby showers together. What church doesn't have baby showers for new moms? You know, like all of them have baby showers for new moms. A lot of churches don't have babies. You know, I know. But it's the pattern of I'm just going to talk about my Orthodox thing. And I think that's a great thing. Maybe you do. Maybe you don't. But like Protestantism has this habit of you don't brag about yourself in that way. Orthodoxy, especially online, doesn't have this habit. And that's part of like this weird, slightly dishonest evangelism tactic that online Orthodoxy is doing. And I'm getting bugged by it. Well, I get it. But I think you're being honest, Sam. I think it's bugging you. And I would push back. And again, I'm validating a lot of what you're saying. And my best friends are still out in Protestant context. I would call my spiritual father is still a charismatic house church pastor, Rob Hull, the fireman chaplain out of Kansas City. Right. So I haven't lost all that respect and so on and so on and so forth. But people talking positively and enthusiastically about what they're experiencing doesn't have to be felt. Doesn't you know, the same way that someone talking positively, like Michael talking about positively, enthusiastically about his experience in his church doesn't need to be felt. Right. But you could talk about your positive experience in a way that's inclusive of the other groups or your positive experience in a way that is exclusive. Fair enough. Fair enough. Yep. Fair enough. And that's sort of. Oh, sorry. Go ahead, Chad. I just I got to say it and I got to get back in there. I got to put tile on the wall because I'm going to men's retreat this week and I got to hurry up and get done. Sorry. I'm going to be an asshole and butt in. Do only Lutherans do men retreats, Chad? Is that a unique thing of the Lutheran Church to do men retreats? It's not going to do with the church. I'm going with the. You see, yeah, you see Chad is not doing. Chad's doing the positive thing where you don't, you know, humble brag about your own unique tradition at the expense of the other ones, even though all the other ones do the exact same thing. Oh, he's going to humble. He's going to humble brag on 12 step program. Well, I'm going to a sponsorship retreat this weekend with 60 men. And Lance was there with me last year. So anyways, no, I have a prediction about now. It's probably because I'm not a facts guy and kind of dumb, but this prediction is about the booming of the American Orthodox. Right. So let's say that there is like this like overwhelming flood of people, kind of like what I saw in Indiana, which it really was. And they are actually raising money to build to build a new church. But what I think is going to happen, first of all, they're going to have to the new members are going to have to be willing to kick out the money. And so that's a big thing. Now, let's say that they do end up kicking out all the money to build all these new churches and new seminar or whatever seminaries, whatever the hell they have. And then they build and they get bigger and they get bigger. And then what I think something is looming in the future that we can't see. And what we're going to end up seeing is something like what happened in Canada where the Canadian or the Catholic, whatever was that Quebec or whatever that whole Catholic city just crumbled. And you had all these empty churches. They're still there now. And I think that I don't know why I think that it's just a weird prediction. But what do you guys think about that? They're just going to have this total flood of people. They're not they're going to maybe if they can get the money together, build all the churches, maybe build the churches. And then in 20 years, 30 years, we're going to see empty buildings. I guess one guess one orthodoxy is going to boom differently from evangelicalism. And there's going to be trade offs in there. Evangelicalism is built to boom. Evangelicalism is built to boom. Orthodoxy. It's got way more things slowing it down. And so you're going to see orthodoxy grow and you're going to see sifting, but it's going to grow and it's going to be a good thing. And I'm really I'm really part of Sam what you're talking about here and your critique is correct. But part of it is confidence. The orthodox orthodoxy in America has confidence right now. And God bless them. You know, it's good that some one of the Christian groups has confidence because, you know, Protestant, of course, all over the map. And Catholics sure don't have much confidence after the collapse they've had in the last couple of decades. So we need we need a part of the church right now with confidence. And so I say God bless the orthodox because they got it right now. And so you guys go. But we also know that confidence usually sets us up for correction. And those will come too. But I think I don't think orthodoxy is going to boom in the way evangelicalism does because it's just not built for it because they have too many. Things built in that are cautious. And although what Chad just said is right to it to the degree that orthodoxy is going to be able to continue to scale its people are going to give and they probably will. You know, in some ways, I see this in Christian Reformed Church history. The Christian Reformed Church had, you know, in before the Second World War, they had desperation. Because they were just along with all these other little immigrant ethnic groups trying to keep the one true church, which was the Christian Reformed Church, because the Reformed Church in America was obviously, you know, apostasy. So we were trying to keep the one true church on God's earth. And it was only in America because Netherlands was going to hell in a handbasket. And so we got to do it. And so the Christian Reformed Church just built schools and churches. And then after the Second World War, we had all of those good habits ingrained in the community. And now suddenly we're part of a bigger thing. And so we had the baby boom. And so we are building churches like crazy. And now come the 80s and 90s, we have the collapse and the loss of confidence. And that's a cycle that things go through. And so, you know, I think, you know, Sam, everything you said in terms of your cautionary tales and your observations about especially online orthodoxy, I completely agree. But it's like, yeah, that's part of the cycle. And so we'll get to see how orthodoxy, and it's because of some of its uniquenesses, sort of handles this American experience. And to me, the bigger, more interesting conversation is the fact that what we're, you know, what we're seeing now is in some ways the end of the protest. I love how Chad said it, the beginning of the contest where we're not protesting. Now we're competing a little bit. But it's, you know, especially I think in the TLC, it's a friendly competition. I'm, you know, I love house churches. I love Pentecostals. I love all of these guys. And so, yeah, you know, it'd be fun to have Lance still doing his house church thing. Clearly, God called him to the orthodox, and he's, you know, he's a contestant now. And Jeremy's here. And we've got Jonathan Pigeot. And, gosh, this is fun. If you can, if you can, you know, if you're the kind of person that can sit down with a board game, maybe a really contested game like Risk or a computer game, and you can sort of really go at it and enjoy kind of going at it. And at the end of it, just say, I boy, Lance kicked my butt. But boy, that was a good game. Let's do it again. I mean, to me, that's what we're doing. And I'm just happy to see orthodoxy. I'm happy to see a confident church on the American stage. I'm happy to see people joining it. And I'll cry with them when they discover the sins that have crept in in their confidence. But it's it's wonderful. And I praise God for it. And Paul, you think I think what I'm going to see, Sam, I think you're probably already seen this because I saw this for the past decade anyway. I think you're going to see see a move in Protestantism, even that be at the house church level or whatever, towards a real presence, Eucharist. That conversation has been going on for a long time. I think you're going to see and there was a evangelical church that actually they're deciding they're going to do evangelical orthodoxy like this. It was up in that was up in Oregon, I think. I wish I could remember the name and you're going to see them embrace some more of that. Let's just say way, way of life. And so you're going to evangelicalism is nothing if not adaptable and competitive. And so if they start to see someone beating them at something, they will adopt the tactics of that person often quicker and then sometimes supercharge it in a way. So I agree with you, Lance. The evangelical churches will notice and even just by sheer Darwinian forces are market competition forces. There will be an evangelical imitation backlash. Yeah, yeah, we're seeing it in. In. So, Kevin Adams, if you go back in the channel you see my conversation with a buddy Kevin Adams, who he comes to Rockland Lincoln Roseville that's a suburb outside of Sacramento, it is the most churched area in the city there's multiple multiple American and evangelical Pentecostal mega churches. And so the CRC goes up there. And Kevin Adams is the unusual CRC church planter that gets well above 200 within two years, which is a metric. And so he's doing the Wednesday night believer service and the Sunday morning seeker service. He mowed Bill Hybels mother's lawn growing up in Kalamazoo, Michigan. So, you know, this was the CRC trying to learn seekerism. So he goes up there and he does it he plants a secret church, but he's not as successful as the Pentecostals and the Southern Baptist and all of those people in Roseville because the CRC is always a little you know, you're a little too confessional and we're a little too thinky talky and so, you know, about 20 years into it. At this point now he's got a he's got a little pastoral group, and they've got a Presbyterian a PCA pastor in there. And they've got a an army chaplain in there, and they have a Greek Orthodox father in there. And so 10 years ago 15 years ago, I start to hear my friend talk about what he's learning from, from his Presbyterian from his from his Orthodox friend and his Orthodox friend's wife died. And it was a really big deal and he just watched Father Chris just manage these things and and then suddenly, you know, he's got this little icon in his office and I'm like, Kevin, you know, you're Christian reformed you're not supposed to have an icon. Well, he's got an icon and before you know it, they have weekly communion and before you know it, they've they're into symbolism and the sanctuary is still pretty sparse, but they're like doing you know the Anglican symbolism things and then and then he And then he and you know and then I go to an event in his church and I sit across the table from a guy with a Greek last name. And he was telling me all the reason he grew up in the Greek Church, the Greek Orthodox Church, he was telling me all the reasons why the Greek Orthodox Church was, you know, it was stayed and it was rigid and it was ethnocentric and so then he comes to Granite Springs and you know what, this is, this is, I could understand it because of course Kevin is taking all this Greek Orthodox stuff in. But it's, I have a personal relationship with Jesus now while in the Greek Orthodox Church I grew up in, you know, it was all stayed and formal and everything and so I just thought, yep, this is, this is, this is what we're doing with pluralism church and you know, I think you're exactly right, Sam. If there's anything about American evangelicals, they're going to look over at the Greeks and the Orthodox and they're going to say, I'll take this, I'll take this, I'll take this. Now they'll really screw it up in some ways, but there'll be some really good things. Someone will get it right and then the person who gets it right will get attention and that'll be copied. I was talking with Karen Wong and it was, it was a while ago, but she was saying at her church and she goes to what would be called a mega church, she goes, it's like five campuses and you know, several thousand people body and she said they just started experimenting on Sunday nights with getting together and praying the Psalms. They would stand and read the Psalms aloud together and she's like, it's really controversial and a lot of people are really nervous about it, but every week there's more people showing up. So I think this is to your point, Sam, is that there's a lot of this stuff is from exposure too, right? Like I grew up Mormon, I didn't know anything about church history, you know, pre Joseph Smith, right? 1830. I didn't know anything about the Christian tradition because I was told that it was all apostate. Like as soon as the last apostle died, we were on our own until Joseph Smith showed up, which Laura Mercy. You know, once I came into the church and got exposed to the Christian tradition and learning about these arguments and these philosophies and how it's had to battle with heresy the whole time and how all this stuff got worked out over time. It like brought a whole new appreciation for the tradition that I had because all of a sudden I was able to participate in it and feel like I was part of the story. Whereas in Mormonism, I felt disconnected from it. I felt separated from it because it was anathema essentially. And it's nice to feel that this stuff's embodied and that it has been embodied the whole time. And now I think a lot of Americans are being exposed to that for the first time, you know, because we got to talky thinky. I think also the severing the cord of patrilogical belonging, sort of like I was talking about. Yes. Like, you know, previous generations of Dutch churches had a sense of hundreds of years of connection through the past and that you were growing up as part of that. And so it's nice to add that multi-generational I'm the next generation in line to this thing that belongs. And one thing that evangelicalism and the latter half of the 20th century did was to really sever its connection. And this was very tied with the boomers and the Jesus movement and the not liking your parents generation because boomers were that way. And it sort of, you know, it was it was the plant with shallow roots that grew up fast and then got burned in the sun because people want to belong to something that's bigger and longer and older than themselves. And Protestantism can totally do that and normally does. But it forgot that kind of of its own fault. And it's reaping the whirlwind on that. It's like, again, orthodoxy is not the only every form of Christianity is 2000 years old. All of them are the same age. None of them are older than any of the other ones. Stop pretending that you're older than any of the other ones. You're not. They're all 2000 years old. You know, but also, Sam, I'll push back. But stop pretending that 500 years ago you didn't throw the baby out with the bath water with a lot of the things that had been done that you can even see Jesus did praying the hours. The apostles were going up at the hour of prayer. 600 years ago, Constantinople got burned to the ground and that completely changed the whole thing. And a lot of baby got burned in that. Luther tried to to hook up with the Orthodox Church. Yeah, they were having a conversation. They were leaving the already schismatic Catholic Western Church and trying to connect to the East. And he said, No, no, no, no, no, no, no. Hold on, hold on, hold on. No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no. No, it's not that they went down. He said, I'm going to tell a story. Okay. And I was I wanted to talk to Luke because I'm Luke's real life friend. So and that's important to the story because, you know, he shared the story on Christian Baxter's channel about how he went to the evangelical church with his parents or whatever. And he decided not to take the communion because it didn't mean anything or whatever. But he didn't talk about the other time when he did take evangelical communion on the same trip, which is when myself, a minister at an evangelical church, invited him and his family out for a meal. And we broke bread together. And according to my theology and theological beliefs, this is communion, remembering that we are both part of the same body and blood of Christ. And what so this is the thing because, you know, whatever the exclusive claims of orthodoxy or Catholicism or whatever, like, that's, that's what you got to let go. Like, and it's I'm not saying it's you because everybody obviously in this corner is very loving towards one another and respecting the journeys that everybody's on and where it's going to end up. But like, you know, those in those institutional or whatever stumbling blocks about the the exclusivity and things like that, like that's that's the reason why I can't join. And it's the same for Catholicism. And honestly, it's even the same for like confessional traditions. It's like the way I see it is that me working for an evangelical non-denominational non-denominational church, it's that's Christianity on hard mode, because I don't have a confession that will tell me what the answers are when I don't know something. And I don't have a tradition. It's me figuring this stuff out in real time and then talking to kids who are, you know, knowing nothing and they're been but they've been entrusted my care and trying to figure out what the Lord is, is trying to do and speak to them. And so, you know, I think it's just that that that thing like, it's kind of like the Woody Allen thing. It's like, I don't want to join any church where I game clout for joining, because I don't think that's what Jesus would have done. You know, he could have said, guys, it's all settled. I'm joining the Pharisees. I'm going to straighten them out, but it's going to be great. Now the Pharisees are our team, you know, like you didn't do it. He was out there with the tax collectors and all that stuff. And I know, I know, like, I'm not saying, you know, obviously it's there. There's these things all through all through the, the, the institutions and all these things. But like, if, you know, if, like, if the Orthodox or the Catholic communion, the Eucharist is like this spiritually powerful thing, and I'm not saying that it's not like. Why don't you let people taste and see that the Lord is good? Like, why? I think that's a good, no, I think that's a good thing. So Michael here, I would say this, and I would say, and this is the point I'm understanding, because I actually, I understand the hardness. Like, I was doing what you were doing, and it's really scary to be in the place you're at, because I didn't want to get it wrong. Right. Like, because there's this real sincerity that you want to get it right. And it's kind of your outro. I agree. Like, it's hard. I would say that the flip side is this, which would be like you would say, hey, don't claim that you have the soul 2000 year connection. Right. Like you were making that point. I think that's fair. I think how, how my Orthodox priest, how they would say it, whether you like this or not, is like, we know where the spirit is. We don't know where it isn't. So clearly God is moving out side of the Orthodox Church, which is a way to bring in a universal church thing. If you really think about it, that's the way my priest would talk about it. At the same time, I would say, which is the hard thing for a Protestant, which would also be willing to potentially accept it's like, you know what? They didn't get it wrong for 2000 years. The way they were doing things. Now, again, the things that were that Luther was talking about, and you talk about that, the Orthodox Church was in communication with Luther, but it was taking almost a year to turn around. They were writing letters back and forth. And it just the speed of communication was was not there. But on the flip side, I think the a couple of decades earlier, Constantinople had been sacked. Like the Eastern Orthodox Church was in complete utter disarray and retreat and chaos when Luther reached out. So it's important to remember the state of affairs at that time to cut the Orthodox some slack. Absolutely. So I would say what I would say to you, Michael, like you and I have any conversation, which is like, hey, are you willing to so so again, if an Orthodox says, hey, spirits moving out and out. Spirits moving out and other places. I know God's moving. So clearly there he's moving out there amongst other churches. You and I would probably also agree that there are certain Protestant churches that you're very scared for the people that are in those churches because they're being led by someone who is leading them down a very a path that I don't think is a good path. Right. So you would even say there are some churches that you'd be like, whoa, wait a minute. A little scared for those people that are in that church are being led by that person. At the same time, I would just say, are you open to the fact of saying, you know what, maybe orthodoxy and Catholicism, the way they do Eucharist and mass or divine liturgy, that is an apostate. Like they didn't get it. Yeah, I don't I don't think it is. Because I'm like, I, I think that the issue is, is that, you know, with these, and you know, it's because, you know, there was so much. Like I don't see the diversity of these different, when everybody says it's like it's schisms all the time. I don't see that as a bad thing. And actually, there's a guy who's he goes to our church. He's a PhD. And he wrote a really great book about it's called Embracing the New Samaria. And he's a Latino guy. He's married to a white lady. And his whole history is about like the good and the bad of like multiculturalism in the church. And basically his study is, you know, mostly focused on evangelical churches, but saying like, if any church that stays like ethnically homogenous will die, like because of just the way that people are, you know, so this is just even like in a neighborhood level. Like we need to figure and I think it's the same for denominations and churches. We need to figure out the way to value each other's traditions and not want each other to change those traditions. Like the fact that, you know, orthodoxy is held on to so many things for so long, I think is incredible. And I think and I don't want like don't change your aesthetic. Don't change your liturgy. Keep it. Keep it. But, you know, embrace that it's not for everybody. And I think that if we can get along in that right way, it would be great if like people from, you know, my tradition or whatever, you know, evangelical churches are saying, you know, I understand you grew up in this church, but it doesn't it's not making sense to you. But maybe you should check out this orthodox church or maybe you should check out this Catholic church because so much of this stuff is like personality driven, you know, or, you know, it's based on the experiences. So like I want that healthy ecumenism. And I think, you know, the Catholics have kind of knocked it down from where it used to be with their like Vatican II stuff. And obviously many orthodox people are, you know, pretty open. But just the fact that there are these like statements and documents and things that make these claims of exclusivity, it really, you know, there's certain people that really love like that's their favorite part of the thing. And I think that's the toxic part of it. And it's also the same for like independent fundamentalist Baptists too. You know, their exclusivities are just as wrong. The catchphrase I say people I say go to church. What I mean by that is in some ways it's you have to engage in the human relationships around you. That's like the best way to go about that. You know, you have you have relationship, you have a family, you have some kind of community around you. And so that's the best place to go because in some ways that's the place that will have this procedural aspect to it that will will ground the other stuff. You know, it's like if you have to if you have to, you know, to help your kids with their homework or you have to do this this kind of really grounded stuff that has nothing that's very little to do with the ideology. You get engaged in other people's lives and it binds you in a different way. And then like my, you know, my father would he was going to church. I wasn't really living with him, but he was going to church and he would like kind of see that. Those are elements of this conversation. I got to go to church. Being being part of a church is part of Christian discipleship and in that word discipleship, there's this word discipline, which is it's a discipline to go to church. I was what would be so great about actually going to a church. Like you start going to a church so that when you do need like to be prayed for when you have something to be prayed for about you have a place to just say that you're dead on right gris and that is what the church is for to know and be known to love and be loved to have a place to go where people can pray for you, where they will welcome you in. And this is again part of why I'm you know I I I want churches to have estuaries because it is I know that it is difficult in many churches for people to in a sense come in and bring their real self and what I mean by that is half the say what's on their mind. Or you can't wrestle with them. It's like it is so Plato, you know, that's john reminds us is broad so he's a wrestler. You can't wrestle over a screen so maybe if it's paintball for Jesus maybe it should be wrestling with Plato. Because, and in church in a real space. Now often it doesn't happen. I understand that, but at least there's a chance to actually have a relationship with grip. And that's part of why churches are local. They're relational, they're face to face they're in real life. And I said about why would young people want to go to church. And I feel like I want to have some some kind of dynamic message or something that if they do find some reason to come. You know I'm, I'm trying to fish on throwing bait. I'm trying to hook somebody. It's what Paul is going to do is he said about being evangelical evangelism of some sort of fishers of men is the, is the promise yet. Yes, correct. We did go to church today. I don't go to church to think, or to rationalize God, I go to church to worship him. Right. And, and that's unhappy with that. And I'm very happy with that. And afterwards during coffee hour, we can all argue about the God of our understanding. Right. You're right, I think that the wild twin. I mean I, the thing that led to my, my sort of dawning to consciousness of Christianity. It was a 101 day vigil that I did in the forest. And I went into the forest. You don't have to go crazy. You actually have to go. You have to. You have to humble yourself and be and do it right here right now. Right. Get up. You like I like how Father's amendment talks about it for the life of the world. He says it starts when you get up and get ready. And you walk or you go to church, you start to see that's those are simple. I get up. I brush my teeth. I take a shower. I put on clothes. I go the things of life and we're ascending up into heaven.