https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=NV5MShpM8WU

 that's what I mean. Hey, go for it. I was already beatin where two or three are gathered and we find a non trinitarian. This is what we do. Um welcome everyone to the uh to the beat down that I am about to receive. There are the sins of being soft on child sacrifice. Um that I have displayed this week on my own YouTube channel. Um I have a special day for my penance. A group of um of of bonafide. I don't know what they're actually bonafide. Some of them are a little conservative. We have. We are all against child sacrifice. So, I don't care. With one accord. Yep. We have uh we have a pastor Mo who is another minister in the Christian Reformed Church. People don't understand that the whole TLC is just simply a plot by the Christian Reformed Church. Not die. I am die. Man. Man. They're bringing you in. Blow it. The highways and the byways. Trinitarians or not, we're dragging them in. Um so and then we've got Hank. Now, three of these people are distinguished members of what does your Chicago group have a name? Kind of. Kind of not. The the Chicago beat up. Yeah. It sounds sounds like some of them are. Yeah. I mean, they're not. They're not really. And and speaking of organized criminality, we have Hank who um I don't know what to say about Hank. Hank's uh Hank's been on my channel. He's a regular on Sam's channel. Likes to talk about church fathers. Hank abandoned Protestantism and fled to mother Rome and has been beating me up for not following and still holds hope for uh myself and Mo and Sam even. Uh Sam is no stranger to the channel. And Kale is no stranger to the channel. I had Kale and Sam on last week and here for Sam says Luke. So, I you know, I this this week uh Kale on Twitter and people who are on Twitter know that Kale and I go back and forth on Twitter a lot. Kale wanted me to say something about the Tucker Carlson video to uh a little snippet from the the Heritage Foundation and I as someone who was very innocent of Tucker Carlson obviously uh I had a big show on Fox but I'd never watched him. I don't have cable. Uh I never paid any attention to him. I listened to the speech. I thought and um and then you know, he gave and put it on another video. I thought, oh, I like the second one better and uh so then Kale wanted to know what I thought. So, I made a little video and oh my the pearl clutching in this little corner. Is is Paul VanderKlay really as winsome as he is? Um well, you look like David French. Oh, man. See? See why? It's can't have this thing. Alright, so II don't know. I don't know exactly how to go about this beating beat down that I'm about to get but I think Kale should get uh because Kale's tweet inspired the original transgressive video. I I think I'm gonna turn it over to the mic first and uh tell us tell us Kale about about that video and why it um why it why it inspired you. So, so, you know, Paul, you're very um you spent a lot of time talking about agent arena relationships and I know you you talk about that in terms of god number one and god number two but I it is something that I've kind of extract that out of your your your work and I use it all the time actually in my in my classroom to talk about you determining factors and and so the the example that I use for my students is um is tennis right? Even if you don't play tennis, you know that tennis on grass is different than tennis on clay which is different than tennis on hard courts and they all have sort of special. So, the arenas of Roland Garros, Wimbledon and you know you at the US Open, you know, um feature. It's the same game. It's the same grid but on a different surface and then you know, it's the same basic uh athletes uh playing the same game but with with sometimes wildly different um interactions and a lot of that is sort of that that that that that interaction and so I was struck. Um I've always uh full disclosure. I I I realized in the last five years, I've turned on Fox News twice, right? And the first time that I turned on Fox News was when Rod was interviewed um by uh for live not by lies and so I said, well, you know, I gotta gotta give him a solid there and and and and turn on and see what he has to say and then the second time that I turned on Fox News and I really mean like any cable news um in the last five years was on January 6th and um you know, this is all going down and I grabbed my kids and we turn on the TV and we watch, right? So, just just so people know where I'm coming from on the on the Tucker Carlson cable news thing. I'm not a watcher of set. Uh I watch YouTube and clips and all that kind of stuff but I just don't do it. Um and in part because growing up with with uh parents uh who like Fox News, it's just it was this constant haranguing noise in the background that just drove me nuts and so I had an allergy to it. Um thankfully, my parents have sort of backed away from all that, you know, but anyway, that that that's where I come from. So, Tucker Carlson. Now, uh you know, Tucker Carlson has always been someone who's been very interesting to me on on a personal level because he went to boarding school um right down the street from where I teach at boarding school and um he uh is graduated from Saint George's and Saint George's um is an Episcopalian uh uh school and um it was founded by the Reverend Hugh Diamond and the Reverend Hugh Diamond founded Saint George's and set it up as an Episcopalian boarding school primarily for New Yorkers, right? And that's sort of a lot in Bostonians but primarily that and so uh he got sick. So, he started it and ran it for I think 25 years, something like that. He got sick and on his deathbed uh converted to Catholicism and he converted to Catholicism um but then he lived and so he realized that uh the board wasn't ready for him. Right. And so nor so he certainly wasn't. This is this is very important to me personally. So, he um I have to retire. So, he he retires from Saint George's and he enters a monastery in in the UK um and the UK monastery so accepts him as a as a novice and you know because he was a priest and he was a uh an Episcopalian um priest and so he retires from uh from that enters the monastery as as a new Roman Catholic and becomes a monk and then about a year or so later um the English Benedict and Congregation uh receives a gift on the um Aquitonic Island in Rhode Island of a of a 500 acre gentleman's farm right on the Narragansett Bay and so the the guys who were in the monastery was like well Hugh you know you know how to um you know brother Hugh you know how to run a boarding school. We're going to send you back to America and you're going to start a Catholic boarding school and so he did and so there's always been this kind of this connection that I've had with that now it gets even deeper because Tucker um uh dated and married the head master's daughter so uh his father-in-law and a retired Episcopalian priest is also the retired head of school at St. George's and so um I've always just just as a sort of a footnote right so now Tucker's personal wife is I think important here because you know he jokingly sort of calls himself an Episcopalian and and he means it but he's he's very self effacing about the whole main line thing and I think later on I really like to connect that to some of the work you've done with Aaron Wren and the sort of the death of the main line and where did it go and all that because I think that is that is part of this this this bit but at any rate um you know Tucker uh you know grew up in a broken home and you know goes to boarding school grows up in California comes out to the east coast for boarding school and I think sees in boarding school you know solidness right you know uh uh uh thick thick structures institutions that are that are that are deeper and less ephemeral than the sort of the case I'm I'm of course speculating wildly here but I'm going to go with it and so so then Tucker goes off as he says in the speech like if you if you if you read the transcript of the speech you know he um uh gets a job at the heritage foundation in 1991 because he needed a job and his Episcopalian father-in-law is Episcopalian uh priests father-in- law uh uh to be uh says look you got to get a job and so that's sort of starts this whole thing if you recall he applies to a boarding school and he applies to a gig uh at at at um heritage foundation and of course the rest is history um now uh so so let's get back to the agent arena real quick so the agent arena thing is a big big deal because you have you know it's not just a conservative um pundit type at a conservative um a think tank ball extravaganza in in the heart of the beltway it's tucker carlson and it's the heritage foundation paul you correctly intuited that he's in a room of people that he's very familiar with right he's comfortable he makes those those kind of jokes okay my read on the situation is that he was speaking as an insider to insiders and it is a particularly so i called it a foul on twitter i called it like you know this is the you know you you you you said the wrong thing you know you wore the wrong pants to the to the dinner you wore white shoes after labor day right i mean that's the kind of level of this sort of inherited wasp sort of ethos that that he steps into even apologizes for not being in a tuxedo he's merely in a suit coat right and so so for him to get on into that you called it paul you said at this podium right that podium you know you don't say those things at that podium and so for for me you know more more so than him being a fox news guy more so than all that that he is saying these things at that podium at that particular place and i think that is why i can't stop thinking i haven't stopped thinking about it since i saw it uh i think sunday morning um and so that that's my my opening spiel sorry wow that was good that was good who's next i have a question for zay kale before uh we pop your head down what what do you think were the things that tucker said to the heritage folks that were most anathema or heterodox for the standards of that crowd evil may the best paper win as utter kfabe larping beltway bullshit it's evil and the kfabe that we've been engaged in since 1991 and beyond or before it's it's wrong and to say it out loud we've been engaged in kfabe since world war two and the ones that haven't been engaged in it have been hated which is reagan and the guy i don't like trump i i was around when reagan got elected the the the hatred yeah that reagan enamored yeah okay was was amazing because the the the discussion was really created by harry truman we're going to have engage in the world but we're going to engage in a way with russia in a cold war and will that which will never win and reagan's great line is somebody said what do we do at russia we win they lose yeah you're very clear it was extremely clear okay and we've had kfabe ever since and what's happened is you know i i was involved in politics the biggest frauds in the world come from from think tanks um they're grifters they they write what you and i want to hear and they get paid for it and we've seen that whether it was david french who is extremely conservative but now thinks it's okay to have drag queen story hour okay because that's winsome christianity i i don't know as a dad um the only thing i'd be winsome about is how many times am i going to punch a person doing drags story in front of my six-year-old daughter um luke kfabe means that it looks like it's real but it's not real it comes from professional wrestling right it's the narrative structure surrounding uh what is in essence a sort of a simple fight right so it's this entire structure like you really hate one another think hulk hogan versus the ultimate warrior versus andre the giant versus ronnie ronnie piper like all that sort of stuff like they go out and have beer together afterwards right but but the the the collective shared fiction um that we all engage in is that oh they really hate one another and it's always done with a little bit of sort of tongue and cheek yes and that the the damage that you're actually appearing to do to each other is actually calibrated yeah and that like when i'm going to slam you down on the mat i'm actually doing it in a way that um emphasizes dramatic effect but hopefully doesn't hurt you because you're going to have to do that to me in a couple minutes and we need to do this for our careers right so it's right because we've got a we've got a match in st louis you know we're in chicago tonight and we're going to be in st louis in two days and you know we got to be you know able to do it then too etc etc so sorry and the metaphor for the heritage foundation is like they might be arguing against the liberal think tank and having a debate but yet like they live in the same neighborhood their kids go to the same school and like they actually kind of need to get along in real life and so there's something of a stagedness about the conflict between them that over exaggerates this somewhat but that's gentleness but i would even say this you can get along with people that you disagree with that's not the issue do you really believe what you're saying do you live it out and i mean good example mo might know this guy remember congressman joe walsh crazy joe okay crazy joe would say the most crazy right thing right wing things he could say now crazy joe is calls himself a woke conservative well joe is just going back to who we all knew joe was 30 years ago a moderate republican who was pro-choice anti-gun so on and so forth right but he had to get elected during that tea party wave so he engaged in k-fabe he would yell at his constituents he was absolutely insane but he was doing it with a wink and a nod and my point is is that people why trump got electors people got tired of it they finally realized they weren't k-fabe is another word is another word for k-fabe professionalism because the whole veneer in the machine of professionalism is i'm going to wear a mask adopt a persona so that i can in a sense embody the arena for you so you and i can have the proper transaction in order to achieve a particular goal i mean i'm not buying it okay what's weird about trump being the k-fabe breaker downer is that he loves professional wrestling yeah yeah yeah and he he he's an expert in k-fabe yeah and he also creates all of these pseudo battles with the left or with the media or with the deep state or whoever right which is a new form of k-fabe and you get to be on his side and fighting his own personal grievances about this that are the other certain degree trump was the reviewer of how deep that k-fabe goes i mean because think of the some of the most k-fabe type things we mentioned wrestling um i'm actually on a podcast that we're going to get released this uh summer called four uh four colored commentaries four guys people of color talking about wrestling hip hop and comic books some of the most k-fabe that you can um talk about look at how many hip hop albums mentioned donald trump in some kind of heroic fashion before he ran for president right he was reality tv very k-fabe he was involved in wrestling and so but he came into the political arena and kind of said this is all the same thing you are believing some kind of genuineness to these pundits and representatives but they're all just acting they're all in it together and so to a certain degree i think the big story around trump is not trump it's what he has kind of revealed about the rest of the political system and i think that doubt that gets to i think that part right that the the sort of the standpoint of suspicion um you know has you know has served tucker well not in terms of batting a thousand but in nor as a mechanism with which to say and kind of some sort of nihilistic fashion nothing is real but rather to sort of see through that which is sort of thrown up as real as to be the false thing so that you can see through to the real thing and i and i and i think it's an important distinction it's one that lewis makes of course right you know that that the point is not to see through everything it's to it's to see through the false thing so you can see the real thing or the true thing and i think his audience uh you know is appreciative of that even when he's you know like i said he makes mistakes i'm not i'm not a tucker stan you know but but it's he seems willing to question you know the cathedral right i mean i guess that's the out of which he springs is is this you know so so part of you know when trump was running for office he was criticizing um he was criticizing obama because the democrats weren't lying enough because if you're dealing with national security you can't tell all your secrets and so you know you need to lie but then again you also attack them for lying so in a way we all sort of know that with these with these institutions with these with these large elaborate structures there is there is a degree of k-fabe and performance that goes on i mean even for even for a minister i mean if i'm if if i don't feel like getting up sunday morning and going to church and preaching a sermon or if i think you know if i have problems with something that the church elders did or something that happens i get up into the pulpit it's like banderclay i just don't get up into the pulpit and say ah you know why do we why do we have church at 11 o'clock instead of one o'clock i really want to sleep in on sunday morning but those elders won't let me do this and you know right well look paul i'm not a teacher i mean you know i i'm mr zeldon i have a bow tie on for god's sakes right i mean it's just like you know i understand what it means to play a role right you know but i also know what i can and can't say in front of the kids right i mean let's say that i go in to have a terrifying meeting with my headmaster and it's just it goes it goes you know sideways and you know i don't know if i'm going to have a contract or you know something like that i mean i can't go into the classroom be like guys you know i know we're slotted to read chaucer today but like i gotta tell you you know that headmaster you know if you liked me you would you know whatever something like that right and that's what i mean by a kind of foul you know a party foul or something like that but this gets into institutional instantiation when you are a teacher you you represent the institution when i'm a minister i represent the institution in the roman catholic church you really have a hierarchy with institutions and the members of the distributed body um very much um very much are called to instantiate that and you know reading the doubt that piece and then today's rodrir had a beat had a big piece on it you know we're really talking about the complete breakdown and suspicion of institutions and because all of those institutions require a degree of kfate pro rose pro wrestling just as you said requires that you know we we go into the drama and everybody there knows it's a drama and we have the big fight and i slam them down and yeah tomorrow we go from la to to san francisco if they still have wrestling in san francisco they probably still do and they do the kfate because that's what the distributed body requires and i think part of what we're seeing with all of this is the is the disintegration of many of our distributed bodies and the beginnings of new forms and reinstantiations and again i think carl uh tucker carlson even though i i know nothing about the man i expect that in many ways via these these new platforms i'm sure daily wire was salivating like mad when they heard he was gone from and they're just thinking okay look at joe rogan's unleashed and and that's that's what's weird about let's say david french going to the new york times but but you almost get the sense that these mass media organs are now stepping stones for the really big step up which is you know tuck your own platform his own platform exactly no middleman yeah right exactly but but i think that you know if you look at the speech i the whole thing is generated in my mind there are two things from the beginning of the speech right before we get to the really good clip that you know we sort of i'm jokingly calling the lab leak right the first thing the first thing is that father paul scalia offers an invocation and in that invocation i don't have a copy of it i've tried to get a copy of it because some of my friends were there and people i know were there i even asked him and he didn't have a copy of his remarks or he just wouldn't share him with me which is fine by the way father paul scalia is the son of antonyn scalia um a roman catholic priest um yeah so um talker if you look at the video and you read the transcript like he was genuinely moved by father paul's um uh call to pray for the country and and and and then he moves into uh i think his name is kevin roberts i think he's the head of heritage foundation he's there for a couple of years he is also a roman catholic um by the way um talker says that he's he has come to make this he's come he's agreed to sort of come out of his little you know hut up in maine um to to come to the belly of the beast washington dc because um kevin roberts is what he calls like a real man like he's real and i checked because i i talked to the security guys and the security guys they always know and one of the security guys leans over to tucker and says i would go to war for that man okay so he's talking about authenticity and then he says this right right after this so i've come because he says like i got the the midterms wrong and who the hell was i to make predictions because i know nothing and number two licking my wounds from that i meet this guy roberts and he's a real person running a k-fabe institution like the heritage foundation of which i know of because i used to work there back when i was a kid and he says wow this guy seems real and and he and it all checks out and he says this he says and i'm going to quote from it if you don't mind and i thought and these are the kind of people who will tell you the truth i mean why would he lie to me he's talking about the security guy i don't even know his name but he meant it and so to see a leader a real leader at the helm of an institution that matters that has the kind of throw weight that heritage does was thrilling was absolutely thrilling for me because the story of the last decade is the collapse of leadership not of the population the people remain noble and decent so far as i can tell i still live here i'm never leaving we have good people talk about the united states of america we have terrible people in charge and not just our not just of our government but of the institutions that i grew up in the episcopal church my high school i can just go on and on and on they're all run by weak people okay so so that frame you know people in the sort of the the beltway sphere don't talk this way because it's like it's like it's like somebody saying you know you know john f kennedy is screwing all the girls it's like you just don't do that now you see it's in it's in that it's in that kind of register so so he is struck by all of the institutions that he grew up in and it's about his genealogy as far as i'm concerned he grew up in these institutions he wanted to trust those institutions but he looks around at all of them and he sees them as weak and cowardly so i don't know that that that's what grabbed me and then he kind of moves in to this whole bit about what would inspire a guy who works at city bank and he's a a an upper level person at city bank and he's going to be sitting through the requisite dei shenanigans right you got to go through the workshops right and one of the guys he says there's no incentives for any of those guys to say anything about it other than like okay sounds great i'll do the work move on what inspires a person to get up and says no i don't accept that that's bs you know so that's sort of this live not by lies portion of his presentation and then he goes into that last part yeah and that's something that i think resonates with me personally just the lack of leadership or the port the weakness of leadership a desire to avoid responsibility or accountability because i think even in the political sphere the one thing that stuck out to me in the speech was the whole idea of sacrificing the children yeah because when we think about a lot of these political things for example right wings love right wingers love to talk about violence in the inner city it's like yes violent crime and the murders are up 30 percent for anybody who lives in the suburbs or anybody who lives in lakeview the nicer parts of the city they kind of care it's they don't see it it's not a big deal i come from a little bit of a different context i see it prime goes up 30 percent that means somebody's getting shot in front of my house right young kids are going crazy that means a 13 year old throws a brick at my wife happens to miss but it also means that if i was there when that happened and i beat up said kid now you have light-skinned roses what they would call me instead of voices beating up little black kid and it's just like i have to deal with the consequences that these weak leaders are making and and that's kind of where i gave a little bit of pushback on paul's commentary of you know that's strong language and i and i don't think i was aggressive in my pushback i think i was polite but it's a it's strong language but where i'm from it's merited a large aspect of the abortions are happening in my community that's right um like the amount of young people in my community is huge because they're all having kids young if they have them by the time they have them they've had a couple of abortions already it's just so messed up and everybody wants to put in these little blinders on well we don't see that um we don't want to wrestle with that we won't even go visit your church even if we're part of your sending church um because it's dangerous over there as we continue to vote for the people and policies that make those things possible and so that was is at what point do we call those things out at what point do we just say i don't think you have any interest in this debate or working towards the truth or some kind of unified good here i think you don't at best i think you don't care at worst i think you're looking forth evil and then once i've come to that conclusion well then what do i do about it okay hanks moving his hands over there well we see how i'm serious so i have a relative who's got a phd in journalism and she wrote a wonderful article about belgian chocolate racism okay and in my mind gee you know we have seen something happen if you want to report on something the dissolution of the nation state of libya has become now the number one sex trafficking country in the world and this young lady travels throughout the whole world maybe journalism would be to report on that and what a tragedy that has become and so what happens is people see an article like that and says you're not serious we call it gaslighting you're you're you're you're not a serious person oh no yes look at my credentials like chris and cobble to me no no don't question my history look at my credentials you know who i am damn it right okay right and it's like i don't care who you are being a moron is being a moron okay and and what we've seen is that why do people not trust our institutions because we're run by a bunch of midwits we're run by people great craven yes who who will roll out well mr kriss i went to northwestern and then i got my phd in in government affairs from harvard so i'm very well qualified to say stupid stuff okay and after a while people aren't dumb people have a lot of some of the smartest people i've ever met never went to college and they look and they just say you know what flip it off these people are crazy i don't trust anything and and that's a it's a bad place for a country to be in it's a bad place to be in a church it's a bad place to be in writ large but that's where we are today because you know i mean i can't believe i'm writing reading the guys i'm reading i who do i read today matt taibbi michael tracy glenn greenwald okay why because they're the ones that are best describing how the world's gone nuts okay and and so what we see what what all talker carlson in my mind did who i i'm like hell i don't watch them because i think that watching fox news is like watching anger porn is talker carlson aptly described what the the battle is which is it's not about back in the old days 40 years ago paul would say hank i think tax rate should be x on this because it will have this salutary benefit no paul i think it should be this and we'd have a debate about it now we have a debate of what a woman is is it okay if my 13 year old daughter feels like a boy that she should be mutilated and put on a altar to bowel okay um and ruin her life because you're seeing people who are deconstructing out of out of the transgenderism are saying my life has been ruined okay and where are people our age that were around 30 40 years ago who were there for wisdom saying this is here let me explain why this is not a good idea okay i okay i i think a lot of this again is so so mo is talking about the fact that okay you live in a zip code you know what's going on in that zip code i mean and this was when they were talking defund the police where i grew up in paterson when i work here you know i regularly talk to lots of black mothers and i have never heard a single black mother who's dealing with the stuff going on down their street say you know what we need we need less cops what they're mostly doing is screaming about the um the lack of police enforcement that they are getting policemen for it's meant against some of the young black men in their community i mean i've lived i've lived that scene my entire life part of though what we're dealing with is again i think the disruption of these extended these extended bodies these extended institutions because you know one you know tucker carlson coming out with his bow tie someone in the 1970s might have yelled well there's a limousine liberal what on earth does tucker carlson driving around in his little golf cart with his pretty little wife down there in southern california really know about the violence that's going on in most communities especially when he's from the upper crust new england white bread community and and so again my argument is what we really have is a disruption of these of these sense-making networks that have sort of allowed um people at multiple levels at multiple um at multiple zip codes with multiple belief systems to sort of be able to align and work productively and i would assert that what we are in is certainly a dislocation because of because of technology a dislocation of sense-making and in a sense a transitory process by which things are starting to shift out and and we see this continually where people look i mean for for you look at um fdr and you say wow you know he really spoke to america but my grandfather couldn't stand fdr i mean he was you know during the during the 60s when his kids were wanting him to just dare vote for a democrat my grandfather's like nope you know he he was he was gonna he was gonna not oops looks like the camera is unplugged i snipe you see you've never looked better oh this is so humiliating unintended consequences all right i gotta shut up now because i gotta fix my ring that's right you can't talk if you can't see your face i'll take a shot kael why don't you take over oh no oh no someone's got to step up well all right all right i'll go ahead sam all right so i think part of what's going on um part part of my story i guess like last week i talked about irish catholic side of sam uh the other half of me is very new england waspy my middle names is adams and not just because we admired the adams's but because i am you are you are an adams yes and um that you know i grew up in chicago or the suburbs of chicago but even though moe and i grew up maybe 20 miles apart or less it seems like we grew up a lot further apart than that and i think that one thing that i can see that's been going on is once upon a time in the elite sphere there used to be rules that the left and right agreed to where the elites from both the left and right would have their kfabe but there were rules of the kfabe and they were supposed to be faithfully representing each side of their political spectrum and all the constituents that go to long went along with that but the left started to get so much upper hand in the elite sphere that they started to want to change the rules of the elite arena and that i think a lot of members of the right wing part of the elite arena have been sleepwalking while the left has been changing the rules of the elite elite arena in their favor i would just add sorry same just real quick i would just add i don't think that they've been sleepwalking i think that they have been content to play the role of the washington generals versus the harlem globetrotters sure sure yeah like one example that i would give like in college is that i was in a christian fellowship at a ivy league university and that back in those days it was still kind of okay to be a conservative christian organization at the university there was still a republican club still a pro-life club and stuff like that and like yeah you weren't going to be like made more popular on campus by doing that but that was still allowed but there was a hoopla about one of the leaders of a christian fellowship coming out as gay and then being forced to step down from his leadership position and then it's like well wait a minute we can change the liberal side can change the rules of the arena and we can say that all of the student organizations need to be affirming and can't discriminate on the basis of sexual orientation and then what are the faithful religious organizations supposed to do in that circumstance right we were supposed to be pretending to you know show that the ivy league university was such a place where you could be a conservative christian and you had your spot at the table even if it wasn't the most popular one well now all of a sudden do we actually get to have a spot at the table or do we have to sacrifice our principles in order to have our spot at the table and how many times has that bar of how much in agreement with the left hand side of the spectrum changed and moved to force these right leaning instantiations in the elite arena to have a spot at the table and i think what's happening is like that was really what was going on with jeb bush versus um donald trump in 2016 right and i would even argue and i would just add real quick you know i know the thing that like made me a crazy person was when they tried to turn mitt romney into um like an actual nazi like i'm not a mitt romney fan but like are you kidding me like i mean at that point like i mean remember and it was joe it was joe biden who said they want to put y'all back in chains y'all i'm just like oh no way like i'm done like i'm done playing at this point like that's just so just patently absurd well one of the things that i think has contributed to that though is this whole christian ethos of be above it but the problem i sense with a lot of especially moderate christians is that the whole pattern of christ is take the hits it's well i want to be above it but i don't want to get hit um so moe yeah i know somebody threw a brick at your car just be above it man you know sacrifice your kids be above it and i'm like well hold on mr way up there in white elite hoodness right um you know i you gotta do something either fight and take the hits and there's a lot of people that want that too they want to be able to fight and call out evil without having any repercussions for that and there's the people that just want to avoid conflict because they want to avoid getting hit it all amounts to the same thing it's cowardice i don't want to get hit so i will use some kind of religious argument or you use jesus to get me out of this conflict and it's kind of the opposite of what jesus taught jesus said engage and you know if we're going to do the whole non-violence thing understand that they will be violent right moe was you know that you know that's child sacrifice though right i mean you know it's very it's a very quick move to get to child sacrifice and what they're telling you to do as a father for instance is like okay you're just gonna have to take that hit in other words you're just gonna have to sacrifice your kids you know and your community because you know great or good wink wink and like no no i've no i'm not i'm not prepared to do that i'm not called to do that yeah this goes back to the you know uh paul you had shared a clip from the glen lawry um john mccord conversation where they're addressing that same idea um from scott adams that he had put out and it's like this is what a lot of minorities are encouraged to do you know i mean so certainly it's what i'm trying to do stay in the neighborhood you know even though i can get out but in part but a big part of the reason that i don't try to get out is i don't want to get out just to avoid taking hits um if i'm going to get out it's because i'm going to go fight and probably take hits someplace else um but i'm not just trying to avoid the conflict and that's where i sense a lot of people are it's i mean even within our denomination the crc and the whole sexuality thing it's well i don't want people to be mad at me well what is true well yeah i know but it's going to be and there's this whole dance going on and it's like no there are real consequences to some of these things whether it's abortion laws whether it's trans stuff whether it's violence there are real people getting really hurt and there's a lot of people that think well if i just don't read about it or if i just stay as far away from as possible so that i can plead ignorance well then i can still claim that i'm being a loving christian because i'm trying to be right when at the end you're just you're just a child with with your your your hands covering your eyes pretending that the other person now can't see it's like no real real i think i think a fair amount of today's um allyhood and tolerance is really sort of a um it is a luxury belief um yeah i think i think you know i think sexual libertinism and libertarianism is a great idea well and this is this is something that i said and i know annoyed a bunch of people too many many in this has been pointed out many in the elite circles they they preach license but they practice puritanism i mean and everybody loves barack and michelle because he's so devoted to her and she's so devoted to him you know there's no throttle there um and and if if word got out that barack behind the scenes which i i have no reason to believe he is is a notorious womanizer like john f kennedy you know the you know just just go ahead every time david brooks releases a new book just read the amazon reviews right they just won't let him forget you know that he divorced his wife and got a younger model um you know and i don't know that obama would have that problem though because one of the big things about obama one of the biggest reasons he's still so popular is that he's every white liberals especially in politics in hollywood he's their black friend yeah everybody has that thing i'm not racist i have a black friend yeah it's a magic negro and that's what obama is to like the country as he gets to be your black friend that every time you want to make some kind of racial statement you can go to him because he's black enough i voted for obama how can i be racist yeah right i i think i think mo when you're talking about you i think a lot of what you're talking about before is cheap grace you know because i was born to parents that decided we are going to live in the inner city even though we're white um so we are going to be a minority in a majority neighborhood and with the exception of when i lived on campus at calvin college i've been a minority in every community i've lived in my whole life and and happily so personally i find it i find a whole bunch of white people around me kind of dull and so i really like a i really like a neighborhood in which there's some drama and there's some you know in all the neighborhoods i've lived in and have had drama and and but but there's a there's as you notice mo there's a real difference between being out in the suburbs of taking the hit which means so and so two houses down is saying not nice things about me behind closed doors or at least i imagine they are versus someone throwing a brick at your wife those are two wholly different realities and i think a lot of what people are instinctively reacting to is a sort of cheap grace that in in in the speaking for these extended bodies they they vocalize a number of things and it is a k-fabe in it to a degree but it's also by the time you get to bernie sanders or hillary clinton or joe biden or donald trump you're not pumping your own gas you're not buying your own groceries and you live that way for a certain number of years and you really have very little understanding about what joe the plumber if you remember that guy oh yeah um if you remember you know how joe the plumber actually lives and and there can be a an elitism on both sides and i of course have lived sort of i have often been sort of a borderline figure i've lived on both sides of a lot of different things and the you know the the the blue collar talk about the white collar and the white talker talk talk about the blue collar but you know they are deeply connected when i lived in the dominican republic one of the things that you saw even in the best parts of town there are always these tiny little areas in the neighborhood where everyone else is where all the domestic help lived right in the rich part of the neighborhood and so we are part of this we are part of this extended fabric this extended community and and i think part of the question in terms of politics and religion to a degree because pastors are very political people if you want to try to keep a congregation together you practice politics all the time because there are all of these different conflicts you do in fact learn how to manage you manage the or the the perception of the arena you manage your persona and you try to and there can be a sacrificial way where you do this all in a way to hopefully allow the body to grow and to become such an arena that people can begin to flourish and and and another aspect of it is the one of consequences like even the elites can deal with consequences for their actions you know thomas soul talks about this in his book uh discrimination disparities he's like the problem is you have a lot of politicians that are enacting policies and they have no accountability to whether whether they work or not if they don't work well we just throw under the rug you know if they work we're going to use that in our campaign and so for me it's less about like the elites it's about nobody or very few people taking accountability for their words for their actions etc and i happen to live an environment mainly because i grew up here where it's like the accountability is going to hit me real hard you know if i start being reckless in the street i'm going to have some opponents um and so on and so forth and it's thought of and to a certain degree this is a lot of christians push this i hear this all the time yeah they did something else kind of bad but they're my friend and i love them i'm going to forgive but by removing the consequences or even like hiding the consequences you're not allowing them to grow or even develop but i think it's also the fact that so many of our relationships are now mediated by institutions by screens extended bodies that if you're if you're in a marriage there are consequences if you're in a family there are consequences because that the the connections between us are so thick and so rich in fact you know so much of what goes on is is is deeply consequential and my my wife's latest fascination has been watching hoarders um and and and it's so fascinating you watch some of these these hoarders and you know there's the spouse in there and it's so interesting to watch the the dynamics between the spouses and why don't why doesn't that dude just say to his wife if you don't stop this i'm out of here i'm sick of list living in this mouse roach infected misery you've wrecked our bank account but there they are in this little dysfunctional circle of misery which is also their circle of joy and so much this thing just expands out and um and i guess part of the other point i wanted to make about my video was very much connected to your point mo that it's one thing to stand and say this is evil all right what are you going to do about it you're going to go full blown unabomber you're really going to step out of this polity or is is this evil language also k-fade because and the child sacrifice thing there's a huge difference between my neighbor that got an abortion and i think and there's a there's a certain analogy to child sacrifice and my neighbor who constructs a stone altar and starts looking around at the toddlers i mean for one thing i sit there and i pray for my neighbor who got abortion for the other i i say wife call the cops i'm going over i'm going to stop that tragedy and you have to understand the recognizable difference we always point this out with respect to what jesus says about um lust in one's heart as adultery yeah but um yeah i'd rather have them lusting in their heart and not in their bed and so you know to there's a certain amount of k-fade that goes on with all of this language and it's it's i'm not saying that this is a bad thing i think it's a completely normal thing it's a signaling thing but i think we also have to recognize that it is a signaling thing because what i see is that and and i see it in marriages all the time there are certain certain people in a marriage that'll say if you do this i'm getting a divorce and it's like when you watch someone say i'm getting a divorce i'm getting a divorce and after the third time they've said it the other party knows they're not going anywhere they're not really getting any other thing with a child sacrifice because initially you gave a little bit of push back in the comment section which i totally understood it's yeah that's evil okay what are what are you gonna do about it yeah um like i have a good friend of mine um one uh he works his full-time job as he raises money and he stands outside abortion clinics all the time preaching and then trying to pray with moms and dads and so on and so forth like that that seems weird to me why does it seem weird to me like i acknowledge the evil that's happening there but for some reason him stepping out in there is weird to me and is uncomfortable for me um and what does that come from that's where it's like what do you do like how effective is he being i used to teach sex ed in the schools how effective are those things but i feel like to a certain degree a lot of christians have just given up like we're not even talking about what do we do about it anymore yeah and i think you know so benjamin voice i was surprised but ben if you follow benjamin voice's twitter feed he is he is at this conference this in ireland yeah yeah this transgender conference and and and so when i look at that and of course if you want to know benjamin voice watch his channel he's got so many conversations but there's something deeply christ-like about and about your friend mo because here's here's the funny thing about sitting and talking about stuff all the time but actually going down there and then once you have an actual relationship with someone who's gotten an abortion or with an abortion doctor once you have an actual relationship with them then suddenly things get very real and there's something deeply part of christianity where god doesn't just sit up on the clouds and start yelling down at people from sinai but he actually comes down and be and become subject to their evil and you know again when you when you read paul and peter in the new testament and they say things like slave be you know slaves be subject to your masters and paul about you know listening to the listening to the government because he's been given given the power of the sword and that power of the sword will go on to take his life and paul's life and on and on and on and so there's something there's something i think there's a real that this is where sort of the radical christianity the the christian anarchists really make a point because it isn't until you're actually be realize that as solja nitsenson that line goes between down my heart that you begin to know that this evil person that you have sort of made into a straw man or a scarecrow this evil you're a lot like that evil person and that's when i get to redemption which is well how does redemption really take place and it almost always takes place in close relationships and if you walk through sobriety with an alcoholic or a drug addict or maybe a hoarder or someone like this it it it's long painstaking things that the news cycle and that sort of outrage outrage k-fabe attention simply doesn't afford and i think this is where us reformed uh folks have a bit of an edge in this idea that the idea we start with the t in tulip the total depravity it's that when i call somebody when i say that somebody's committing something evil i'm not saying it as somebody unfamiliar with doing evil i'm saying yes that evil that i'm accusing you that's in me too and i happen to serve this god that has offered us grace and forgiveness for that evil um and so certainly it's helped me that when it comes to abortion many women in my family my close family that i love more than anybody else have had abortions and i've heard their experiences and it's evil and they they feel it they feel like they've participated in that and they were they ask god for forgiveness for that and so it's one of those things where we also have to be careful in calling out evil and not necessarily acting as if people are uniquely evil that's right and it's like and jesus you know you know i love it when he says and you know if your son asks for a as your son asks for an egg do you give your son a snake and if you who are evil jesus jesus calls the entire human race evil right there and and then jesus comes in and becomes the victim of our evil and that then becomes the motion by which evil is undone now is it undone and all of us do all of the abortion doctors see the light and and and you know and then all of the nuance that goes around it and all of the ways we participate in structures that perform horrendous evils completely unintentionally no we are mired in the thing and so i i wind up in roman seven who can save me you know and that's go ahead i have a nuanced question for you paul about child sacrifice okay why was it okay for god to sacrifice his son and what does that say about child sacrifice itself and don't try to ternate eyes your way out of the question by saying it was actually god because we all know god sacrifices sorry man who let that man in this room abraham and isaac he's he's called audarius he's back slap on the wrist noticed hair i actually thought about that before we started this conversation i was thinking about that exact idea well go for it well i mean the idea was while a couple of things sam just said i can't bring in the trinity so i will try to leave that part out of it although i do think it's significant but the other aspect is when you think about god asking abraham to sacrifice isaac and you you hear that translated in the book of hebrus where it says and abraham was going to sacrifice isaac knowing that god could bring him back from the dead and so and the the idea of sacrificing his son knowing that he was going to bring him back that that puts a different edge on it so like if i sacrifice my kid i don't know that i can bring my kid back um i don't have that confidence now of god for some reason asked me to sacrifice my son well that's going to be a different story lord please don't do that now i'll i what's really lovely is is jacob gave me this so i can play this whenever i want to yeah i might make a great point steal that boom jacob agrees with me jacob confederati agrees with me i make a point i'll make a point from so peugeot and and john vervecki had jacob howland on what a wonderful conversation between those three and so then of course i go on a jacob howland was then the the new hot girl in this little corner for me that day so i looked up a whole bunch of his things on youtube you know he made a he made an amazing point about the sacrifice of isaac which again i think the entire the entire story about jesus as the son of god and isaac as the son of abraham and god demanding a sacrifice i think those two things are deeply connected as as moyses noted um one of things that jacob howland said about that point was in a sense in a sense what abraham does with god is calls his bluff and says all right okay father in heaven is child sacrifice what you want i will lay my son on the altar your move and and i think in a sense you can you can see christ doing a remarkably similar thing and then and then god saying okay and then it's sort of like chicken but chicken gets transcended and then you have the resurrection and you have a you have a you have another turning of the narrative in there and um so yeah it's and and but although of course the the the passion narratives are so amazingly nuanced in that is is is jesus life being taken from him yes but then also no he lays it down and and you've got all of these in here who's who's the one actually sacrificing jesus is it the jews is it the romans is it satan you know exactly it's and and is perhaps some reason why child sacrifice keeps showing up in human history again and again again is it's a broken attempt to participate in the the truest most real thing that's ever happened both before and afterwards wow there we go on that that that is why paul i am the only person in this organization that can have an interaction with sam on a consistent basis don't refer to the organization well i i there's a hierarchy well it's a hierarchy now now now kales kales been trying to get a word in here kale go ahead so so this is why i want to go back to the arena agent question we started or i started off with since it's all about me um you all are all being very very christiany amen you know except i i think i think the five of us in this room would would could you know my bowtie notwithstanding consider ourselves weird christians right in that in that um uh we are um very much out of the mainstream in however you want to define that um even perhaps within our respective traditions you know we we would all fail uh paul do you remember when you had that video of peugeot on with um the radical rationalist or whatever and rationality rules yeah rationality rules the crying game moment exactly right so all of us would fail the crying game moment right um episcopalians and i really am not trying to like rag on the episcopalians but i'm doing it because i think it's important to this conversation you know i think of episcopalianism as a kind of invented christian technology in order to make a cozy church state relationship in which you can have a widespread basic buy-in on like the basics so that you can have you know a ruling class that doesn't have to get too hot and bothered about questions of the trinity or questions of the sacrifice of of isaac or the questions of the sacrifice of jesus in fact we're going to do as much as we can to never really say jesus because and all this jesus talk makes people nervous right so for tucker carlson to be the one right uh you know to be the one who comes out onto that podium um and say a very weird thing is him sort of saying guys we're not weird enough like what we're really looking at what we're really facing is like all the weird stuff that none of us would rather talk about right so so it's i really i really think that the the main line mainstream ism connection is is is vital to us trying to understand what happened with tucker on friday night and that's why i really want to keep bringing it back to it so he sees himself as the son as the inheritor of a ruling class ethos who had made a kind of gauzy low-res christianity so that so that bad men so we could have good bad men right and so wasps were our good bad men and they were willing to um as matt damon says in that clip that i shared earlier they you know they didn't make wars they were willing to do what it took to make small wars not blow up into big wars right and and so therefore there's a certain kind of mechanistic instrumentalist sort of view of the world and you didn't bother yourself about heaven and you certainly didn't bother yourself with hell because god would sort all sort out all of that crap later on we're here to sort of do the kind of the business right and you know but the problem as i see it is that you know the son of you know that movie by the way the good shepherd is really kind of chronicling the beginning of the dissolution of the wasp establishment you know through the cia and all that so it's an interesting movie it's not a very good movie but it's an interesting movie to the kind of thing to the kind of conversation we're trying to have right now and you know the you know they didn't have a generational plan right you know if you look at for instance like the the episcopalians were the great boosters of like birth control right in this country right and so every good episcopalian was like very serious about what is the lambeth council in 33 i think it was uh in which you know in order to sort of you know clean up the country you know we're going to have to sort of contracept ourselves into into cleanliness and and encourage the the less fit to right right so in other words what they really thought that this would take care of the catholics and the blacks right they they really you know politely but like that but the problem is is that they bought it their kids bought it right because they were worried about a great replacement the wasp they did a good job of marrying late having two or three kids correct maybe and you know being chased and etc but they were being out reproduced by irish catholics in massachusetts and black people in big urban centers right and and that was that was part of it well maybe if they can't be as chased and as disciplined about their reproductive habits as we are then uh let's give them something to do that with and and it's not and their disillusion is not unlike the disillusion of the british empire right in which you have this sort of long slow death you know and now to the credit credit to the brits they've been able to sort of figure out how to kind of do it sort of but but you know the you know the wasps seem to have comfort in them comforted themselves with this at least we have the institutions okay now i find it very interesting paul that you make the generational point rod makes the generational point right and all of us in this sort of like you know all this sort of this early gen x mid gen x late gen x reality is that all of us except for a few outliers like a rost outfit right but all of us operate outside of the mainstream you know you like to say paul like what do you mean you can't say it i hear this stuff all the time yeah paul we we like we're in this little corner like yammering on right it's not the same thing i mean look look how many how many times could you have like looked up a christian blog or a christian youtube channel in which they complained about the evils of pornography and it would have been 100 correct and we all have seen this maybe even participated in this nicholas christophe at the new york times writes one damn column and all of a sudden pornhub is back footed and has to sort of do all this kind of work to sort of reestablish themselves so i think it's a big friggin deal you know that tucker carlson just got canned from the one perch the one establishment perch in which you could have some kind of counter to the grand narrative and so that's why i i think i'm disturbed like like you said he's gonna be fine he'll just sell my pillow ads until he's dead and he'll accrue 500 million dollars like yay us but meanwhile you know uh i think maybe this is to your point moe is like real people are getting really destroyed right you know and like i teach kids and i teach a bunch of rich kids right and they're great kids right but i see exactly what this ideology that is being rammed down everyone's throats does to our children and like i deeply care about the generational transfer not just in terms of our wisdom tradition but like just an actual kids actual people like be fruitful and multiply it's the first it's the og commandment and we're falling down on that and i think that that is in part what thank you um in part i think that's what what tucker you know is sort of yelling at in his own kind of way revealing this is the other aspect of trump this is something i push i had commented on paul's video was ever since i was a kid and i'm fairly young um not a gen xer but ever since i was a kid two things that all right wing people were always talking about is peace in the middle east and undoing roe v wade peace in the middle east to the point that even obama was like come on peace in the middle east guys that's not gonna happen um and then here comes this doofus as everybody likes to call him and put some people on the supreme court and a couple years later roe v wade is undone and before he's out of office there's these is the israelis are talking to the saudis yeah and it's just like wait a minute wait a minute wait a minute we could do things we could yeah not only that but why can't we do those things why can this guy that for some reason everybody's saying is a doofus why is it that he can accomplish our main priorities and we can't well he didn't build a wall though i mean the one big thing he's like build a wall that wasn't our priority like that i wasn't hearing about a wall from the time i was a kid right you know good point moys the two things that are maybe some of his biggest accomplishments were things that were almost like tangential that weren't his main focus that in some sense the deep state accomplished the old republican deep state accomplished through him but it was the fact that trump was in office that was able to happen whether it's you know appointing judges and state department negotiations with the united arab emirates or whoever the judge that had those accusations so why am i blanking kavanaugh brent kavanaugh any other any other person the republican presidents there's a yeah kavanaugh you probably step down not donald trump because he's so stinking belligerent but no that's all they got on you yeah i got i got 20 i got folders of women who are yelling that about me yes i'm totally depraved that's right that's right i want to go back a little to carlson because he had an epiphany during the iraq war when it first came out he was for it and very quickly he realized it was a big mess it was wrong and he was wrong and he started admitting it when he did he got attacked by republicans and he would never let go of it and i think what i see one of the things that i find weak with christians is they don't like to read the old testament because the old testament isn't messy but the prophets are even messier the prophets are very messy because they call out israel and then they get killed and they get killed in the worst way i'm reading jeremiah right now yeah okay i'm reading i said i read i just finished reading isaiah how not to win friends and influence people tell the correct yeah i mean hey joseph you're a knucklehead right um okay in as sam and i have studied early church fathers some of the early church fathers went right after the caesars athena gorius yeah okay um they understood it because they read scripture and said hold it yes you can be loving and winsome but it doesn't mean that you stop what what built the west was people like athena gorius and others calling out power and saying you're wrong paul did it first paul said we're going to reset relationships within the in the home men love your wives women obey your husbands men you can't go out and cheat you can't have a side hustle okay dot die for them you know right as christ did for his church i mean that's kind of a big deal right kind of and and what we've seen is that western christianity got soft and what it got soft about was it forgot basic scriptural injunctions kale kale probably knows who i'm going to reference one of my favorite catholic prelates is cardinal robert sarah i think that guy is fantastic the guy is probably the should you know i i love the guy now he's in africa i think africa is a great place to live in i follow on twitter african priests and they have they have reaped the consequences of what we did in the west over the last three years shutting down for covet they're starving okay they were doing well now they're starving the ukraine russia war where you don't have potash they're begging for potash and then the west says when africa says um well we're going to do our own potash no we have environmental problems well you know if let's break a few few million eggs and see if we can make an omelet um the issue is the church itself isn't standing up for the least it's saying we need to be winsome and i'm going to call some names i mean i see you know i see these guys talking about winsomeness and they're missing the mark completely whether you know whether it's someone you should interview phil visher who lives in my town phil's a mope he's a mope okay because you know what he's he i know what he's doing in wheaton because that's what i do in ween he's having a glass of chardonnay seeing how good life is in the in the pristine boulevards of wheaton illinois okay you know i mean if you go downtown wheaton at 11 o'clock at night the only thing you're going to see is a stray dog um my point is is that it's not a tough place and we what we do is we we put on we're going to go back to kfabe we put on i'm hulk hogan i'm going to go on twitter and act like the christian hulk hogan and my point would be hey hulkster why don't you get in the ring and sweat and fight instead of talking on twitter why don't you do something there are so many things out there whether it's most community whether it's what my wife's involved in sex trafficking okay my wife is involved in helping people coming out of sex trafficking that's better than what you first said well i'm not as elegant a speaker as you mr vanderclay um i'm a pop well i'm a populist um right well his wife's involved in sex is involved in sex trafficking but at least but at least i'm not winsome about uh child sacrifice um so all right so my point is is that what we have is there's two testaments there's the old and the new we call it scripture and part of that would be to say hold it part of being a christian is calling out on all sides right this what we're seeing here as as things that are go against god's created order now i'm not plunking for christian nationalism we inherited a country that was sort of christian light meaning we have these natural law natural law coming from basically scripture but the the question is is what we see right now is when we've seen this total breakdown of what we had we're seeing you know and paul i i think i said this to you before sooner or later we're going to get to france level where all of a sudden it's just going to be the heavy fist because you can't keep on playing kfabe the way they're playing kfabe without finally people saying i've had enough and all of a sudden the clerics aren't the french priest these days the clerics will be the people in the ivy league and in institutions and they're the ones that are going to suffer some pretty grievous consequences it's just what i'm watching sam sam wanted to get in go ahead so i i feel like one of the forks in the road and that is a lot of what's going on in the nuanced conversation is if we if we accept sort of you know my proposal that part of what's gone wrong is that the left sees the rules of the elite arena and that this is having all sorts of downstream consequences does the right then respond by trying to get enough influence by the current rules that are mostly controlled by the left in the elite arena to hope that it can then rebalance the arena and go back to the equilibrium which is sort of what the goal of nuance is right we play by these leftist leaning rules in the elite arena hopefully we get enough respect even according to these biased rules such that we could get enough power to change the rules back to something more neutral again and then that will have all sorts of beneficial downstream consequences or do we say screw it that game is over and we're not playing nice by those rules anymore and we're going to resort to the rules of a a rule list game which is essentially some kind of semi-violence even though no one actually seemingly is punching each other and you know David if David French is the example of our of the Christian rights attempt to play by the left's arena rules then it looks like oh thank you David French for writing another column about how the evangelicals love their guns too much we didn't want to say it but it's very nice of you to say it because that serves our purposes of having the left just think the right is too obsessed with guns all the time but thank you for saying it David you have so much more credibility but really we just wanted to find someone who would say that and like if that's it I don't see that as working but I see that as that attempt of trying that and I think Tucker is basically like look I kind of tried I was pushing the boundaries of this elite arena thing as far as I could and Fox just fired me and so screw that game time to do something different and I think that the question is is what really is that different thing and maybe complaining on Twitter isn't actually the right alternative either and I think I think you want to see something right so here's where I think the game's being played we saw this thing with Bud Light and Tommy Viator gets on Twitter and says we need to he worked for the Obama administration and he said we need to have forgiveness for the marketing director of Bud Light it's she shouldn't be canceled is what he said it's in a lawyer named Per Schlitter got in and said you made the new rules we're playing by them have fun this is how it's going to be right meaning hey you know what you screwed up there's no forgiveness we're just off with your head you're out okay you don't whether you're seeing that what you're seeing is you're not seeing that forgiveness right we had that before the politician that was the most forgiven politician not in my lifetime was Richard Nixon okay um I mean there was every two years was a new tricky dick um but the the point is that now what you see is there's no forgiveness it's like okay here's the rules hard and fast fine I end up now understand your rules and I will play by your rules which means the the head of marketing for Bud Light off with her head okay and that's what happened and Tommy Vieter sees that and says no we should have forgiveness well this is what I mean by what you're what I'm seeing our elites are going to be dealing with is when does a father go nuts when his daughter's playing volleyball and his daughter gets hit in the head in this concussion maybe breaks her neck because a transgendered woman spikes the ball but do you need when does it when does when does societal order break down okay when we start seeing people getting when it gets so bad that people just say enough's enough but do you not in our present system even then Hank have cause for a lawsuit let's say and a lawsuit not necessarily to simply enrich yourself but to actually pay attention to because you know part so I'll go back to the civil rights movement I mean if you were if you were an African-American in the 1930s and 40s how would you feel about the possibility of getting a fair shake in the United States you had decades and decades of slavery only ended by a civil war which was not begun ostensibly because of slavery and even the Emancipation Proclamation only freed slaves in the rebel states not the border states and then after reconstruction what happens a brief time of the most probably the guy who would have maybe bound the wounds was the guy who started the war a blink and that he gets assassinated and then you've got then you've got a lot of Jim Crow the a lot of how the civil rights movement triumphed was even though you had very disciplined marchers and Dr. King you had a fierce debate between some sides that said the white man's never going to let us go isn't that obvious they've had us here for decades and the much more patient um waspie side basically said we're going to patiently work through the courts we're going to have a movement that is we're not going to have mostly peaceful protests we're going to have completely peaceful protests we're going to train our people that when they get hit when you put dogs on them when you put fire hoses on them we are not going to hit back and this is how we're going to win and you know what they won and I think this is part of the conversation that we're having um okay so we've got a we've got we've got some we've got some things to do about sports I tend to think that um I tend to think that the xx and xy are going to continue to be segregated long term with respect to this um I have a degree of confidence that in the long run a lot of these things will be corrected because we see you know we see a lot of things go back and forth but um you know but this is really although I would agree with some of the things that you said paul there's a few things there one is the civil right a big part of the civil rights movement movement having success was the riots in the cities and martin luther king being killed so I mean those are factors that cannot be left out that's true um it was the good cop as opposed to the but there was also a bad cop yeah is I mean what uh sam was saying about the child sacrifice in my opinion the antidote to child sacrifice or the devaluing of children which is where a lot of this is going a lot of the elites don't value children children are burdens their responsibilities their work is preventing me from living my best life that's what's being taught so I kind of think an antidote towards that is for us to start valuing our children and the way that we ought to I mean like I have three kids I'm open to having more but the rest of the world is like are you out of your mind to have more than three kids you realize how much you're limiting yourself you should definitely have more I'll tell you that and so this is I mean our denomination is learning this lesson the hard way um it's like we don't value having kids anymore but it's also the case that um a big part of the difficulty we're having is because just read height um about we have in some ways valued our kids the wrong way so we have fewer kids and we lean into them and in a sense what a lot of people are saying was it was the better old days when mom and dad is like yeah go out there and come back when the street lights come on that was the rule when I was a kid so so this this value conversation is really difficult it's all about figuring out how to value them in the right way well yeah because and that's where we go to our biblical example of what doesn't mean to value our kids to teach them wisdom to not spare the rot you know and also ignore them a lot which is a way of child sacrifice I watch the football game I sacrifice attention to my child can't just try to get I rustle with that a lot how much do I work I don't make very much money you got the bears and how much fun is really watching the bears oh yeah go ahead thanks thanks to paul bring up a real sensitive subject there well at least eric rogers got traded so hot that's why people turn tune into us right as our hot takes on on football I I I think I think you still have to sort of figure in this the you know the the going back agent arena where is he talking you know he's not on his fox news platform when he says this stuff he's in a room full of elites he's an elite right and obviously there are different types of elites I get that you know but it's about you know your your your question paul about lawsuits for the trans um business right you know give it time well done right so I think that you know the elites have to be recalled to their responsibility for the rest of us and I really mean that I I'm I'm maybe overly comfortable with um the notion of an elite because I'm not one of them and you know we need our elites like I don't I like I hate college for instance right I think college is a big racket I think most of the institutions are hopelessly corrupt and it's an absolute waste of time and money and we're just sending our children into uh the ma of malik like I really do believe that or manman or both and um but I I know that in order for us to have a competent society we have to find some way in which to um make the best of us better and um sadly our elite institutions aren't up to that right they are making it worse not better um but we do need an elite right you know I was the other day I was thinking about that um that old tv show called lost and um you know if you recall you know you have this this this catastrophe right that that that that you know this breakup on the beach and everybody sort of scrambles around and if you remember the first episode it's actually it's a good it's a great great hour of television and you know right away jack the main guy um uh who we find out later on is a is a hopeless alcoholic right in in his real world right in the the comfortable arena of his he's a he's a hot mess right but in this moment of crisis he's a kind of natural elite who shows up and right away everybody looks to him what do we do what do we do and you know and as a kind of metaphor image for what we need like and and maybe uh tucker's creed of core here is that like we need you to stop wasting yourself sacrificing yourself to uh you know the god of the bottle and you need to sacrifice yourself to the god or the spirit of the community and what happens you know I tweeted out the other day like what happens you know we have made this sad mistake of not teaching our kids to love the country um and teaching your kids to love the country we used to call patriotism and now all patriotism has become conflated into jingoism right so there's no longer a distinction between those two things and you cannot go to you know a fancy college and and ever hear something positive about the country I mean that will have deep deep implications in the future right and it's always at that future thing it's always that future thing what are we doing now in anticipation of the future right so how long can you have a church sorry how long can you have a country when you teach your best to hate it how long can you have a church if you teach your best to hate it you know how long can you have a family if you teach your children to hate the family like I really do think that that is where we are um and the so so back back to tucker that's what I think the prayer is about that's why you know it's not about you know necessarily saying that like you know the the red team is is good and the blue team is evil um so much but that but that you know animating um you know like I'm a sacramentalist right I ultimately believe that that God and and and the spirits are working in and through us and you know the powers and principalities that we see all around us I mean this is you know even the greeks knew this right even the greeks knew that achilles fighting hector on the battlefield is not just about achilles and hector it's about zeus and hara and and you fill in the blank it's about it you know it's it's these it's this sort of multi-level thing going on and we have contented ourselves again maybe this goes back to something you also like to talk about paul which is sort of the flattening or the iron box of modernism right you know that tucker saying um you know it's evil it's malik it's child sacrifice and we should pray for 10 minutes of a day and 10 minutes of the day for our country is is an acknowledgement that modernism is not enough and you know that that's that you know you don't say those things I know I keep saying that but it's like I say that stuff because I'm a weirdo well he got fired and drears says drears says he got fired because rupert murdoch gets uncomfortable with all the religion talk it passes my snip test I mean I don't know the details of course right well part of part of why he got fired too was he was very critical in a deposition of his bosses and then the attorneys went during the during the discovery for fox saw all these nice text messages he had being very critical he has oppo file I mean it's in in-house oppo file stuff but I you know I still think that I don't here's the thing though is somebody who works for a larger company right who has sometimes concerns about management yeah you don't write the damn stuff down sure okay you don't send them to anyone because the minute you put it on a text message it's the minute that it's there forever even if you delete the text message yeah it's discoverable yeah I get it it's discoverable but but to go back to where where kale's from my dad was extremely patriotic you know he fought in the Korean War people that I know that come from this country from another country I mean my brother's girlfriend's from China his his wife passed away a few years ago and she's gone nuts with how successful she is and how her first kid's a doctor second kids and all that that and she goes if you guys don't want to take advantage of the wonderful wonders of this country I'll be happy to and I I've heard this from so many people who have come into this country who have been very successful and the problem is that we are fish that swim in the water and sometimes what happens to happen is you have to be put in a new fish tank you know you know what I don't like that fish tank too much can I go back in the other fish tank please and I think the other thing that we don't I read Douglas Murray's book war on the west in his last chapter was about from Roger Scruton gratitude and one of the things when I do my intentions every day is I I thank God for for specific things I'm grateful I'm great you know I I may have had a tough day yesterday but I'm grateful for today and for the opportunity to live today and the opportunity to interact with people today and the opportunity that I'm in a home that's warm when it's cold and cool when it's warm and I'm thankful for my family and so on and so forth and by having that and looking outside of yourself and having that gratitude it takes my eyes off of me and puts my eyes on dare I say dare I say Paul VanderKlay well because you feel grateful you're not me no my eyes hurt right now um okay um but the point is is that we don't have this gratitude okay we don't have this thankfulness and I think that Kayle you bring up something very important if I teach someone to hate something and they're malleable they're young they will grow up hating it or they will find out that what I was teaching them was wrong and they will grow up hating me right the bigger problem is not teaching them to hate things I think the problem for a lot of people is allowing other people to teach them to hate that um and not to so you know Kayle was talking about the elites then we kind of need elites to take responsibility but to a certain degree the elites are also reflecting what's happening on the lower levels on the lower levels we're not holding our leaders to responsibilities even the non-elite leaders um I have had a lot of problems with churches um and church leaderships not people in church leadership not doing what they're supposed to be doing and so I have to what do I do with that as one who has kids how do I show them yes these church leaders suck but not all of them do yeah and it was hard to find the church well I started a church and how do I start a church within a hierarchy that can hold me accountable and show them that there is the possibility and we should seek the possibility of good leadership whether that's us or whether we're encouraging other good leaders but we have to also hold those leaders accountable we have to praise good leaders and the good leaders that suck we have to be able to acknowledge that and try to remove them from leadership well I mean Kayle you're self-fortunate you uh exist in a denomination that allows you such recourse kayle I feel your pain oh well I I just want to say that if there are questions I got an earlier question um if there are questions I'm not gonna I've got a meeting at 12 30 so I'm not going to open it up and we're not going to do uh let everybody in and do stuff but if you have questions just um just type in big capital marks questions and we'll we'll try to get at them um right way early in the podcast I don't know if he's still here let me go to my start um got this question don't you realize that politics is idolatry Jesus wouldn't stump for either party if you went um if you went change if you want change go organize and do it yourself no government needed and then and then in 10 years it'll be called the government yeah you politics look you you have to do it I know nobody likes that you know that's like a non-fun thing to say but like politics this is how we like figure out how to get along with one another yeah you know it's jack jack on the island of lost like doing politics yeah as you take responsibility responsibility grows right that's right politics is necessary it's not idolatry but you can idolatry yeah yeah yeah yeah um I I also you know my argument is that you know when hank talks about getting into another fishbowl and I know pull out your bingo cards are going to mention my years in the Dominican Republic but boy I'll tell you if you live in a long time in another place in the world there are things I loved about the Dominican Republic I mean I could go up and I could pet the rhino I could get right up to the rhino in the zoo the baby white rhino I just pet that little sucker but who in America gets to pet a rhino I got to pet a rhino at the Santa Domingo Zoo that was a wonderful Republican name only I pet them all the time for the win but I you know I I actually look around and I compare what we've got going here to many other places and part of me says our system's pretty good you know we're having a lively debate it's working um and is it perfect no does it take you know even just the even just take a moment everybody was in moral panic when defund the police went through and I thought and ain't gonna last there is such a thing as truth there's such a thing as gravity I mean it can get ugly and things that get really twisted don't get me wrong it's not Pollyanna but um you know I I do praise God for a lot of what we have in this country and um I think you're right Kale to love your country and I think actually left and right tend to love their country in different ways when Obama says things like America is better than that that's a sort of weird lefty inverse patriotism but it really sort of patriotism so here's a question uh J email is focusing on this national level politics distracting us from working on local relationships with matter which matter way more than stuff you'll never ever affect change on so as I uh a couple days ago was sworn into my local school board I am now officially a publicly elected uh politician I guess of Cook County Illinois so wow Cook County God bless you yeah I can't trust me anything I ever say again I guess but um and this this sort of gets at my question I'm not quite sure exactly how I'm supposed to approach this position because I I can see the two path thing like you know I my town has a caucus which means you need to apply to the caucus the caucus slates candidates for the school board and they like win 99 percent of the time so there's like a funnel on the democracy and like I can get through because of my last name basically and get you know all that sort of thing but do I be the friendly slightly right leaning guy who occasionally tries to prod the school board in a fiscally responsible uh you know direction and you know but more or less goes along to get along or do I come fire breathing out against no we're not having a gay pride flag during in during the month of June nowhere on the premises of this school is will there will we fly a great a gay pride flag you know like because then like I could make some real enemies I could sacrifice some of the capital in my last name that I've inherited and would like to pass on to my children etc etc it's it's that same problem do I try to play in the elite game according to these left-leaning rules and hope to get a little bit of influence every once in a while or do I push back in a very substantial way and what are the pros and cons of either side I don't know that yet I just got sworn in on Tuesday well Sam first question is do you have a second do I have a second what when you make a motion in a government entity like you're on now you have to have a second yeah okay so as somebody who was elected for eight years the first thing you figure out is how to build coalitions and it's not easy but it can be done and I think the you're in a tough position because I never had to go through that when I was elected like a pride flag or some of the other stuff that you're going to go through on a school you know my thing was hey they're over bidding the swimming pool by a million dollars how do we try to get that thing back more practical blocking and tackling okay and so the first thing is if you don't have a second you can't bring it up anyway it actually doesn't get in the minutes literally it doesn't get in the minutes okay so you got to have a second all right now if you have a second and you have seven people on the board it's just you you five against two right now you got to start looking how do we chip away at some of the things yep let me tell you it's it's politics and I've been there and done it and I can tell you something I hate losing there's a lot of things I don't like but there's one thing I hate and that's losing so you figured out after you lost a few times how can how can I build coalitions and I did um now yeah you got to keep it brief I got more questions thank you okay so basically but Sam I appreciate what you're about to do this is uh you're going into the belly of the beast my friend all right this question is for kale and I think it's a leftover what thoughts does kale have on the legacy of harold bloom and his notion on the western cw would come with that that's that's right moe's old roommate so and perhaps especially what sorry perhaps especially with respect to the ongoing health and vitality of higher education yeah so um full disclosure big harold bloom fan um agree with him about half the time but what he stood for in his career uh his love of shakespeare his genuine love I mean real affection for the western canon um is um a model um and his erudition um was just so impressive and amazing I think his project was an utter failure I think the and no shade to him because I shared the project but the project is an utter failure uh the western canon has been essentially strip mined uh and decolonized out of um the world and I think it will be left up to weirdo people like me who are going to go on the internet and start teaching people old books for there to be any hope for that project to continue all right Chad the alcoholic asks what am I to do are there solutions I'll stop drinking uh that would be a good thing to do Chad um I'm kidding sorry Chad um solutions to what what do you think the question is I think it's just broad questions and I I I think you know oh oh okay I think I think solutions solutions involve um not giving up not falling into despair they involve virtue go to church what's that what's that boy then make your bed make your bed or as making new testament e look for the plank in your own eye yeah right right you know you know Papageo says you know go to church um clean your room uh you know love your children love your wife um uh sacrifice for what you know to be good and true and witness witness witness because we are Christ right I mean you know we we bring it to bear and it's on us so and I think Peugeot you know one of the things that Jonathan talks about which you always hear him talk about you have a hierarchy which means there are fringes and so I think just like with Sam dealing with a school board don't eliminate the fringes just just help help the organization to have a healthy structure and when you have center and fringes and the right kind of mobility for the different times within the hierarchy that's that's part of what really helps keep um keep systems healthy all right Manuel has a question if you cannot walk next to someone until they are saved do you still have the responsibility to show the evil of their ways before you part with them I'll say something about this quickly speaking or or sort of making a display or calling out evil is not necessarily helpful for people to see the evil within themselves that as a pastor you learn very quickly is if you if you really want to sort of break through if you really want to colonize a person in that sense tell a story it's a tell a story it's it's love it's love it's it's giving yourself to the relationship and walking with them now that now one of you know one of the things I often post is uh Tim Keller's quote which he gets from Jonathan Edwards in terms of diverse excellencies Jesus was the master of this you can see it in the gospels there are times that he's he's so bold and announcing that we think that's not responsible and then there's times that he's so winsome that we think that's not responsible and the whole game is to figure out when where and how both of those measures actually need to be done so that you achieve your goal there's my model you have to model model what you want to see model trying to be good model striving model an acknowledgement of when you suck um you have to model all you can't just call out evil but you have to do your best to live righteously and admit when you're not yeah and model being the sort of person who's open to feedback that you that your friends know that if they have something that they would like to tell you that they think you're doing wrong that you would listen yeah and I I think one of the reasons why I like or love teaching stories is that stories really provide you with this sort of third interloper that you can kind of you can talk about the reason why I said tell a story is that you know if I'm on it in a sort of explicitly counseling type relationship that's one thing but if I am walking with someone you know I always think of um you know the road to Emmaus and you know the the the the cloaked Jesus the non-disclosed Jesus is is walking with them they're literally all heading kind of in the same direction they're sort of talking how can you not know what just happened and and all of that and so you sort of pick those moments for revelation now of course we're not Jesus in quite that same way but um I think walk with them you know and and the same now you know as a Catholic of course I'm you know the saved thing is is a little bit more tricky and long you know time release um than it is maybe for some of my evangelical friends it kale's idea here is really cool because if you really read the road to Emmaus the people that are walking to Emmaus are walking the wrong way that's right away from the resurrected Jesus walking away from Jerusalem not to Jerusalem and Jesus is walking with them maybe they're walking to Rome well no hold on Paul right way all roads all right question from from pic um how do you see the relation of this little corner to more fringe aspects of the political arena anyone I think an interesting thing about this little corner is that it seems to attract people a lot of people who in many cases would be capable of some level of elitism that are some will at some way frustrated because they don't want to or can't go to in that direction and that it's it's the basket of misfit toys thing and I think that but how do we deal with you know fringy ideas that do you know come up on discord or from other people and stuff like that I think that the goal is that we're trying to demonstrate a way to listen and be listened to that helps orient in some better true direction I don't know and and I'd have to say uh Claire who um if you if you you have to be innocent willies and serpents and innocents and doves and if you write Joey a thing like this he will silence you just for the fun of it I just you just have to learn that about Joey um it's just not gonna go all right another another question um here here it is from David I'm just okay well it can be fun to call abortion child sacrifice what is the Christian path to redemption of such a thing well let's let's maybe talk a little bit about why there's for the for these issues that we're dealing with abortion transgender and the christian reform church same-sex marriage there's a reason that we're having these kinds of debates because they are difficult debates um you know in some ways issues like this compared to so so let's uh let's be fair to the Quranists among us you know to love to come in and say well the answer to all of this is is is clear laws rigidly enforced right and what I think the west has seen over a long period of time is that what we're really looking for are certain kinds of outcomes and flourishing and there's going to be an interplay of law and liberty hopefully that pursues it and um and so I mean the the abort I was I was quite happy to see to the chagrin of some people to the left of me politically I said good the states are going to start playing with abortion again we're going to learn some things in this and we are yeah um and you know and I would mention to people regularly look at european abortion laws compared to american and canadian abortion laws downright conservative I mean you know so um actually there I think in many of these in many of these debates there's there's gonna be time and I think also part of individualism has some enormous benefits to it but part of the part of the liability of individualism is it doesn't appreciate what let's say some traditions like roman catholicism appreciate which is that many of the things we're dealing with are two three four five generation games and we usually think we want this wrapped up by the next news cycle which is tomorrow and so in a long period you know we're we're working through these issues abortion has been a very complex issue for a very long time long before roe v wade and you know I pray we make progress with it what I think is helpful also within the christian sphere is for example my mother has had abortions and this is before she became christian but what coming to shoot for the longest for years years and years after she had the abortions she felt very guilty not necessarily anybody she wasn't really in a religious sphere but she felt something awful and part of that comes from our culture um the latino culture which values kids that she destroyed but when she became christian it gave a name for that shame that she felt so now she can realize yes I did something awful and evil and now I can name it and now I can embrace forgiveness for that sin yeah I remember Chesterton says something about that I remember reading it as a kid and really not understanding it you know but that that the good news is that there's a reason why we're such a mess right like and I and I appreciate that now certainly as an adult it's like like you said mo it's like it's I have language I have I have a mechanism I have a meaning frame with which to make sense out of this thing that in large part I'm sure your mother would say that she was largely acting unconsciously almost right subject to forces uh being confounded by the you know whatever was going on right so that's a that's a fascinating insight you know we can have a lot of discussions about the the pluses and minuses of sort of a a progressive eschatology that I think some might argue is is at least a a consequence of Christianity but I think part of what it does afford us is the the understanding that um we we can in many things hopefully make progress now I don't think progress is always that linear and always in one direction I think there's always sort of a moving back and forth with many of these things but I I think overall we that's a western thing right paul right I'm just sorry to butt in here but like that's really a western conception of taking the Christian eschaton and and making that an imminent frame reality yeah it is it is and you see that with the orthodox that there there's definitely I mean Peugeot is much more talking sort of static often right patterns right right and and I think that is so difficult for us westerners certainly post-enlightenment Christian westerners to sort of escape what you know that lab leak right you know what what what Hegel and and Freud I sorry Hegel and Marx etc do to make that happen because it's almost impossible to sort of disambiguate those things but but I think I think we do I'm an inveterate optimist anybody watches my channel knows how to optimistic sunny guy I am I'm always looking at the bright side of things I inherited from my father it's probably a function of my biology but I do think that we which is a gift from God which is a gift from God it's a gift to me maybe it's a pain for the rest of you but no we like you Paul but seriously I mean like in other words like that's that's your nested reality that you embody like that's a real thing it's not a joke yeah so I so I I praise God for for you know what is what has happened I'm optimistic um I'm optimistic about about even what we're struggling through now I know it's scary I know it's frightening but um you know I I think I think Tucker Carlson getting fired from Fox is probably to Tucker Carlson's blessing and although Kelley when I listen to you I think yeah he's he's off TV yet when I listen to he had three million views a night I think doesn't Joe Rogan have more than that and um so I don't know I don't know there's so and there's so much we don't know I'm also that this skeptical side of me which is when when you read history so often and this is what I love from Tucker Carlson's second speech that when you read history so often so much of this 24 hour news cycle stuff just noise it's just noise and um and there's so much more okay closing thoughts we've got a couple minutes yet everybody gets a time on the stage for their their final comments who wants to go first nobody I don't mind going first um I saw a couple people saying in the comments that I shouldn't speak for my mother um they're as wrong as ever can be I don't speak for my mother in the sense of I am her mouthpiece but I speak what my mother has taught me and the most important lessons that she feels that she taught me and my mother is also one that has been crapped on by the system and has been not allowed to speak by those who would claim to want to lift her up which is why for some reason my mother as a former Black Panther Party attender was also a very big Trump supporter um and she is probably one of the people in my life that I would say is the wisest and has taught me the most about who I ought to be in life in in light of Christ I you know just to just a quick response so you know I you know again I Patterson, New Jersey, Dominican Republic drink so so many so many young people have just not met enough other people and people like Moe's mom I've met women like her and in my church too you know people like African-Americans it's like really ah which one right people they're all over the map so every time we sort of cluster them together in these demographics in these you know Pacific Rim wars it's like that's I don't believe you all right who's next come on Hank you got a speech you got a rabble rousing speech for us what do you want to leave us on Hank I just love you man um oh come on you were the hard guy now you're going all soft on us Hank well I'm I'm very nuanced Paul I I appreciated this this is a diverse perspective I think we should get the five horsemen of the apocalypse together again in another quarter the the you know the the old sages and the young bucks and I think they I'm going to say um hey contains multitudes that's correct um I think one of the things that has helped me with Sam and with the Catholic Church is studying the Church Fathers and giving me a broader perspective of not getting so excited about the now and I would just indicate to everyone that one of the I said this to Paul Paul on your last live stream I said you know your live stream is like my Twitter except I hit the mute button sometimes hitting the mute button isn't a bad thing with people that are not helpful okay because what it does is you get enraged and you want to interact and you know what the interaction is going nowhere um and so we need to look at a long-term view I like what Paul said about the Catholic Church Catholic Church is looking much to sometimes Kale and my pain that we feel the Catholic Church moves too slow on stuff I'm still wondering why it's not moving on the German synod like I think it ought to okay but sometimes you have to trust the process and I want to trust the process we do need the elite the problem is that sometimes there needs to be consequences and I think that when people start feeling some consequences of losing their positions of authority you know I think Hillary Clinton was the most surprised person in 2016 she lost to Donald Trump she earned it it just didn't happen she didn't do her job I mean read the books where her husband said you need to go to Wisconsin and Michigan and she completely ignored the guy who knew how to win races um yeah you know what sometimes I need to listen to Mo or Sam or Paul or Kale or other people to gain their wisdom because wisdom doesn't reside just upon my brow Hank it's the Hillary Clinton of this conversation I love it will Kale will will Kale come to Chino I got no money man oh I think a collection would go fund me no no no no I Kale I can fly out Kale I can I got I gotta figure out a way to pay for tuition starting in 17 days so no um like really yeah it's getting kind of hot over here so um so my my parting bit if you don't mind Paul I'm gonna try to make this snappy um Malik and Mammon are real and we I can never forget that and I don't know how to live with that true thing and figure out a way to act in the world and I I don't think that you can negotiate with Malik like there's no detente with Malik and I know that behind the behind the behind the behind the behind is ultimately there are malevolent principalities and powers that um um are are are hell bent I mean sorry hell bent on on eating my children and and not just my children I have three beautiful children that I care deeply about but the children that I teach and the children that I see all around me and um I don't know then like so what I can't square is like I know that I'm need to figure out how to live with people so to your point Paul like I know that that liberalism uh has sort of afforded us a technology with which to sort of get along but at the end of the day I know that I can't you know pass a bill joint sponsored by me and Malik and and therefore I feel like I'm in a little bit of a conundrum uh as to what to counsel and and how to live so it's I don't know it's an I don't know closer all right all right and the Unitarian gets the final word um child sacrifice is evil but it's also child sacrifice that saved the world and so perhaps child sacrifice is so evil because it's just a hair away from the most beautiful thing that ever happened and I think that no one did a better job other than the New Testament of writing about this than jk rauling I think that Harry Potter is basically jk rauling trying to understand how God's sacrifice of his son was justified and you can see that in Dumbledore trying to figure out how it's okay for him to basically use Harry Potter to die I dare you in order to say the world but and so let's go gentlemen hour three let's do this man I'm all all right last thing perhaps what the idw tried to do or this little corner or whatever is where the the right renegades who have left the elite game and are building our own game but there's a surprising number of people on the left who find this game more compelling too jk rauling might be an interesting example on her way towards redpilling or whatever and maybe that's the way that this gets won is that we offer a different game for the elites to play that proves more compelling and offer a better story a more fun game to play where pinks at where the rats on the losing side do get to win enough percentage of the time as Jordan Peterson would say yeah and that's how you take down the false game is by offering a better game that even the other side likes better that's a that's a good thing that's a good thing so will jk rolling come to chino will jk rolling camp in chino boy for all of our tickets well thank you all this has this this did definitely did not disappoint I enjoyed this immensely and thank all of you over in the comment section and in the in the live chat which yeah its quality is suspect we we talked about that at the last live stream but we will see the we will see the more considered fruits of your reflection in the comment section that's right that's right that's right all right so thank you all gentlemen god speed everyone be well all right gentlemen take care all right