https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=i5l77coekx4

 Hi, this is Paul. This is a rare midday video just sort of in the stream. I have a my video tomorrow. I'm going to look at a conversation with Andrea and David Fuller about the rise and fall of Jordan Peterson in the IDW so that'll be released tomorrow morning at the normal time. But I was reading through comments and Bill Timmons comment really struck me. You know, Bill obviously been around for a while and, you know, watching Jordan Peterson and John Verbecky innocently dialogue but then becoming soap opera intellectual porn for others seems out of place to me. Why is this channel's theology drifting across the board to fit with Jordan Peterson and John Verbecky isms? Can one be so intelligent that they actually miss God's voice? I don't know that it's a matter of intelligence. See, that's a really tricky question for a Calvinist. Missing God's voice because we clearly do and a certain read of Calvinism is that God's voice can't be missed. It's overwhelming and there's truth in that too. But what in between? And actually, you know, I love this channel. I just have concerns and I really appreciate voices for this. Now, this is a really tricky thing in a YouTube comment section because there are a lot of different theologies out there and I actually thought this was a really important comment because, again, and in tomorrow's video I'll talk a lot about this too, the propositional versus the three other P's. The procedural, the participatory. I was consistently getting all four in my video. This is the procedural, the participatory, the perspectival, the connoisseur and sabbat in Spanish. I think as part of getting over the overreach of modernity, there's just sort of a communal beat down on propositional and, of course, that then feeds a food fight between the modernists and the done with modernism. I'm gonna use postmodern. I'm gonna use done with modernism. The done with modernism crowd because the, you know, the propositional, modernity and the propositional are deeply intertwined and I was thinking about this and thinking about what I find so often, I guess probably because I'm so high in openness, so annoying about so much church stuff is that there's so much repetition of the propositional and there's so much clenching about the propositional and the propositional is repeated again and again and again and again sort of like a mantra. And well why do we do that? Well I think part of the reason we do that is we're afraid of drift and so, you know, drift is something to concern with because the reality of drift is you don't know when you're doing it. I've used this illustration before when I was a kid we'd go to the Jersey Shore and I would be swimming in the ocean and my mom would be sitting on a blanket and every now and then my mom would stand up and say get over here, get over there and I'm like I didn't I didn't move this way at all but my mom's like yeah you did because she's the fixed point on the beach and what there was in the ocean was a current and so what I would do as a kid when I would swim in the ocean the fun of swimming in the ocean was always riding the waves up and down. Well I always thought I was going like this but the current of course every time I stand up and set down I'm in a slightly different place and you don't realize it unless you have a fixed point. Now the propositional, the point of the propositional is that it seems to afford fixed points. My frustration with the propositional is it's never quite as fixed as everything else because everything is moving but not everything is moving. What's the one thing that doesn't move? The God who does not change and you know I'd so often hear that in conservative churches. Our God does not change therefore we don't either but it's like well then you sort of are fudging on your your total depravity because part of the total depravity is that you're never getting it right and so if you're never getting it right and you're actually moving towards God that means you should be improving. Well how do you know if you're improving? Well you're looking for fixed points and the point of modernity is that the propositional offers fixed points. The difficulty of humanity is that we're not good at fixed points. We don't we really struggle with fixed points. Okay so in a way pre-Protestant Reformation the church would say we're the fixed point. Martin Luther's like a little skeptical. The Swiss Reformers like I'm really skeptical. Why? Because if you're a fixed point it would be matching up better and so what happens in Protestantism is that well the Bible is our fixed point and part of what's been so devastating to Protestantism I think Roman Catholics have had their own devastations for some other reasons. Well I think the priest scandal is the is what is what so severely attacks the fixed point ism of Roman Catholic Churchism that the church is the fixed point and then you have pedophile priests so well in Protestantism the the devastating attack has been well as societal morality continues to change and as an American society people believe soul-searching Christian Smith people believe that that morality is a fixed point because it's self-evident well obviously and they go go on to state their own morality that's their fixed point but it's it's really an internalized it's sort of a naive experientialism that is their moral compass they always know what's moral and but but nobody else does so now you're you've got the same problem with Protestantism but it's multiplied because at least with Protestants there's words in a book and well but then the problem with Protestantism was well we no longer believe that book and so then you have your falling away so you know the problem the problem with you know drifting and orthodoxy is is that in in order for even your own orthodoxy which says we should be continuing to make movement towards God which means improvement and you know in the Peterson-Pageot talk I mean an ideal sort of by definition is all about movement towards that ideal we've got deep skepticism about most of the candidates right now is it the church well there's skepticism about the church that happened in the Protestant Reformation how about the Bible there's skepticism about the Bible well then what you got left well science well which science and so of course science is an attempt at empiricism from constants in the natural order and predictability but again you've got the problem of the fact value distinction where facts won't give you values values are in the manifest image not the scientific image so you know so yeah proposition takes a beating now as done with modernity is rising and the IDW which I'll talk about in tomorrow's video the IDW is sort of no we can't be done with modernity enlightenment always forever it's not gonna work not gonna work so I just wanted to respond to Bill's comment and just express appreciation and and again partly for me even though Calvinists can be known to be as dogmatic as anyone I think part of what what Calvinism affords is once again my connection with God is not dependent on the strength of my grasp but the strength of his grip now that's it's obviously a highly gentified God that's Christianity God number one and God number two and trying to keep the agent and the arena together while still not losing the distinction between them that's the challenge so yeah so you know I part of the reason I read the comments is drift but you know well yeah we're all surfing on those waves baby and looking for those fixed points and of course I'm a Protestant and so fixed point continues to be you know the Bible is the Word of God and churches are variable of course with Orthodoxy and Roman Catholicism church is the fixed point in the Bible is but I see I'm not sure how much of an improvement that is because when you've got people seriously asking is the Pope Catholic well you got a church problem and and we've had pluralism with respect to church right from the beginning and you know in my Sunday work I'm you know in the Apostle Paul I'm really excited about that project I I've sort of avoided the Apostle Paul for a very long time probably because of dogmatism and so since I'm high in openness I don't like being hemmed in but I know I need to be hemmed in because you know again I read on one hand at the beginning of Galatians Paul says you know I didn't receive this stuff from other Apostles I received it from Christ directly okay so there's your fixed point but then when he writes in 1st Corinthians 15 he says I went to Jerusalem because I wanted to make sure I wasn't running in vain okay well how do we tell we tell by talking to each other and so that's what we're doing we're telling by talking to each other and and we read the comments and we we listen to each other and we we find out if we're doing right and so you know this is I'm still a Protestant I still keep going back to the Bible but I'm also a magisterial Protestant so I I keep checking church and I'm also you know I keep checking you all and read the comments and learn from you and all of that so drift is always a problem but you also can't not drift because if you're not drifting then you're probably not making progress towards your God and you know perhaps an Orthodox Christian would say no you can't because you've got theosis so you need progress to Christianity is is a progressive religion and that progressivism is for us as individuals and for us as a community so so thanks Bill for the comment I appreciate it and yeah again I continue so I'm gonna talk in tomorrow's video about scale which is a really big issue but and and it may come that the the channel gets too big that I can't read the comments but reading the comments is really important and even if I don't always heart them or I don't always leave a comment I do try to read most of the comments at least the first and second level of comments if y'all start this big conversation drilling down in something I probably won't go all the way to the bottom of it but I continue to grow from the comment section and read them and yeah so thanks for the comment