https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=qvWHODDj4jQ

 This is part two of working on Jordan Peterson's part four of his Easter series. And in part one we looked at just briefly part one of his Easter video where he talks about the main difference between, let's say, Peterson's perspective that the world is a platform for action versus the world is a space for objects. And I walked through in part one the history of religious authority and texts. I start all the way back with John Walton and how texts derived authority and how in the period of the Israelite monarchy there's authority was found via sacrifice, centralized sacrifice in the temple versus sacrifice on the high places. And then with the destruction of the temple, how the text became the center of the religious community and especially the destruction of the second temple in 70 AD in Jerusalem, how both in synagogue worship and Christian worship the text becomes the focal point. Now actually in Christianity Jesus becomes the umbilical between heaven and earth. And in Judaism the text is in a sense the umbilical between heaven and earth. And then we talked about the patristic period, the fall of the Roman Empire, the Protestant Reformation at the height of the late Middle Ages, and then the religious wars after the Reformation, the Enlightenment, how that comes into American culture, and what that means for Jordan Peterson and where Jordan Peterson then fits into that. We're going to continue with that and we're going to continue now on the second part which is a very short one and has these tiny little axioms. So in the first part he talks about the divided world and Peterson basically says, okay, I think the world, I think it's more faithful to describe the world as a form for action than a space for objects. And in the second part he's going to list some of his axioms that he derives from the Bible that are foundational for his religion. Now if you remember I began in part one with this piece from the Lafayette College question, what is religion? And actually if you go back and you watch that first piece in part one or listen to it if you're listening to the audible version of the podcast, Peterson in that answer to the question, what is religion, really nicely in a nutshell puts a lot of this stuff and we're essentially unpacking it. So let's take a look at some axioms. Well then he ends with the revolution and he says if the world is a form for action then kind of story A is you go between where you are and what you want. Story B is kind of the hero's journey. Chaos comes into it and then there's in a sense death and resurrection and we emerge into a new reality. Remember this whole five part thing is about the Christian crucifixion, really incarnation crucifixion resurrection. So let's take a look at these eight axioms he has in part two. Did I not put in the link? Let's see. No I didn't. I guess I'll, oh I think I've still got it queued up in the browser so I can just go with that. Yeah here we go. Part two, some axioms of the Christian revolutionary story. Number one, to decide that. Well actually let's back up a little bit so we can go back and hear this because it helps. The normal story. I was at point A and I was going to point B and the revolutionary story. I was at point A and while going to point B something entirely unexpected and earth shattering happened. This meant I had to abandon my story, question my assumptions, allow my old beliefs to die and be reborn anew. The second story which is deeper is essentially religious. Part two, some axioms of the Christian revolutionary story. And the volume drops here so sorry. Number one, to decide that and then enact the proposition that being is good despite its tragedy and malevolence. Number two, to work in consequence for the continual and eternal improvement of that being and to know that as love. Number three, to do such work in truth. Number four, to let everything inadequate burn off in that pursuit and to welcome its replacement by what is better. Now before I have them continue for those of you listening to the audio version, being is capitalized and that's important. So in the first proposition to decide that and then enact the proposition that being, capital B is good, capital G. Those capitals are important. Point two, to work in consequence for the continual and eternal improvement, eternal is a funny word, boy, eternal improvement of that being. Now I'm going to get into this word being again, capital B and to know that as love, capital L. To do such work, point three, in truth, capital T. These capitals are important and we'll get into that in a minute. Number five, to know that as the sacred imitation of Christ. Imitation is capitalized. Number six, to understand that although Christ's sacrifice redeemed us all, the work still has to be done. Number seven, to accept that work as the sacred meaning of life. Meaning and life are both capitalized. Number eight, to strive toward the heavenly city on the hill in that manner. Heavenly is capitalized, city is capitalized and hill is capitalized. And again, if you watched two videos ago when I talk about city on a hill, this is important because when you get into one of the articulations of what Peterson thinks is central admonition, is in a sense to pick up your cross and strive up to that city on a hill. And we're going to get there at the end of this treatment. Okay. So like I said, point two is very brief. It's very short. Now, a person, I get a lot of interesting emails from folks and I have little email conversations with folks and there's a lot of things that go on in Reddit that I'm not a big Reddit user, but Reddit's a good source of some information. And this piece gave me a heads up I noticed on early on when I started listening to Peterson, his use of the word being and then in some written text, be with a capital B. And someone on Reddit pulls up photographs, this paragraph that says, I use the term being with a capital B in part because of my exposure to the ideas of the 20th century German philosopher Martin Heidegger. This is, I don't know, is this from Maps of Meaning? I'm not sure. Heidegger tries to distinguish between reality as conceived objectively and the totality of human experience, which is his being with a capital B. Being with a capital B is what each of us experiences. And this in fact is, you know, when I listen to Peterson, what I hear him saying, which each of us experiences, subjectively, personally, and individually, as well as what we each experience jointly with others. As such, it includes emotions, drives, dreams, visions, and revelations, as well as our own private thoughts and perceptions. Being, capital B, is also finally something that is brought into existence by action. And so its nature is, to an indeterminate degree, a consequence of our decisions and choices, something shaped by our hypothetical free will. Something, excuse me, something shaped by our hypothetically free will. That's interesting too. Construed in this manner, being is one, not simply easily or directly reducible to the material and objective, and two, something that is most definitely required of its own, required, something that most definitely requires its own term, as Heidegger labors for decades to indicate. And so being, again, for Peterson, is important. The quick to listen podcast, the guy from the Gospel Coalition in Canada notes that as well, being with a capital B. Okay, and then let's get into, so these eight axioms he has are, you can't understand them apart from the Christian story, let's say. So remember, the first part is the business about, first about reality is a form for action more than a space for objects. The second part, he has these axioms where he's got these elements of the Christian story. He brings in Heidegger here in terms of being as this thing that we experience where everything comes into being, but it's not just our experience, it's being, capital B. And then he goes into narratives and sacrifice. And I treated this quite extensively in, it was, I guess, four videos, where Jordan Peterson and the history of the Christian God, and then the two other videos about sacrifice, including the, I didn't have Jordan Peterson's name in the third one, but it's very much part of the same conversation, the sacrifice and the symbolism of the Bible. Now in this Peterson, in part three, Peterson really connects sacrifice, future, social contract, these are all connected, and I summarized some of this in the beginning of the first part of this video. We discover God when we bargain with the future and it works, and in some senses, as I said in my previous video, this is in some ways Jordan Peterson's argument for the existence of God in quotation marks, that whatever the ontological existence of God, God is a part of human community and human culture inseparably so that Matt DellaHunti cannot just exercise God from the world by saying, I don't believe he exists and I don't find any evidence for him. And this is a big part of Peterson's complaint against the atheist, the celebrity atheist. So Peterson says we discover God when we bargain with the future and it works, because the future is filled with other human beings, he mentions, and if you lose God, in quotation marks again, you might lose the future and your ability to bargain with it. And this is something that I think we have to keep in mind as we continue to talk about how multi-layered the resurrection is. And then his last admonition is of course, do what is meaningful, not expedient. So let's play a little bit of this because he goes into the bigger the sacrifice, the bigger the potential gain, and this is where his open agnosticism comes in, in terms of how big of a gain might it be, because of course with Jesus, this is the biggest gain possible. What's beyond that? What pertains more closely to the whole person rather than to the part? What constitutes the ultimate sacrifice for the gain of the ultimate prize? It's a close race between child and self. The sacrifice of the mother offering her child to the world is exemplified profoundly by Michelangelo's great sculpture, the paeda. Michelangelo crafted Mary cradling the nearly naked body of her adult son, crucified and ruined. It's her fault. It was through her that he entered the world and its great drama of being. Is it right to bring a baby into this terrible world? Every woman asks herself that question. Some say no, and they have the reasons. Mary answers yes, voluntarily, knowing full well what's to come, as do all mothers if they allow themselves to see. It's an act of supreme courage when it's undertaken voluntarily. In turn, Mary's son Christ offers himself to God and the world to betrayal, torture and death, to the very point of despair on the cross where he cries out those terrible words from Matthew 27, 46. My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me? That is the archetypal story of the man who gives his all for the sake of the better, who offers up his life for the advancement of being, who allows God's will to become manifest fully within the con. How do pastors really spend their time? Unplugging toilets. Let's continue. ...of a single mortal life. That is the model for the honourable man. In Christ's case, however, as he sacrifices himself, God, his father, is simultaneously sacrificing his son. It is for this reason that the Christian sacrificial drama of son and self is archetypal. It's a story at the limit where nothing more extreme, nothing greater, can be imagined. That's the very definition of archetypal. And that's the core of what constitutes religious. Pain and suffering define the world. Of that, there can be no doubt. Sacrifice can hold pain and suffering in abeyance to a greater or lesser degree. And greater sacrifices can do that more effectively than lesser. Of that, there can be no doubt. Everyone holds this knowledge in their souls. Thus, the person who wishes to alleviate suffering, who wishes to rectify the flaws in being, who wants to bring about the best of all possible futures, who wants to create heaven on earth, will make the greatest of sacrifices of self and of child, of everything that is loved, to live a life aimed at the good. He will forego expediency. He will pursue the path of ultimate meaning. And he will, in that manner, bring salvation to the ever desperate world. Part Four. So, the bigger the sacrifice, the bigger the salvation. And so, if Jesus is the archetypal sacrifice, well, it must be the archetypal salvation. But now we're going to get into Part Four with video and text. And this obviously is the destination for this. Now what's interesting is he takes a, he puts on a little Wikipedia front end to talk about the Ark of the Covenant to give a little bit of background information for people who might not know about the Bible. And then he jumps into an edited version of what's on his blog. And so I've got the link here. And I'll just let that play. And we'll, I'll follow along a little bit on the, on the blog. On the Ark of the Covenant, the Cathedral, and the Cross. Eastern Message One. Abridged from Wikipedia. The Ark of the Covenant was a lidded, gold-leafed wooden chest containing the two stone tablets of the Ten Commandments. According to various texts within the Hebrew Bible, it also contained Aaron's rod and a pot of manna. God was said to have spoken with Moses from between the two cherubim on the Ark's cover. The biblical account states that the Ark was created a year after the Israelite exodus from Egypt, according to a pattern given to Moses by God at the foot of Mount Sinai. Thereafter, the gold-plated acacia chest was carried by its staves while en route by the Levites in advance of the people when on the march towards the promised land or at the head of the Israelite army. In transport, the Ark was concealed under a large veil made of skins and blue cloth, carefully hidden even from the eyes of the priests and the Levites who carried it. When at rest, a portable building, the tabernacle, meaning residence or dwelling place, was set up to house the Ark. It was built of woven layers of curtains along with 48 boards clad with polished gold standing like vertical blinds. Solomon's temple in Jerusalem superseded it as the dwelling place of God some 300 years later. Commentary. There has to be a bridge between the finite and the infinite. There has to be a place where the ephemeral meets the eternal. There has to be a bridge between the knowable and the unknowable. And there has to be bedrock at the foundation. The Ark, which is the portal to God, is to be carried on the shoulders of those who are holy. It is not to be touched. To touch the Ark is to risk death. There are holy things that cannot be touched except at mortal risk. Those things that cannot be touched are at the very foundation of the community. The Ark must be placed at the centre of the temple. The temple must be placed at the centre of the community. The community must be arranged around what is untouchable and unshakable. The untouchable and unshakable is what is axiomatic. The people following the Ark have determined to journey together toward the eternal promised land. The city arranged properly around the Ark of the Covenant is eternal Jerusalem. One thing must be axiomatic or everything shakes and falls. The axiomatic cannot be expressed fully in words. Instead the axiomatic, untouchable and unshakable, is what makes communication in words possible. The axiomatic is a spirit, a process, a living force. Its manifestations, however, are concrete. That is the transformation of the spirit into matter. That is the generation of the tablets of stone. The Ark of the Covenant contains the rules that are derived in the first order from the axiomatic principle. That principle is the spirit that made the rules manifest. That spirit is the ultimate inhabitant of the Ark and the rules the result of its action. The spirit is the creative logos. The Ark of the Covenant and the Temple are replaced by the Cathedral at the center of the community. The Cathedral is the cross in architectural form. The cross is where the transformation takes place. The transformation is the incorporation of the Body of Christ. That incorporation... Oh no no no no no. Nuts. Control tab, how could you let me down? Oh, refresh. Control tab. What's beyond that? What pertains more closely to the whole person... Toilets resolved. ...rather than to the part. What constitutes the ultimate sacrifice for the gain of the ultimate sacrifice... Oh no, this isn't where we need to be. It's a close and abeyant gold leaf knuckle that has to be bedrock at the foundation. The Ark, which is the portal to God, is to be carried on the shoulders of those who are holy. It is not to be touched. To touch the Ark is to risk death. There are holy things that cannot be touched except at mortal risk. Those things that cannot be touched are at the very foundation of the community. The Ark must be placed at the center of the Temple. The Temple must be placed at the center of the community. The community must be arranged around what is untouchable and unshakable. The untouchable and unshakable is what is axiomatic. The people following the Ark have determined to journey together toward the eternal promised land. The city arranged properly around the Ark of the Covenant is eternal Jerusalem. Something must be axiomatic or everything shakes and falls. The axiomatic cannot be expressed fully in words. Instead the axiomatic, untouchable and unshakable, is what makes communication in words possible. The axiomatic is a spirit, a process, a living force. Its manifestations, however, are concrete. That is the transformation of the spirit into matter. That is the generation of the tablets of stone. The Ark of the Covenant contains the rules that are derived in the first order from the axiomatic principle. That principle is the spirit that made the rules manifest. That spirit is the ultimate inhabitant of the Ark and the rules the result of its action. That spirit is the creative logos. The Ark of the Covenant and the Temple are replaced by the Cathedral at the centre of the community. The Cathedral is the cross in architectural form. The cross is where the transformation takes place. The transformation is the incorporation of the body of Christ. That incorporation is a dramatic ritual, is the embodiment of the decision not to believe in Christ, but to act him out, which is to believe in a much deeper manner than to merely believe. Christ is he who transcends death by voluntarily accepting death. Christ is he who rejects the kingdoms of this world for the kingdom of God. Christ is he who speaks the truth that creates the habitable order that is good from the chaos of potential that exists prior to the materialization of reality. Christ is he who wields potential as the sword that cleaves death. Christ is he whose radical acceptance of the conditions of life defeats the hatred, bitterness and vengefulness that the tragedy and malevolence that taints being otherwise produces. Without the acceptance of death, bitterness rules and hell triumphs. Christ is the potential of man and woman. It is said that man and woman alike are made in the image of God and that God is he who uses the eternal logos to generate habitable order from the chaos of potential. This is the axiom. This is the diamond at the centre of the world. This is the spirit in the ark that is untouchable. This is the bedrock of the culture that brings peace and prosperity and that respects the dignity of man. This is the great truth. This is the responsibility whose acceptance allows each of us to live despite the catastrophic fragility of our limited being. Our likeness to God gives each of us a value that transcends the finite. People and society alike are charged with the ethical demand to respect that value. This is not only the presumption that grounds the idea of the rights of man. It is the presumption that lays upon each of us the ultimate responsibility that is the inevitable corollary of those rights. Face the chaos of the future. Employ the logos of which you are a part to transform that chaos into the habitable order that is good. Speak the truth. Embody the truth. Accept impossibly the limitations that make being possible. Dispense in that manner with resentment, hatred and the desire for infinite and unbounded vengeance and all the cruelty and evil that accompanies it. Pick up the cross of your tragedy and betrayal. Accept its terrible weight. Hoist it onto your shoulders and struggle impossibly upward toward the kingdom of God on the hill. The alternative is death and hell. Part 5. Okay. Now, as I said in part one of this video, there's a difference between the eye and the ear. The ear is a creature of consciousness. You hear things in a moment. The ear needs memory to try to construct an enduring objective or monarchical vision. The ear needs memory in order to see. It is subject to snapshots that actually allow moments to imprint deeply. And if you hear something, sometimes that will trigger your watchers or your listeners in that case and it'll imprint it deeply just in that moment because moments have that kind of integrating power. But seeing a text is a different reality. And as I said early in the first part of this video, where sometimes like this morning I was listening to the book of second Kings and I was listening to the entire book all at once. I can do that with my ears in a way that's harder for me to do with my eyes. Part of it's because of my dyslexia. Part of it is I think probably my dyslexia and my auditory powers are connected. I probably compensate for my learning disability in terms of visual processing with auditory processing. When I learned the violin in first grade, I learned in the Suzuki method. I think probably all of that just cemented auditory as a very powerful thing for me. Reading something, what I do in my job when I deal with texts, to look at something, to look at a text and to listen to the text are two different things even if the text is the same and they have two different powers. I was doing some reflection yesterday on depression consciousness and I'm thinking about doing a video on depression. So the eye can scan the text as a whole and find patterns that it isn't terribly easy for the ears because the ears have to involve memory and all of us in our contemporary period, I think our memories are disabled in some ways by all of the other power that we have to outsource text into reading, text into recording, so on and so forth. One of the things that this triggered in me was all of this talk about the axiomatic and we began with this video and maybe it's a good idea to play it again and here, let's see where we get to, this young man, I don't remember where we left off. Thank you for being here, really appreciate it. So I was watching a few of your interviews in preparation for this and I heard you speak about religion quite a bit. If you look up what religion means in the Webster dictionary you get something like a system of faith centered on a supernatural being or beings or something like that. But I've heard you use religion to describe things like punk rockers for example, that that's a religious experience. So my first question would be how do you define what is considered religious and then sort of as a follow up to that, if say Sam Harris… Religious is what you act out. What's that? This is what you act out. Anything you act out. Everything you act out is predicated on your implicit axioms and the system of implicit axioms that you hold as primary as your religious belief system. It doesn't matter whether you're an atheist or not. That's just surface, that's just surface noise. So it has nothing to do with divinity or supernatural beings? No I didn't say that. Or it doesn't necessarily have to do with those? No it probably necessarily has to do with it too but it doesn't necessarily have anything to do with your voluntarily articulated statements about whether or not you believe in something like a transcendent deity. So I mean what you act out is much more what you are than what you say about yourself. And what the hell do you know about what you believe anyways? You're complicated man. It's a fair question. Seriously people are complicated. You know like we're not transparent to ourselves at all. That's why we have to go to university and study psychology. It's like you know we're not exactly black boxes but we are the most complicated things there are. Right? And we can't even program our VCR clocks. So it's like how the hell can we propose to understand ourselves? I'm existentially oriented which is to say that I think that what you hold to be true is best determined as a consequence of an analysis of your actions rather than as a consequence of an analysis of what you purport to believe. Now in order to act you can't act without a hierarchy of value which I tortured the other poor questioner about. You can't act without a hierarchy of values because you can't act unless you think one thing is better than another because why would you act otherwise? So that means that you're embedded within a hierarchy of values whether you know it or not or maybe multiple fragmentary and competing hierarchies of value which is all the worst for you by the way because it just makes you very confused. That hierarchy of values has an axiomatic, it's based on axioms and the probability that you understand them is very low because generally people don't understand their axioms but that axiomatic system is essentially your religious system and there's no way out of that as far as I can tell. And you can say well it isn't predicated on conscious belief in a transcendent deity. It's like okay have it your way. But you know most people in this room act out a Judeo-Christian ethic and not only do they act it out, if they're treated in a manner that's not commensurate with that ethic they get very very very annoyed. So for example if I fail to treat you as if you're an embodiment of a divine fragment let's say that's characterized by the ability to make free choice and to determine your own destiny in some sense. Or if I fail to treat you as if you're a valued member, valued contributing member of the polity as a sovereign individual then you'll find that very offensive and become angry. It's like okay then that's what you believe. Well if I ask you if you believe any of that well that's a whole different story. You might give me some radical leftist nonsense but that doesn't take away from what you've That doesn't take away from the fundamentals of your action. As one final thing, so when you and say Sam Harris argue about religion you're arguing about fundamentally different things it sounds like. His conception of what is religious is very different from yours. Yeah well he tends to think of religious thought the same way that a smart 13 year old atheist thinks about a fundamentalist Christian. It's like yeah okay that just you just not get into the heart of the matter you know and I just finished reading all of Sam's books in the last couple of weeks and as far as I'm concerned he doesn't ever get to the bottom of the issue. He doesn't address the fundamental thinkers. There are some profound thinkers. Dostoevsky's one Tolstoy Nietzsche Jung it's like they're completely absent from and the same with Dawkins. It's completely absent. All that conceptualization is completely absent from their corpus of works. They don't even have an understanding for the psychological utility of religion and it's a big problem. You know you don't get to be an atheist when the people you attack are like naive fundamentalists and I have some sympathy for the naive fundamentalists. It's like what they're basically saying is something like this. Look we have an ethos that's valuable. New scientist types are casually dismantling it. What the hell are we supposed to do? Well the fundamentalists don't know what to do about that so they say well creationism is science. It's like well no it's not. But that doesn't mean that they don't have a point. Their point is there's something valuable here. It's like don't break it casually. What are you going to replace it with? The new atheists wish that everybody becomes rational. It's like yeah sure that's going to happen. Thank you. Okay I thought it was helpful to run through that again because we're dealing with what's axiomatic here and again if you go back to Peterson and his text on the Ark of the Covenant we begin with a bridge between the infinite and finite. There has to be a place where the ephemeral meets the eternal. There has to be a bridge between the noble and the unknowable. There has to be bedrock at the foundation. Why does he say there have to be these things? Because this is the only way we can live. Because if objects in space, if the objects aren't foundational, self existence in and of themselves then what is? And Peterson would say well we're creatures in a form for action. Well what is axiomatic? What is foundational? And again it's our actions that are most telling in terms of what we really believe. What is down below? And listening to Peterson's description again there of religious isn't far from I think a reformed Christian's perspective on that which is religious. It's at least close to the philosophical tradition that I inherited in Dutch Calvinism. It's not the same and a lot of the terms a Dutch, a reformed Calvinist would not use. Spark of divinity, no. A fragment of divinity, no. And now again as theologians we tend to be very careful about how we use this word divinity and whereas Jewish communities will be very careful about how they use the name, reformed communities are very careful about what we talk about as divinity. That's part of the tradition. So and what struck me with this is for example thinking about Charles Taylor's A Secular Age and this is right away in the beginning of Charles Taylor's massive book. So this is Charles Taylor speaking. So what I want to do is examine our society as secular in the third sense, yes three senses of secular in which I perhaps encapsulate it this way. The change I want to define and trace is one which takes us from a society in which it was virtually impossible not to believe in God to one in which faith even for the staunchest being is one of human possibility among others. I may find it inconceivable that I would abandon my faith but there are others including possibly some very close to me whose way of life I cannot and I'll honestly just dismiss as depraved or blind or unworthy who have no faith, at least not in God or the transcendent. Belief in God is no longer axiomatic. What do we mean by this? In the modern age this is a change that happened in 500 years and so what Peterson is saying is that God has not been exercised but he lurks below the surface and you're not simply going to get rid of him by saying I don't believe in God. Back to Charles Taylor, there are alternatives and this is also and this will also likely mean that at least in a certain milieu it may be hard to sustain one's faith. There will be people who feel bound to give it up even though they mourn its loss. This has been a recognizable experience in our societies at least since the mid-19th century. There will also be others to whom faith never seems an eligible possibility. There are certainly millions today of whom this is true. And so but we get into this axiomatic area and we have to ask well is Taylor right? Is Peterson right? What in fact are the axioms? And so Peterson is saying axiomatic in our society in this piece that he's working with. Well what is? Well what is axiomatic in our society? And I mean our society and Western civilization that all of us live in that those on the left and those on the right will agree with. The situation that Peterson says if I stop treating you as, I'm going to use Christian terms, as an image of God that you get very angry. Now we find ourselves in the culture war situation and in the previous video I mentioned you know a transgender situation. For the doctor who insists that he won't give a trans woman a pap smear but that she actually needs a prostate exam and she is offended by this. This is the same offense of the Imago Dei. That's how she interprets it. What's going on? Because in both sides of the culture war these are the issues and when the social justice warriors say trans people transcend sex they are still clinging to the Imago Dei and they're saying my claim to the Imago Dei, my claim to the rights as person means that my secret self, my secret sacred self which I talked about in the last video, part one of this same video, transcends my biology. And Peterson and Weinstein are saying no, you can't. So where is Peterson in this conversation? And again this is what makes Peterson interesting because I know a variety of people who would say things like well I'm a spiritual being having a material experience and what that does in terms of the hierarchy of values sets the physical beneath the spiritual, they would use that word. Using the word spiritual in our context is fraught. But a person that's saying I'm a spiritual experience, my true authentic secret sacred self is internal and spiritual and I'm just having a material existence, Peterson boxed at that. But Peterson also comes at it with phenomenology so Peterson is allied with Sam Harris and a materialist on that. But on the other side Peterson says now wait a minute, reality being capital B is a form for action not a space for objects. So that's again where Peterson is interesting because he's right in the liminal space, he's right in the middle. The New Age community that would say I am a spiritual being having a material experience, there are even some Gnostic Christians that might go there. Then the materialists are on the other side saying no material is foundational and what you call spirit is derivative, it's essentially dependent on brains. Now Peterson's in the middle with a whole bunch of other interesting critters that we've dug up like Rupert Sheldrake and I know once I hear his name some of you will hit unsubmitted unsubscribe or whatever you'll hit. But this is the moment we're in and this is why all of the religious conversations and I think the most interesting conversations at least for me definitely but I think the most interesting conversations about Jordan Peterson are the religious ones, not as much the social ones, I talked about the social ones in the Dodd interview and there's some valid critiques that can be brought to Peterson and ones that I think will continue to be brought to Peterson and that he'll have to work out and I think perhaps the majority of the Peterson entourage behind him or at least the fan community behind him is interested in the social food fight that's going on but I think there are watchers understand that deep beneath this are these religious categories and we've been moving and again in part one of this video I've moved through the whole history of first there's sacrifice and sacrifice is displaced by text and texts are displaced by the physical world again so you know if we're thinking in a pendulum way we were in the physical world of sacrifice and then we go to the text which is more abstracted and then we kind of go back to the physical where but it's physical and rational it's heaven and earth in that sense and we're coming to the end of that period and where philosophy is beginning to say with Thomas Nagel materialism is spent and in a sense usually it reaches its peak until it crumbles and Peterson is saying as we watch the fall of materialism we could lose the whole game why because materialism is not going to be displaced by this utopian world of rationality that the celebrity atheist might conceive of but when we look around we see it's being replaced by neo-paganism and neo-polytheism and a new Gnosticism where I'm a spiritual being have a physical experience and what I really need to do is be set free from my physical experience well now I'm a Christian I need to be set free from my physical experience well now if you know any ancient history and you know any church history we are back in conversations about Gnostics and neo-platinists and so on and so forth so that's why suddenly the orthodox church and sacramentalism in the reformed community and the Roman Catholic church all of this stuff is interesting again why because we're trying to figure out how this world is connected and the modernist framework is spent well what does that do to the modernist so at our Jordan Peterson meetups we have maybe they won't speak as freely if they know I'm ratting them out because I know they're listening to this but people who a few years ago were solidly in the Sam Harris camp now have their doubts why do they have their doubts they've been listening to Jordan Peterson and they might not be able to articulate where their doubts are coming from but their watchers have picked it up and the elephant is restless and the rider is watching the elephant and thinking oh we're going to go someplace I'd better make up a new story that makes sense of this and keeps me on good terms with all my friends and keeps my social calendar moving because I really don't want to switch whole friend groups because remember none of us think for ourselves a la Alan Jacobs and his book How to Think we think in communities and the modernist elephants are getting nervous because they're increasingly finding their position unsustainable and they're really bothered by people who saying I'm a man having a female experience or I'm a man trapped in a woman's body why was it you know no we can be nice to those people we can you know afford them their rights so on and so forth it's not fundamentally a political question it's fundamentally a religious question and so the mainline churches and the churches on the left are saying oh no problem no problem no problem and then the Anglicans in a certain parish in England are saying pastors shouldn't talk to people about their sex lives and I post that on my blog just cutting and pasting from the Anglican website and then someone from my denomination comes and says well what do you mean by this and I know where that person comes from in my denomination and says well if you can't talk to the trans people about their sex why are you complaining about Donald Trump about his sex if the material doesn't matter well the material does matter and so again are we playing games if I walk if I walk into my doctor's office and I say to my good doctor and I like my doctor I say I now want you to treat me like a woman because I've been feeling womanish today and I've never had a breast exam so I want a mammogram and I need a pap smear ASAP and I think I'm on the verge of menopause my doctor would look at me and he would probably give me a psych reference he'd say go talk to a psychologist because I know I did too graphic how shall I say it prostate exam has been a regular part of our examination because you're a man now if you're going to be a gnostic and decide you're going to have a female experience I'm going to wonder about your mental health oh no no no no it can't be mental health what is it well now we're getting into ontology why is it that the Jordan Peterson conversation keeps coming back down to ontology do you believe Jesus rose from the dead physically well Sam Harris and Bart Ehrman if you listen to their podcast that's laughable miracles don't happen Peterson's not willing to say that Peterson says well there was a the laws of physics weren't before the singularity so there's at least one miracle we can't explain the singularity what are we going to do well here we are this is this is why this is why we're having these conversations and Charles Taylor's trying to track this back 500 years Jordan Peterson's would say it's a lot older than that so Peterson said it is said that man and woman alike are made in the image of God and that God is he right there God is he capital H God is he who uses the eternal logos capital L to generate habitable order from the chaos of potential this is the axiom and see what Peterson is seeing is that well what's at what's axiomatic for us this is the diamond at the center of the world this is the spirit capital S that is untouchable this is the bedrock of the culture that brings peace and prosperity and respect for the dignity of man this is the Imago Dei this is the great truth this is the responsibility whose acceptance allows each of us to live despite the catastrophic fragility of our limited being small b our likeness our likeness to God small l gives each of us a value that transcends the finite he's talking about the Imago Dei and he's basically saying if Western society loses the Imago Dei it loses its individualism and it loses the game and it will slip into collectivism go back and listen to my dog thing face the chaos of the future employ the logos capital L of which you are a part to transform that chaos into the habitable order that is good capital G speak the truth employ the truth acceptance accept impossibly the limitation that being capital B that makes being possible pick up your cross of your tragedy and betrayal accept its terrible weight hoisted on your shoulders and struggle impossibly towards the kingdom of God on the hill okay the alternative is death and hell this is Peterson's religion it is not so I got through the video saying Peterson is Protestant like Dilla Hunt is Christian yes Peterson but there's lots of Protestants I said before Peterson would have trouble getting into my church as a member why salvation by grace that's foundational in terms of my Calvinist system Peterson you are saved but now the word saved means something different you're by saved we might shortcut Peterson and say you will have the experience of meaning in your life okay but we talked again before Peterson's got a deficient eschatology but Peterson's got a deficient eschatology but Peterson's right there in the middle he's in that liminal space he's not ready to cross over and again listen to Mark Galley in the in the quick to listen podcast Mark Galley's like he's so close here's the big here's the big here's the big debate with Christians we're going around the triangle if you go back to my video about the office here's the big debate is Peterson ready to cross over well in some sense he's in that liminal space because he's not ready to close the door in Christianity he's not ready to say there are no miracles he has a ghost story with a friend of his who I got confirmation from with the drawers opening in this hotel in now I don't remember if it's Nashville or Memphis I'm gonna have to look it up but Peterson's right there on the edge well so what do we know about Peterson's religion well it's fundamentally modernist in that and you can see that back in his axiom go back six to understand that although Christ sacrifice redeems us and I would ask him if I were to have a long conversation with Peterson one thing we might do is walk through these because there's a lot in these eight axioms that he presents and so I would say please talk to me about the sense that you believe Christ's sacri- sacrifice redeems us because that's Protestantism and I'll let the Roman Catholics and the Orthodox square that for themselves but but that's Protestantism that Christ when when when Jesus Christ says on the cross to Telestai it is finished what exactly is finished and for us to work and redeems us all the work still has to be done see I have misery deliverance gratitude I would say I certainly have work to do in terms of gratitude but that's separate from Christ's work now we're getting into theology and we're pretty deep into theology but this is this is where we're going to see where this stuff comes into play so why is Jordan Peterson so concerned about the loss of Western civilization well lose the Bible we lose our humanism we lose the Imago Dei yeah we lose the Imago Dei again if you read Harari homo Deus you've got 20th century is the struggle of three humanisms and note the progressivism in each you have Nazism which is humanity is the story of racial struggle you have Marxism which is humanity is the story of class struggle and remember Marxism is a progressivist materialism evolution this is this is material progress and so as Stalin is starving the Ukraine he's believing to the degree that Stalin believed in anything besides his own well-being the but the the the socialist dot the communist dogma the Marxist dogma the Marxist dogma was that he was trying to help them pass through the steps to get to their utopia and the Nazis are exterminating the Jews kind of catalyzing racial struggle because we're trying to speed up the steps to get to our racial utopia but what do we have in the West we have in the West the sacred individual okay we have the Imago Dei the communists threw that out when they threw out the Bible but the West still had it we employed God as our ally to fight godless communism the sacred individual is being threatened now by the secret sacred self it's the man coming in it's the trans woman coming in to the doctor's office and demanding a pap smear and the doctor saying you have a prostate I don't have a prostate my my my material experience is not of a prostate nature I think I need a pap smear well how can the physical layer and the meaning layer and the identity layer all be in alignment that's the question so in other words if you're thinking a pendulum metaphor well we swung too far and we're back to the the secret sacred self sex is not biologically determined or conditioned we have I have a secret I have a secret Facebook group with just my people who have attended our local Sacramento meetup so if you've attended and you have that you have to attend attend our local Sacramento meetup and you can get included in this secret Facebook group we have an inner ring one person noted from the meeting that none of our meetups ever we ever really talked about the transgender issue once why well because there's so many more interesting things to talk about but it isn't accidental that this was a line that was crossed and and this is the line that triggered Peterson because this is a line about the relationship between the physical and the meaning layer and Peterson is unwilling to give them up and this is why Peterson box at the resurrection question he's he's got what Charles Taylor would call cross pressures on one hand his scientific materialism is saying scientific materialism is a terribly powerful tool that we don't want to give up on the other hand there's cross pressures saying meaning world is in is a is a form for action and and I can't divorce my physical from my meaning layer and what happens in the trans conversation is that gets embodied in a very real way and Ben Shapiro keeps bringing that up in his little Sunday shows that his wife is a doctor and what you put male and female on that chart when it comes to the doctor with nine and eight and the doctor says that the physical layer of the lives and drugs means something can we simply divorce the the physical layer well now we're back into Gnostic thought now is Peterson a Gnostic or not a Gnostic in some senses he isn't because he's trying to keep the material and he's coming from below Bishop Baron and he's a stubborn northern Albert and I my brother in laws from Alberta I know how stubborn these people can be and when you push them they dig in talk to my brother in law talk to his brother Tim they're all that way now maybe there's some other people from Alberta who is John and I'm going to talk to him and he's going to talk to him and he's going to talk to him and he's probably going to be perfect and he'll all right Brett Weinstein, we are assassin robots who have to try to overcome our programming. How do we fit that in? I want to hear Peterson and Weinstein talk about that. Individual human rights. Nicholas Waltersdorf, four or five years ago wrote a piece. I haven't been able to find it. Dog on it. Nicholas Waltersdorf is a philosopher in my tradition. I took a philosophy class with him in Calvin College. He used this textbook. He and Alvin Plantinga wrote this in terms of reformed epistemology. Nicholas Waltersdorf made the comment, if you lose the imago dei and its foundations and confidence in the Bible as your source of moral knowledge. He didn't say this. These are my words, okay? But this was his point. If you lose the imago dei and its foundation and confidence in the Bible as your source of moral knowledge, you lose human rights. That's where this gets interesting. Because Peterson is right that increasingly if what we respect in society is the secret sacred self, well, those selves can go anywhere. Already with modern materialism, we've got euthanasia and a bunch of other things that often the Roman Catholics and the evangelicals fight about. Saying, hey, wait a minute. You shouldn't just be able to off yourself if you find life inconvenient. And you shouldn't be able to off your unborn child if you find your pregnancy inconvenient. Life has rights. And Peterson is saying here, our entire edifice is built on these rights. And this is why with the question and answer periods with Peterson, when people start asking Peterson about abortion and some other things, Peterson will say, well, I'm a nice, polite Canadian. And I think social convention and being nice to each other is something we should do. That's important. But I've got some real problems about the ways that we're undermining human rights in the name of human rights. Now, he's saying we're doing this in the name of compassion. But I would push it a little further and say we're undermining human rights in the name of human rights because we've lost the foundation upon which we arrive through human rights. Now, the question that philosophy has been working on to try and construct a Christian-free, clean room, moral system is how can you derive human rights from biology? Well, that's really, really hard because biologically, we're just like the rest of the animal kingdom. Now, in terms of Christianity, you go back to the foundational story and say we're the stuff of earth. I share the stuff. I share genetics with the stuff of earth. Carbon being. But I'm the breath of God. When you hear Peterson try all of his different ways of talking about the imago dei, spark of divinity, fragment of divinity, he's looking for language in that because he's not well grounded in Christian theology. He's learning the Bible, but he isn't well grounded in Christian theology. He's got some process theology coming in and a bunch of other stuff going on and he's working in the mythology. But Christian theology has been working this language business for a long time and there are actually conventional ways of talking about it that make sense within broader theological systems. And when you get trained in theology, these are the kinds of things you get trained in. Just like when you get trained in psychology, you get trained in that language. You get trained in physics. You get trained in that language. One of the points I wanted to make, a lot of people are now that the higher Peterson gets in the hierarchy, the more experts he's going to have nipping on him in terms of some of the language that he's using about this or that. Well, that's the preacher's dilemma because you use something for a popular audience that hopefully will connect and you usually do that at the threat or sometimes expense of blunting some technical precision. And so a lot of that is coming at Peterson right now. But if you lose an afterlife, and this is part of the point I made in the last video, if you lose an afterlife future, you draw heaven and hell into this frame. And I think Peter Hitchens, when he deals with, Peter Hitchens was Christopher Hitchens' brother and he spent a long time in the former Soviet Union. A lot of his book, now I think some hardcore atheist will get offended by Peter Hitchens in a number of places because Peter has the offensive gene just like his brother Christopher. But when Peter, Peter de-converted from Christianity and then reconverted into Christianity and he's just as offensive as Christopher, well they only debated once and Peter said he'd never do it again and he talks about that in his book. But in his book Rage Against God he says, the stuff that happened in Russia is not disconnected from their atheism. And I was making that same point with Miroslav Volf in the previous, in the first part, in the previous, I've got better names for these things or maybe numbers, in the previous one when I read some of Miroslav's Volf's exclusion and embrace, that if you, if you're going to bring utopia here, which is what godless entities tend to do, you get rid of the afterlife, well you need your best life now. You need to, you need to have your best experience now and quite frankly, Peterson's vision of heroism, of I'm carrying my cross nobly up the hill, aren't I suffering, that is full of meaning but it's a little empty on consummation, okay, and I mentioned consummation a few videos ago. Consummation, what do we mean by consummation? This is fullness arriving, this is the banquet of the lamb, this is, this is the engaged couple that are both virgins coming together on their wedding night and stumbling through but over the course of years through marital monogamy, learning to enjoy each other and I'm not going to go with the evangelicals that paint too rosy a picture of that, okay, but consummation is the idea of all of the layers coming into being and this is the image of the general resurrection that follows Christ's individual resurrection and the banquet of the lamb and the reunion of heaven and earth and the fullness of all things and the completion of everything. It is, it is, if you have to locate consummation in this world and culture warriors always need to do that, we need to eliminate racism, I'd be all for that. We need to eliminate poverty, amen, we need to eliminate sexism, I'm down for that. Can we do it here? You're looking at a Calvinist, it ain't going to happen, why not? There's a million reasons why not. Do I expect to see this with my own eyes? Yes, where? In the aged come. Now, you say, that's too bad. Well, I think, well, every materialist, modernist, progressivist vision, which is someday we'll cure cancer, too bad for you because you're going to die before that, or Ray Kurzweil, someday we'll be able to offload consciousness into a machine so we'll live together, but too bad for you because we really don't have a handle on consciousness, Ray. We really can't download your brain into a computer, no matter what kind of deep blue IBM computer they whip up, it's not going to happen and the problem isn't on the computing side, the problem isn't just on the computing side, the problem is on our side because we're way more mysterious and complex than we know. But here's the thing, if you lose the afterlife future, you draw heaven and hell into this frame and this is why Nazi Germany and the Soviet Union and Maoist China and Pol Pot keep getting hellish because, well, balance. And here's the funny thing about hell in the Bible, sometimes I say, people, there isn't hell in the Bible, people say, but there is Gehenna and there is Hades and those two ideas get put together and that's what Jesus talks about and in Latin they came up with one word, the infierno, and we have it in English, in hell. Well, what does that mean? Well, what is hell? Well, hell is for C.S. Lewis, the door to hell is locked from the inside. Read C.S. Lewis, The Great Divorce. What is hell? Well, heaven, well, you first have to ask what is heaven? Well, heaven or the age to come or the renewal of heaven and earth, the new heavens and the new earth, this is the glorious consummation of God's desire for his creation. What about people who don't want that? Well, what are they going to do? Well, I'll tell you, people who love God, the consummation of everything that God wants is heaven. That same existence would be hell. Hell would probably be God saying, go off into your own space, I'm not going to expose you to any of my glory. I will give you a glory free, read C.S. Lewis's The Great Divorce, I will give you a glory free world where you can have anything you want just by thinking of it. Well, that sounds pretty good. Read the beginning of The Great Divorce. How good is it? Well, people can't tolerate each other. Why? Because they, no one will fully optimize to be able to have whatever it wants, cannot be in touch with another will. C.S. Lewis saw this in The Great Divorce. We are seeing this played out. Everyone should be free. Well, then everyone's not going to be able to be in the same room because someone says, I want to be this and the other person says, but I'm in relationship with you and I don't want you to be that. So therefore, we can't have a relationship. C.S. Lewis calls it The Great Divorce. If you're going to bring heaven into this world, you're going to bring hell in too. And here's the problem. There's not enough room in this world for heaven and hell. Heaven and hell can't be sustained in this world. Can we taste heaven here? Yes. Can we taste hell here? Yes. But neither of them will fit here. And again, you'll see this in The Great Divorce where actually hell is a tiny, tiny thing and they take the flying bus all the way up to heaven and heaven is hard because it's real. And the shades of hell can't stand the reality in heaven and what they need to do is toughen up bit by bit, slowly by slowly, get the dragon off the back. Those of you who've read the book, you know, those of you looking for book recommendations, read C.S. Lewis's The Great Divorce. It's a little hard going because a lot of his cultural references are mid-20th century England and for Americans and other people, we won't get them. But that's the book. If you're going to bring utopia here, you must bring justice here and now. This is exactly the conflict we're having. As our power grows, our demands for justice increase. Well, here's the challenge of justice. I say justice means this. You say justice means that. Who wins? Well, this is why everything is getting political and political is getting polarized. If you want to found heaven, you're going to have to institute hell for those who don't want your heaven. And that will be here and now too. Isn't that what we saw in the Soviet Union? Isn't that what we saw in Nazi Germany? Except he picked a war because his political ideology and his racial ideology were the same. He had to get at those Jews in order for the racial progressivism to finally reach its fulfillment. If you want to see how this works out, I recommend I'm not going to play a video with Thabidi Anabwali, I have trouble saying his name, and Ta-Nehisi Coates in the Atlantic. The case for hope in the age of mass incarceration, race and justice in America, which is interesting because Coates, if you read his stuff, he picks a very nihilistic painting of race relations in America. He's saying the black man will never be free. Okay, the black man will never be free. So what are you going to do about it? Now, the other man, Reverend T here, he pastors a church in Washington, D.C. and Ta-Nehisi Coates has no hope. This reformed pastor has a lot of hope. Well, where is his hope resting? In the consummation of the kingdom of God, in the age to come. Ta-Nehisi says, no, no, no, no, no, I can't, no, no, no, I can't, I'm looking for something here now. And the pastor says, no, I've got hope here now, I'm tasting it, it's a foretaste, remember we talked about eschatology, now and not yet, it's coming, I'm tasting it, but it's going to come in fullness and it's going to come in perfection. And Ta-Nehisi says, I can't share that. Why not? Because I can't believe in an afterlife. Okay, so what are you going to do with race here and now? And he has no hope. Well, what does Michael Eric Dyson have? You can find a very interesting conversation between Ta-Nehisi Coates and Michael Eric Dyson in the Washington Post, just go ahead and Google it. Now we're bumping into some of Peterson's limitations. Pick up your cross and you will get the feeling of meaning as you try to go up the hill to the kingdom of God. Will you actually arrive at the kingdom of God? Peterson can't say that. You'll say, well, you'll make the world better or you'll make the world more conflictive because Jesus actually talks about this and Jesus says, I come not to bring peace but a sword. Well, what do you mean by that? I got some pushback comments on my last video where I mentioned that Dodd notes to Peterson, you know, you say you don't want polarization, but you're a polarizing figure and another number of people in the comments correctly mentioned, well, yeah, because if you stop going along, you'll polarize. Yeah, that's exactly Jesus point. I don't bring peace. I bring a sword. Why? Because if you pick up your cross and start taking it up the hill and you start doing it publicly, people are going to get upset. Just like Peterson notes, if you're living in a house of very dysfunctional people and you start sorting out your life, people around you will get upset and there will be conflict. So Peterson is saying, pick up your cross, take your heavy cross up the hill to the kingdom of heaven or the kingdom of God or to the city on the hill, but Peterson can't say you arrive. The best he can say is, I don't know. That's open agnosticism. Okay. I'm just telling Peterson that as word. And I know there's a lot of conversation about a closet Christian, so on and so forth. Let's take Peterson at his word. He's saying, well, if you read Steve Jobs' biography it's the famous one. I can't remember offhand. See, I think about these things mid video and I haven't put them in and I don't feel like pausing, but the very famous biography of Steve Jobs. Steve Jobs is talking with his biographer. Steve Jobs knows he's going to die. Steve Jobs then suddenly becomes an open agnostic. Well, he was always a little spiritualish too. He was more on the woo side of things. Steve Jobs was, and a lot of people are filled with all these inconsistencies and Steve Jobs is just musing with his biographer. Maybe there is something after I die. Peterson is kind of in that place too, but you'll get the feeling of meaning carrying that cross, but Peterson can't assure you of something beyond. Well, I'm a Christian minister. It's my job to try to assure you of something beyond, but as Charles Taylor says, we believe in groups and it's hard to be axiomatic in this age about these things. Well, this is where the fundamentalists who get and poked in their axioms are excelling because they're solid, they're sure, and they keep convincing each other of it. Employ the logos. Okay. Act out the imago dei. Tolkien. Be sub creators and acting in the world can bring change. Yes, it can. And Peterson is a living testimony of this and all the change that he's brought to. How many of you listening to this? Who knows the limits of this? Amen. But he's not ready to publicly go beyond his open agnosticism. Okay. Is that a secret thing? I don't know. It's up to you. His journey for him is his experiment. That's really important to see in this. And this has been a vital piece and no, I won't podcast my Jordan Peterson meetups. When we're in a group in real space, I'm going to protect the sense of the group. But this is Jordan Peterson acting like Jesus. Someone put on Reddit that Paul VanderKlay is being, I'm worried Paul VanderKlay is being the apostle Paul to Jordan Peterson's Jesus. Well, I don't think I'm the apostle Paul to Jordan Peterson's Jesus because I have a Jesus and it isn't Jordan. But Jordan is in some ways acting out a prophetic role and he sees himself that way. And the visions drive his university friends crazy and the dreams and the Jungian stuff, which has always driven a lot of psychologists, made them crazy and spooky. But Peterson sees himself in this role. And I think as he continues to get pushed, I wouldn't be surprised if the pressures on him, what do pressures do? Pressures clarify. Pressures drive you down to your axioms. And I think the harder people push Peterson, the more religious language is going to come out and the more he is going to speak frankly and clearly about his religious Jungian side. There's my prognostication. His journey for him is the experiment. Well, then you've got the Jesus wager, what I call it. Jesus says, if you live like me, which is my well-being or your well-being at my expense, which leads to his death, which is also cruciform on the cross, I will raise you into new heavens and new earth. You got a real problem if you're a materialist because you keep wanting to pull heaven and you get hell with it into this world now. Is this a metaphor for dying ideas and new ones? Yeah. Is it a metaphor for bottom and top lobsters? Sure. And Dell wants to do an update. Thank you, Mr. Dell. See if that shows up on the screen capture. Is this a metaphor? Sure. Is it merely a metaphor? Jordan Peterson says, I don't know. That's where he's at. So that's, there's about three hours of video for you in two parts and I hope it's helpful. And yeah. Now, in terms of Jordan Peterson meetups, I should do some housekeeping at the end of these things. Jordan Peterson meetups, check out meetup.com. I've got Sacramento, Georgia Peterson meetups there. I've got, yeah, I'm doing the audible thing and in terms of the, and also the video thing. And yeah, I'm not going to do any housekeeping. I do shorter videos for that.