https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=wff_SSt_wt4

 Hi, this is Paul. About a week or so ago, I had this conversation with John Vervecki and JP Marceau. And that conversation was in many ways the, I think in some ways exactly what John Vervecki has been working towards in terms of DIA Logos. And even though we didn't stream it live, there is my commitment to not editing and my commitment to posting this stuff, sort of puts me on a spot. So we're talking about miracles because JP Marceau read C.S. Lewis's book, Miracles, addressed John's non-reductive physicalism. I think, you know, this is where community really comes into play because JP Marceau has a degree in philosophy. I do not. And really had been paying close attention to John Vervecki's systems and working it through. Of course, JP was talking about panpsychism a while ago. And so we had all these conversations flying around. And then JP writes this piece on C.S. Lewis's miracles and John's non-reductive physicalism. And I mean, JP is just working through all these different angles and he'd already had a conversation with John. And so I said, well, maybe the three of us can have a conversation. JP said, yeah. And John said, so off we went. And it was a great conversation. If you haven't watched it, you should watch it. And then John hits me with this question. You know, is a placebo, would you consider the placebo effect a miracle? And part of what happens in conversation is I guess I could have, maybe it would be wise to say, well, let me think about that. But I don't like to do that. So I want to give them an answer. And part of me, instinctively part of me felt like I should say no, because miracles are from God and placebo effects are from doctors. But another part of me thought, especially because I'm sort of thinking through Lewis and his book, miracles, and we're talking about reason and causality and all of these things. And nobody had ever asked me that question before. And I'm on the spot. And out of my mouth comes, yes. And I think John was surprised. And JP was surprised. And I think I was probably at least a surprise. I've got to turn off notifications, otherwise I get disrupted just like I was right there, interrupted. But I think I was just as surprised as both of them. And of course, I've got some messages and email like, what is a miracle? And the more I thought about it, and the more I lived into it in the midst of that conversation, the more the happier I was with the answer. Now, maybe upon further reflection, I'll decide it was a bad answer and someone will convince me that I'm wrong. And I'm totally okay with that. But I mean, John's question just brought me to new levels in this favorite book of mine, C.S. Lewis's Miracles. And thinking about what Lewis had taught me and how Lewis had shaped me in ways that I had been taught and shaped, but the little conscious member of my consciousness Congress wasn't terribly fully informed by. And suddenly it's, I've been to Christian Reformed Synod, which is kind of our bi-national judiciary body. And often with Synod, you just kind of rumble through things and you know what's going to happen. And every few synods, there'll be a moment, it'll be like bang, something, the world has changed. This vote didn't go like anyone would have imagined. And so that question is a placebo, a miracle. Now, this has been sort of rummaging around in my head for a while. And that's thinking fast and slow. It's often the slow thing. It's okay, what out of a conversation has been haunting me? And so there's a little group of my consciousness Congress that won't let something go, but the conscious member of it isn't informed. It'll come up in your dreams and it'll come up in those quieter moments. And the placebo of miracles, a placebo of miracle. And so this moment and a few other moments in that conversation, that was a conversation that I will not soon forget. A few other moments in that conversation too just continue to haunt me. And so I go back to them and I chew on them. And of course, I'm going to make videos about them because I'm chewing on them and maybe we'll do it again. So I looked up a placebo and first I looked at WebMD, but it's like, no, I'm not going to go on there with WebMD. Harvard Health Publishing, well, trusted advice for a healthier life right there with the very test Harvard, former Puritans who lost their way. How dare you? But here we are. We all trust Harvard. I was listening to Menchus Moldbug and David, I forget his last name, begins with a G. Tim Lee from the Discord server had sent me that video and later someone else posted it. And that's a whole nother video that's continued to inhabit me. But Harvard, so I believe it. And well, what is a placebo? Well, I didn't, I'm nuts. I didn't put the link in. I gotta go get it. Your mind can be a powerful healing tool when given the chance. The idea that your brain can convince your body a fake treatment is a real thing. Now they're just, somebody there is just writing, but those words are laid and a fake treatment is a real thing. Well, what is the real? Well, the real is your body is a system of chemicals and the addition of another chemical will change the chemical and that will somehow heal you. Whereas the, well, the what? Well, the thoughts, what are those thoughts? Well, the fake treatment is the real thing, the so-called placebo effect and the stimulate healing has been around for millennia. Now science has found that under the right circumstances, now they're starting to sound like psychedelics here, the right circumstances, a placebo can be just as effective as traditional treatment. Now, if I went to someone and said, well, well, let's not go to the doctor with the with the plaque from Harvard on as well. Let's get traditional medicine. Okay. Now what, what, what, what tradition are we talking about here? We all know what tradition we're talking about here. The placebo effect is more than positive thinking, believing a treatment or procedure will work. It's about creating a stronger connection between the brain and the body as if the brain weren't a part of the body and how they work together says professor Ted Kapchuk of Harvard affiliated Beth Israel Deaconess, Beth Israel Deaconess, got Christians and Jews all over the place here. Medical center whose research focused on the placebo effect. Placebos won't lower your cholesterol or shrink a tumor. Instead, placebos will work on symptoms modulated by the brain, like the perception of pain. Unlike real pain, someone's coming to me with a broken hand. No, you just have the perception of pain. Placebos may make you feel better, but they do not, but they will not cure you. Well, I guess it depends on what exactly you're looking to be cured from says Kapchuk. They have been shown to be most effective for conditions like pain, man, most effective conditions like pain management, stress-related insomnia and cancer treatment side effects like fatigue and nausea. But someone comes to you and talks about, I'm getting, I'm, I'm having chemotherapy. So I have fatigue and nausea and you say, ah, it's all in your head. Whoa, you're gonna, people are not going to be happy with you. What do you mean? It's all in my head. They're putting this, this chemotherapy, they're putting this poison in my body that's retarding cellular growth, systemic me and my body because cancer is an overrunning systemic growth. And so I get to die a little slower if the cancer dies a little faster. There's chemotherapy. And again, as a pastor, you have to be with a lot of people who have chemotherapy. Does the placebo effect mean failure or success? For years, a placebo effect was considered a sign of failure. A placebo is used in clinical trials for tests, the effectiveness of treatments and most often of drug studies. Now here's something that's sort of weird because if the whole efficacy, and we're going to use that word a lot during this video, efficacy, if the efficacy of a drug is trying to be tested by giving someone this drug and they're all lying, but well, not really lying because it's telling you it might be the, we're lying to the patient as if patients who are taking one drug, well, they can't tell, can they? So what does that do to your drug test? If you say on one hand, placebo can be just as effective as the regular drug in certain cases. So, so wouldn't the placebo effect impact all of your drug studies? Now somebody out there, a doctor is probably gonna say, yeah, we've taken that into consideration. And maybe Tyler and his statistics are gonna, I'm open to all that, believe me, but think of the frame here. You start a drug study and say, we're gonna give half of the people the, the, the vaccine for the COVID and the other half of the people a placebo. And, but what happens if the placebo has the placebo effect and they don't get the COVID? Well, well, well, no, no, it's only for like pain and stuff, but how are you going to know if they don't get the COVID because of this? Because already we don't know who gets the COVID and who doesn't. So, so more recently, more recently, however, because that's always means truer more recently, more recently, however, experts have concluded, experts have concluded that reacting to a placebo is not proof that a certain treatment doesn't work, but rather that another non-pharmacological mechanism, look at the language we're putting on this. It's a non-pharmacological, okay, mechanism. It's nature, it's physics. I just had a conversation with two Michaels today, Michael DeFuscia, who's written this book on Barfield and Michael L. I'll probably post this video on Tuesday if it, if I finish it in fact, and then the conversation a little bit later in the week, because I like to go, you know, conversation, monologue, conversation, monologue, in case you haven't noticed, unless I have whole lots of conversations in me, I just got to get them out there. So a mechanism, oh, okay, that's, that's what's inside of us, little gears and things, right? How placebos work is not quite understood, but involves, oh, it's not understood, but involves, okay, complex neurobiological reaction. That sounds a little fudgy to me. That includes everything from increases in feel-good neurotransmitters, like endorphins and dopamine. Let's put some of these medical sciency words in here, even if we don't even really quite know what they mean, but we just feel better because they're medical and sciency and people with white coats and fancy degrees say these to us, and, and that's what makes sense of the word and world. And I, you know, I regularly have people say, well, well, I'm not crazy. I have a, I have a chemical imbalance because chemical imbalance was the, you know, the big words of the seventies and eighties that said, well, I'm not crazy. I have a chemical imbalance, but then somebody's angry with you and they're flying off the handle and they're throwing things around the room and say, oh, you're not crazy. You have a chemical imbalance. What? I've got a chemical imbalance. How dare you say I've got a chemical imbalance. I'm saying but I'm mad at you for justifiable reasons. Anyway, how placebos works, not quite understood, but involves complex neuro biological reaction. That includes everything from increases in field group neuro neurotransmitters, like endorphins and dopamine to greater activity and certain brain regions linked to moods, emotional reactions, and self-awareness. All of it can be, have a therapeutic benefit. The placebo effect is a way for your brain to tell the body what it needs to feel better. So if I'm not feeling good and well, what about, what about that experience makes me think that it's a good one? And so I'm going to go to a doctor and the doctor says, you shouldn't feel so bad. I shouldn't feel so bad. And then I don't feel so bad. Is that a miracle? No, no. Miracles are, are violations of the laws of nature. Oh, oh, but what kind of laws are at work here? But the C blows are not all about releasing brain power. Ooh, there's more. You also need the ritual of treatment. Where did we loan that word from? When you look at these studies that compare drugs with placebos, there is an entire environmental and ritual factor at work. Sounds, we're, we're creeping towards the churchy miraculous. If you ask me, says Capchuk, you have to go to a clinic at certain times and be examined by medical professionals in white coats. You receive all kinds of exotic pills and undergo strange procedures. All of this can have a profound impact on how the body perceives. My body is perceiving. My body is perceiving. Oh, body speak to me. Paul, you haven't eaten today, but you're doing pretty good. You're burning fat. Is that what my body would say? The body keeps the score. You receive all kinds of exotic pills and undergo strange procedures. All this can have a profound impact on how the body perceives symptoms because you feel you are getting attention and care, giving yourself a placebo. Placebos often work because people don't know they're getting one, but as it happens, but what happens if you know you're getting a placebo, like you're in a drug trial and you know somebody is, you know, they've taken the pills, it's like I don't feel anything. Another person's taking the pills like, oh gosh, I feel horrible. Well, there you go. You probably got the real thing or maybe you didn't. In a 2014 study led by Capchuk and published in Science Translational Medicine explores this by testing how people react to migraine pain medication. It's all in your head in a lot of different ways. One group took a migraine drug labeled with the drug's name, another took a placebo labeled placebo. Hardly lying to them now. And a third took nothing. The researchers discovered that the placebo was 50% as effective as the real drug to reduce pain in a migraine attack. That placebo, give me some of that. The researchers speculated that driving force beyond this reaction was the simple act of taking a pill. People associate the ritual of taking medicine as a positive healing effect. Wonder where we learned that. But even if they know it's not medicine, the action itself can stimulate the brain into thinking. That makes it sound all sciency, right? To stimulate the brain into thinking. Sort of like watching YouTube or Netflix or the grass grow perhaps. How can you give yourself a placebo besides taking a fake pill? Because you know, I don't have really in my house a pill making machine. So I don't feel good today. I'm going to make myself a placebo. Practicing self-help medicine is one way. Engaging in the ritual of healthy living. Eating right, exercising. So is eating right and exercising a placebo? Is that what the news has been doing to us for all this time? Yoga. Social quality time. Meditating. I don't see any church going in this. Harvard. Descendants of Puritans. Veritas. European looking lion. Yoga. Meditating. Eating right and healthy. But don't go to your pastor. Say, pastor, I'm sick. Lay hands on me. Call the elders. The prayer of a righteous man. If you know the book of James. These activities are positive interventions in their own right. The level of attention you give can enhance their benefits. Have the whole family come around. I'm drinking the sacred water from the tap. No, I'm drinking the sacred water from the bottle. The attention and emotional support you give yourself is not often, is often not something you can easily measure. But can help you feel more comfortable in the world. As opposed to outside of the world. Where does this language come from? And you can go a long way when it comes to healing. Now we have a big picture of the brain. And there it is. Harvard tells me so. Let's see. Placebo effect is already at work even before I read it. WebMD isn't quite as placebo-ish as Harvard. Is this white science? What do you mean? As opposed to black magic? No, as opposed to woke stuff. This is white scientism and traditional healings. Well, which traditional are we talking about? Can you feel modernity ebbing away? You can just feel it, can't you? I can just feel it. Maybe it's the placebo of, I was just on a rebel wisdom thing this morning and it wasn't recorded, so don't bother looking for it. But it was great fun. It was so much fun meeting those people and listening to them. But maybe it's the rebel wisdom placebo impacting on my system, them with all their distributed consciousness and sense making and triangles and integral and all of that stuff. How do I feel about it? I feel great. This is what my father said the night before he died. So, so much for that placebo. But what it is all about is the thought physicality duality, isn't it? Isn't that what this is about? And so Harvard is just, you know, throwing all these words at this thing and it's about thinking. It's about this duality. It's the thinking world, heaven, and the physical world, the real world. But what did we start out saying? The idea that your brain, why didn't this say mind? Who edits these things? Because really, you see, you wanted to say brain. You didn't want to say mind. You don't want to act like there's a mind involved in any of this at all. But that's really what you're talking about. Do thoughts cause physical events? We're in Harry Potter land here. You know, as long as you say it in Latin, it's a spell. Do thoughts cause physical events? Or are the thoughts themselves simply part of a long chain of physical events? Well, now we're knocking on C.S. Lewis's door in his book, Miracles, here. But there's a lot going on here because, oh, it's the white coats. It's believing in science and medicine that makes it efficacious. No, I thought science was whether or not you believed in it. I thought the mind was taken out of the system. I thought it was a monarchical vision, whereas there's no telos or purpose or anything like that. The doctor is the physical cause or a mental cause. But apparently, according to this Harvard thing, you can do this at home. And nobody said, don't try this at home. So there's a lot going on here. The doctor is the doctor a chemical cause? No, but when you see the doctor, it releases chemicals in your brain. Well, why would seeing a doctor release chemicals in my brain? Well, seeing a Sports Illustrated swimsuit model releases chemicals in my brain. And seeing the cop in the rear view mirror releases chemicals in my brain. And seeing Daniel go by my window releases chemicals in my brain. Well, the doctor certainly has chemistry, but that's not the kind of chemistry we're talking about. And well, miracles, no, miracles are like supernatural and seeing the doctor, that's natural. Oh, really? Well, so when you tell me I'm going to give you this chemotherapy to cure your cancer, or I'm going to give you this ibuprofen to lower your pain, or you say, well, I'm just going to give you a sugar pill to lower your pain, but because I wear a white coat or because we just read this Harvard thing, and this Harvard thing says I can do this at home all by myself just by gathering my family around me and maybe having a ritual about the water I got out of the tap. Oh, tap water, great bringer of healer to my body, sustain myself, release my pain. I'm a pastor, I know all about rituals, not as much as some of you other much more ritualistic, I'm a Protestant pastor, so I only have little rituals. Because the Protestants got us into this mess, right? Not really, we just kind of a manifestation of it. But the pill crossing into the mouth, like going to the priest and receiving the host, right? Why is it a miracle if the minister prays, but it isn't if the doctor shows up in his white coat? So well, we're reserving that miracle word for something else. Oh, are we? For what? Because experientially, that's not what I've seen. Pastor, come and pray for me. Many Sundays, there's a young man who will come to church after the service, he doesn't want to hear me ramble on or anything like that, but he comes just because then we have five or ten minutes together and we talk about the things in his life and I'll pray for him. And sometimes if things are bad during the week, he'll call me and, you know, pastor, can we have a word of prayer? No problem. I don't even have to be with him. He's never once asked me, pastor, what are you wearing? Is it a white coat? I like it when you wear a white coat. Never once has he said that. Just, pastor, will you pray for me? I will. And almost all the time we pray for exactly the same thing. Well, you might say, well, it doesn't seem to be helping. Well, he thinks it helps or he wouldn't be asking me for it all the time. So what exactly is a miracle? What are we talking about? Now, this word miracle is a lot sloshier than most of you think. So if we just do this little Google scrape, how it rips off dictionaries here, miracle noun, plural noun, miracles, a surprising and welcome event that is not explicable by natural or scientific laws and is therefore considered to be the work of a divine agent. Well, there's kind of a definition that we have. Well, similar, a highly improbable or extraordinary event development or accomplishment that brings very welcome consequences. The thing is, when you look in the Bible, oh, what Greek words do they translate as miracles? Well, sometimes they're signs and wonders. See, see right away when you say signs, well, wonders, well, that kind of gets at it. Wonder is sort of, that's the experience we have. And so it's the thing that exhibits the wonder, but a good wonder, not a bad wonder like the cops in the rear view mirror after I've been speeding. That's a wonder. I've a physiological chemicals get released in my body, but not the kind of wonder we're talking about. But right away, the first definition is just steeped in, would we have that definition 500 years ago? I don't know, but we certainly have the category. We certainly have the thought. We certainly have the words Latin mirrors are to wonder object of wonder. Well, it's sort of phenomenological. It's sort of a, that's the thing, right? That's something that just surprises us, but something that breaks the laws of nature. As if you found these laws, I was where have we found these laws? Well, we dug a big hole and we dug into rock and the laws of nature, we have found them. No, but they're all over the place and they're reinforced. And so again, you look at CS Lewis's CS Lewis goes into this and we're like, well, what are these laws? Well, these are the, these are the repetitions of the patterns that we have seen again and again, we can, we can reliably, if I drop my cell phone stand with a very accurate timer, this thing will reliably hit the ground in a, in a, within a range, you know, pretty reliable again and again. And the, the amount of time it would take to hit the ground in 1977, even though we didn't have cell phone stands then, and the time we have now will pretty much be the same. We're, we're living in a massive, extremely reliable environment. Well, wonders are things of, well, well, something has happened. And you know, here, even the definition seems rather mental, doesn't it? Because well, we started out talking about these, these mental events that, that, that seemed to, well, aren't all mental events chemical? Well, well, yeah. Well, well, why are some mental events more chemical than others? And why do some mental events change us? And, and, and, you know, okay, we're, we're going, we're going down the hole here because we use this word. I'm just, you know, one of the things that came up right away, put miracle into Google and the 1980 U S men's Olympic team victory over the Russians. I'm old enough to remember that. And it was a big deal. And I was a, I think it was a senior in high school that year and everybody was just over the moon, happy about this because it was a miracle. Well, is this the kind of miracle we're talking about? Well, it was an unexpected event. It was a wonder in the Russians that was, you know, towards the end of the cold war. And the Russians, of course, always the Russians and the Chinese were elevating their status by winning in the Olympics and all the complaining that here's a whole bunch of college kids who are fresh out of college versus this Russian team, which is really professional. And there we didn't have professionals in the Olympics yet. Like now we have it. And, you know, isn't Hume's definition of miracle all about probability? Well, yeah, well, Louis will go into that in the book too. Louis keeps noting that history doesn't work on probability. Everything's a one-off in history, as it were, sort of. Well, it's probability when we're like looking at, you know, counting coin flips and counting dice rolls. And so there's lots of probability around, but, you know, what did, what did, what did those pollsters say about Trump in 2016? And then he won and then Trump in 2020. Go ahead and argue. But history isn't like probability. History is just one long string of one-offs. If you're going down to, if you're going down to Vegas or Reno or an Indian casino and you, they don't pay you on the probability or they might set the odds on the probability. They pay you on the card or the dice roll. And that's what makes the whole probability game fun. So, so, so what is a miracle? You know, right away in Harvard placebo study, it's all about the expectation based on the limited data set we possess. Odds are good that if they have this medical condition, they will die, but they're only odds. And well, and, and, you know, John makes this point often and I, I, I, everything that I've read, I mean, John's being very honest, generic religion works just like doesn't matter who's in the lab coat, the lab coat works. And this is why Christians want to say, no, placebo isn't a miracle because, because only Jesus gets all the miracles. The difficulty is that as Christians on one hand, and I make this argument all the time, I'm not a skeptic about miracles at all. The world is full of strange things. And John says, what about the counting and the horse? And yeah, and, and, you know, even the dude didn't know he was signaling to the horse. And at least according to how we use the word, no, the horse didn't know the dude was signaling to him. They're just, it's just this mindless connection between the horse and the dude. And we're like, woohoo, look at, look at what's going on. If you don't know about the dude and the horse, you can go back to the videos and watch that. Cause he was talking about the horse and the dude and I didn't know anything about it. And after he said, it's like, oh yeah, that rings a bell. And I'm sure I can Google it and find it, but is the doctor's white coat religious? Well, it kind of depends on what you mean by religious. Well, are all religions the same? Well, we're going to have to get to that. We will assert that there are limits to it. And so some of the people who contacted me after this video, they're like, well, well, you're kind of opening the door to anything. Well, yeah, I know because no, I don't think just anything is. And I'm rather skeptical about a lot of things actually. And if you come to me and say, you know, pastor, you prayed over me and I'm healed. I'll say, praise God. Why don't you go see the doctor too? I'm pretty skeptical about all these things. And you know, the Roman Catholic church is skeptical. Someone claims a miracle. It's like they, they come in with scientists and statisticians and, and, you know, they're not dumb, but as Lewis makes the point, neither were the ancients dumb. Mary shows up pregnant and everybody's like, we know where babies come from. And then an angel shows up and it's like, well, well, maybe I'll back off that at least according to the story. But, but so impacts of thinking upon physical changes in the body. Do I feel fat? Maybe if I feel fat, I'll start to get fat. Will I, will I start to get fat because I feel fat and I feel defeated. So then I start eating more ice cream and carbs and all those things I'm not supposed to eat. And I don't do my skipping meals and fasting and exercising and eating the right things and et cetera, et cetera, just because I feel fat. So maybe that's the connection. But what's really amazing is that nobody seems to know why we feel fat or don't get fat or all those things. There's a, there's a ton there. And so, you know, Harvard likes to come at us with its white coats and say, well, we know. And then, well, then you, you know, you have one person who goes into Harvard medical or a Harvard doctor. And the doctor says, well, chances are, if we give you this medicine, it'll work and say, wait a minute, I didn't ask for a placebo. Yeah. But we know that safe and effective means, you know, the big thing about the, the Pfizer vaccine is 90% effective. Oh, what about the other 10%? How effective would a placebo be? Well, the placebo doesn't have side effects. Well, isn't the point the side effects? You know, there's a host of questions here that, well, we don't want to ask. We don't want to, we don't want to ask some of these questions because, because why, because maybe the white coat will stop working and not just with the placebo. So, so the impacts of thinking upon physical change in the body. I mean, part of what drew me to Jordan Peterson was he starts, you know, talking about sacrifice and it's like, well, wait a minute. What really is that idea about sacrifice? And it's the discovery of the future. Well, wait a minute. Well, what is the future? You know, but we immediately acknowledge, we're not really sure of what those limits are. And we're not. That's honest. We're trying to discover those limits by selecting and removing variables. Well, that's right. So someone comes in and says, pastor, you prayed for me and I'm healed. Okay. Was it just that you weren't feeling better before and you're feeling better now? And then we've got this other thing. So, so if it's God, well, God healed me. Oh, okay. Well, well, this, there's this idea, which just because we have this word, which has been floating out called psychosomatic. Ooh, that sounds very sciencey. That sounds very knowledgeable. That sounds very learned. So psychosomatic. Now, if you learn a little bit of Greek, it's like, wait a minute, that's not so fancy. Psyche and Soma. You just said mind body. That's all you said. You just said it in a different language, just like Harry Potter magic spells, say it in Latin and who go to the Latin mass. And I just feel better after a Latin mass than one in old English with that priest up there using all the same words I use. You know, so we want to try to discover these limits. Well, that's good. We should try to discover these limits because there are limits. There's a reason we have the word miracle and there's a reason we save it. And so, you know, I, I'm kind of a troll and I've been trolling Christians for many years and sometimes I get my fill of some of those miracles all over the place. It's like, you're going to wear out that word. And so when the real thing comes along, you're not going to have a word for it. Then they'll say, it's really a miracle. It's a very miraculous. Oh, okay. Why don't you save the word a little bit for something that's really miraculous. And so we can just have one word instead of two and save ourselves a little bit of breath. You know, it's, you sit around and so Christians then have other things and, you know, one of the favorite things is, well, that's a God thing. And so then I'll say, what do you mean? Like the sun rising this morning? Isn't the sun rising this morning? You got the know what that's nature. And oh, now we're barking at the meaning crisis again, because physicists nature, Natura, Lewis talks about this in the book is that which we sort of expect to happen, like the speed at which my cell phone stand falls, but, but, but the sun standing still, well, they wrote that down because well, they obviously thought it was important. Well, did they just make it up like a story? Well, some will say yes, and some will say no. Well, sun doesn't stand still. Well, the sun wasn't moving to begin with, was it? Well, what if the earth stopped rotating? Well, that would be a problem. But, but then again, all of these one-offs are just one-offs. And well, what if the sun refuses to sign like an eclipse? And you can begin to read these things in history. It's like, well, it gets very strange, doesn't it? Well, we want to expand the data set via projection by reducing the data set. Isn't that exactly what we do? It's such an ironic thing. We expand the data set by projecting. Well, the sun never stops. Well, when you say never, you have just expanded the data set to infinity. Well, why did you do that? Because you're trying to employ the monarchical vision. And you say the sun never sets. Well, wait a minute. The sun never stops. Well, wait a minute. Isn't the sun always stopped? Well, the sun, well, depends, depends what frame of reference you're viewing the sun by. If you're in the solar system and the sun is here and the earth is moving, you say the sun stands still. Well, doesn't the sun always stand still? Well, not if you're looking at this big sweep, this imaginative sweep of the galaxy, the sun is on one of these little arms and where, well, it all depends on kind of the pictures in your brain, doesn't it? So every time you say laws of nature or something like this, or you sort of invoke a scientific image, well, you expand the data set to infinity by reducing the data set to a tiny little natural, tiny little process that apparently is purposeless. Even though every time you put your foot on the gas because you want to go to the store because you're hungry or you're going to see the guy in the white coat. Well, which guy's in the white coat? I keep talking like this. Some of you are going to want to send me to a guy in a white coat, but that's where we're at with this stuff, isn't it? Well, if I put my foot on the gas, well, then I expect the car to go and I expect the internal combustion engine and the electronic ignition and the traction of the tires on the ground and the stoplights and the taxes that pay for the roads and the electricity in the place that I'm going and the not COVID or the mass that I'm wearing. I mean, we invoke this, but we reduce the data set to expand the data set. That's what we do all the time. So, so the reason we want to do this to do what? Well, the reason we want to say, well, generic religion works is because we're a little bit nervous about the Jesus stuff or the Buddhist stuff or the Islamic stuff or the Native American stuff because the Native American, well, that Jesus stuff, that works sometimes, but we got the real stuff because you're going to have a hierarchy and it's like, well, Jesus only cures 30% of the time, but this ritual here cures 50% of the time, go with the ritual, right? Because you want to get cured, right? But what if you're a Jesus person and not a Native American spirituality person? And so maybe the Jesus person, well, studies have shown, well, who have they studied? Well, they've picked people randomly. Really? If you pick Americans randomly, guess what? They were all born after 1900. It doesn't really seem like a random sample of human beings. I'd say probably a whole lot of human beings were born before 1900, but they didn't show up in the study. Well, why not? Because we picked them randomly, but there's all sorts of variables that your randomness can't account for. And so here we are. So the reason we want to do this is to decide whether praying to Jesus' name is more efficacious, there's that word again, and praying in the name of the Flying Spaghetti Monster or Zeus or Thor or any other Roman God that was a healing God, and I can't think of their names right now. But the Flying Spaghetti Monster, just like Jesus, is bound up in a world of mental and physical things. So if you pray to Jesus and you grew up in a Jesus place, well, bang, it's a miracle or it's a placebo. Well, how do you know? Well, a placebo isn't a miracle because we give the doctor someone. Well, I'll tell you that as a pastor, I'm paid to give the people something. So, and if they get cured and healed or feel better when I pray for them, it's a miracle. And when the doctor gives them, oh, that's the placebo effect. Well, how often does the placebo effect work? Well, our studies have said we've expanded the data, say it'll work 40% of the time, but it depends on it'll work more for these things and not those things. In other words, you're just shaving any odds off your miracle because if you give someone with cancer the placebo effect and the cancer goes away, well, what are you going to say? Well, I guess we're going to start doing placebos for cancer. No, you're going to say it's a miracle or I don't know why or I'm going to withhold judgment or or or. So does Jesus or any other narrative asserted agentic matrix have a privileged claim? And that's what John asked me. And that's, that's well, as a Christian, I'd say, yeah, well, I'm deep in the Jesusy people, aren't I? And, and, and others who have had rougher treatment by the Jesusy people say, no, they're a bunch of frauds and, and, and shills and, and grifters. That's a fun word now. Grifters. Jordan Peterson's a grifter. Paul VanderKlaas, a grifter. James Lindsay's a grifter. They're all grifters. It's sort of a, you know, depression era word, which conjures up on it's the point of this. Everything's conjuring stuff up. And where are you going to get your data set for any of this? So religion in general works and well, they do a study and they notice that the Jesusy people don't necessarily get healed much more than the, the people with the, with the other religions. And of course you'll do your statistics and well, there's a lot more Jesusy people probably in the people you're checking with, but have you been sampling the tribes in Papua New Guinea? Now they weren't part of the data set. They might be an interesting data set. Why? Because they're living in a very different world. No, they're not. They're not living in a different world. Oh really? What world are they living in? How, what, what relevance realization factor determines the world? Now in all of this, we're using reason and really that's where we began. And that's sort of where JP Marceau and Jonathan have been having, John and Jonathan too, but John had been having their conversations and, and Louis starts with reason. Well, why? Because that's what we're using to try and figure out if, you know, they always call them sugar pills, but I don't know that they put sugar in it because we're now, you know, 50 years ago, sugar was fine and now sugar's the enemy. So flour, no, those are carbs. So these keen wha pills we're giving people, you know, the first chapters are all about reason and it's, it's reason and causes. And of course, John, you know, gosh, it's gotta be so careful talking to him. He's read all these books. He knows all this philosophy and sciency stuff and I'm just a humble pastor. And so then he opens up whole ranges of things like, oh crap, I'm in the middle of this conversation. It's going to go on YouTube and I'm going to be that I'm going to let the Christian side down. And in fact, Louis talks about this. He says, you know, with his, with his Socratic society, that's what he named it, which was mostly women from a women's college. Every time the Christian debates the non-Christian, what does the non-Christian have to lose? What does the Christian have to lose? Well, it depends on the context. Now the Christian has to lose. Every time we go on YouTube and try to, you know, put our little flag in the ground, we could lose the argument. And then what are we using? What are we using to try to try to establish a common playing field with the non-Christian and the Christian, the Jesusy people, the skeptical about Jesusy people. And, and you know, we, the Jesus people, they'll smuggle Jesus. Well, what are the non-Jesus people smuggling? Well, where reason seems to be, but there's, there's reason and causes and they go both ways. And gosh, John brought that to me. It's like, oh crap, I'm going to have to learn about this now too. There's so many interesting books I'd like to read and then they go both ways, but are they the same? And so one of the things I never got around to talking about in that conversation with, because no conversation, you can get around to everything that pops into my head, but what kind of a thing is a reason? Now, if I say it that way, it's different than what kind of a thing is reason or what a reason is. But what is a reason? Well, here's a little definition that I cooked up in making these slides. Reason is a mental thread that can be pushed. Now think about that. I was kind of proud about that. Reason is a mental thread that can be pushed. Why? Because you can only pull a thread. And what we do is when we look at this world, we look at these threads. Now, again, Louis's chapters on how we speak are really important. A little later, I'm going to mention Paul Antleitner's, because Paul listened to our conversation and he went off on Hyperobjects and did a bunch of research. And so I could benefit from the, from the research that he did and just listened to his podcast instead of redoing all that research. But I followed the thread. He followed the thread. Well, what do I mean? Well, a thread is kind of this long thing and it's sort of like reason. It's one thing to another. But threads, you know, when they say, well, well, doctor, doctor, why do I have lung cancer? Well, do you smoke? Well, yeah. How long have you smoked? 40 years. That's why you have lung cancer. Well, the odds are, well, yeah, the odds are, but I know him, I smoked with him in high school and he's still smoking today and he doesn't have lung cancer. And the doctor says, well, he probably will. What do you mean probably? Isn't there a pill I can take? Yeah, that's the one that's marked placebo. Or we have this other pill that's basically going to kill you from the inside out. Maybe it'll work and you'll have the last few years of your life vomiting and losing your hair if you have any left or anything like that and decide which pill you want. Well, it all depends what your goal is. So reason is a mental thread that can be pushed. Well, the reason I have the reason for his lung cancer was his 40 years of smoking. And Lewis pulls this apart. I'm going to have to do a lot more thinking about this because John asked some really important questions. And the thing is John asked hard questions and has good reasons and reasons. And so that's why these conversations are stimulating and important and, and why I keep going back to them. Don't smoke or you'll get lung cancer. Oh, but now I've sort of pushed the thread. Haven't I? Because I'm an agent. I am not going to smoke so that I don't get lung cancer. Now I've never smoked. Could I get lung cancer? When I had after my, my sister died, they're like, well, now you got to go get some procedures because your father and your sister dropped dead suddenly of heart attack. So you might be next Paul. I go to, so then I go to the cardiologist and she sits back and says, you have an impressive family history. That's not exactly the word I would have used. I told her, um, because impressive sounds like a good thing. But of course it made an impression that, you know, five members in my family of origin, two have dropped dead of heart attacks. And so then we have all these tests and in one of the tests, well, there's this little thing we saw in your lung, but it's probably nothing. Most of the time it's nothing, but I still haven't talked to my primary care about that, but I grew up in Patterson and Patterson had bad air. And then I lived in Santa Domingo for a couple of years. Santa Domingo had terrible air, all these emissions stuff that we complain about. Yeah. It kind of makes a difference in terms of what goes up into the atmosphere. Now I live in the central valley and we have bad air. And so maybe I've never smoked in my life and my parents didn't smoke, but, um, maybe I'll have lung cancer, but I'm not smoking in order to not have lung cancer. It's that agentic reasonable set of processes that we, we reduce the set data set to explode the data set to come up with an idea. And then somehow I can cigarette Paul, no thanks. I'd like to not smoke. Oh, okay. This is our agentic approach to the world. And I, the reason I don't smoke is because, well, I don't want lung cancer. So reason is a mental thread that can be pushed. I like that. I'm sure some of you will debunk it, which is absolutely fine. Cause you just make me better. You're only making me stronger. You know, what agents will be permitted in public? Because this is really where the thing goes. And so my video about belief in belief in God is not the key difference between Christians and atheists because we can all agree that, well, maybe he has cancer because he smoked for 40 years and I'm not going to smoke so that I don't get cancer. But what agents are permitted in public? Well, well, I prayed on the person and their cancer went away or I prayed on the person and their cancer was diminished. I had an experience when I was an intern and there was someone in the congregation that had just gotten the news that he had, you know, all of this cancer in him and I prayed for him and I didn't even go over. I didn't lay hands. I didn't do a ritual. I didn't do any of this. I just prayed for him and just my prayer time. And I was at that point playing around with some more charismatic stuff. And so I did some imagery and some all of this, but I was the only one involved in the ritual. And of course, just go ahead and Google prayer studies and yeah, there's a rabbit hole. Just, you know, is prayer effective? Well, do they know you're praying for them? Well, what if it's double blind? What if you're praying for randomly selected? Well, they're not really random because they're sick and, you know, on and on and on and on and on. See, random has its own monarchical vision aspect to it too. But, you know, what agents will we permit in public? Well, if it's a doctor with a white cope with a pill that says, take this. Well, that's an agent that we can kind of come to grips with, but the only publicly permissible agents are human beings. And that in many ways is post enlightenment. Okay. That's, but again, what we're doing is we're reducing the data set in order to explode it. Well, why do we want to explode the data set? Because we want it to not only include all those people that we randomly selected for our studies, but everyone else who's ever going to live in the future, at least within my lifetime, within the scope of affairs and impacts that I want to determine. And so don't talk about God. Well, God number two, the super thingy that's up there within the meta divine realm that we can call and, and please or offend or what have you. But, but, but, but, you know, this whole agent thing is just getting fuzzier and fuzzer. Now we have these hyper objects, you know, corporate corporations are agents. Oh, you better believe they are your insurance company. Deny, deny benefits to you. That's pretty agentic. The governments are agents, government agents. We even have them. Uh, racism is an agent. Yeah. Racism is an agent, but, but what sort of thing is racism? How is it agentic or is it arenic? Well, it's sort of both markets are agents. Oh, they certainly are. And, uh, just check your retirement, um, your retirement account. If you're lucky enough to have one, the universe is an agent, Verizon, Lisa asking the universe, you know, should I get a new LG phone universe? Because I don't want to say God because I would lose status if I started talking to God, if I lived in California or New York, but I could talk to God if I live in Mississippi or Alabama or Texas or Florida in California, he's universe and Texas, he's God or history as an agent. Well, history has brought me, why do we talk this way? Why do we live this way? All of these agents around, but, but only human beings hogwash. How do we account for this? So yeah, Paul did this, uh, did this podcast on cosmic spiritual powers, hyper objects and CS Lewis space trilogy. And of course Paul grew up charismatic. And so, well, there's stuff all over the place. Read, I talked about Frank Peretti with my conversation with Michael Dufu, Dufucia and Michael L. What are we doing when we use this word hyper objects? Well, we're in a world of objects, right? And so now we suddenly have to account for markets and governments and Santa Claus and uncle Sam and, and global warming and all of these things. And so we hack the system and, and now we have hyper objects. We could have called them super objects or maybe they're not objects at all. Well, if they're not objects at all, then how do they fit into our world? Well, you're just, you're just, you're just jury rigging materialism all over the place. Sort of like when Daniel's, then it says, well, there's matter plus information. It's like, well, go, go find me a real materialist, please stop posing as one. Once you have information or what is informing, what is forming, what is causing, and you know, we're all back in Aristotle again. Now, according to Jordan Peterson, and I keep trying to synthesize and, and because just yesterday I had somebody in my church say, what's happening with Jordan Peterson? I haven't heard anything about him for a while and he doesn't listen to my videos or anything like that, but he's just a person in church and what does Jordan Peterson think about God anyway? And so Rick and I kind of looked at each other and laughed because, well, I don't know, you got about 300 hours of videos you want to listen to. I do. God, I put it in quotation marks for those of you listening to the podcast and not looking at the slide, God in quotation marks and scare quotes is an agentic accounting variable for Jordan. Now, Jordan might believe in something much more than that, but he's saying in public, that's the modern liberal, this is the agreement in public. I'm not going to trot out God number two in any way that sends Sam Harris towards the podcast microphone and too much fury, but God is an agentic accounting variable. Well, what does that? He's, it's the hyper object of all hyper objects. If you want to make them into an object, but most Christian theologians say, no, you really can't do that. Sits atop of your hierarchy or your hierarchy of hierarchies. And we feel comfortable with this formulation because it doesn't disturb our buffered self. And in a world of dead, we are left as the only agents. That's what we're comfortable in. Oh, you mean to tell me that this entire modernistic frame is, well, that's not the only reason, but it's sure part of the reason because we get scared by the thing at the other end of the line, or maybe we get excited by it. So we go down to, to San Diego, to the Dell Coronado and we Google which rooms we want to sleep in because there something might be on the other side. And I don't believe in ghosts, but I sure want to go on the Dell Coronado room ride and have the lights go on and the doors open and close and hear about the woman that took her life in that room, et cetera, et cetera. We want the world to be re-enchanted, but we, but what is, what is nature? What is physics? It's this, it's this predictability so that I know every time now, if I, if I let my hands off here and it doesn't fall, well, then we got some spooky stuff going on. And part of me is really excited about that because now we're into unmapped territory. Part of me had terrified of that because we're out of the map. So in a world of dead, now we're knocking at the door of the meaning crisis again, we are left to be the only real agents. Ah, I am master of the cell phone stand. So we all have to fear. So all we have to fear are the rest of us plus power. What is systemic racism? Racism plus power. What is patriarchy? Maleness plus power, plus power, plus power. Well, what is the power? The power are these hyper objects and, or maybe, maybe, maybe the thing itself is a hyper object or, or, or we don't know. So then we have emergence and our rule says emergence is the biggest fudgy thing I see these guys pulling. There are rules been on my channel and he comes to the Friday morning question and answer. Well, you know, I can't think of the, I think it's Stephen Meyer had a conversation with someone else about these self, maybe it was with James tour about these self-organizing systems because, you know, a self-organizing system like a tornado. And so this emergence and this emergence is real. So government agency emerges, school spirit emerges, racism emerges, global climate change emerges, or maybe it doesn't. Donald Trump's presidency emerges, or at least a swelling of support. It all emerges. It's sort of self-organizing. Well, what, what does it have and doesn't it have? Well, it has, it has systems and, and well, we think is we can't really, the consciousness we possess, we sort of map onto each other. It's sort of like, unless we're a really obnoxious solipsist, we, we, we afford each other consciousness and, and, and we assume that their inside is like our inside, but we don't say that the tornado has reason. Well, it's natural. What do we mean? We mean that we, we, even though we can't do it, we assert that it will go by some reason. Well, what do we mean by, well, that's the thread that, that if we could account for all of the atmospheric pressure and the terrain and forces, we're saying, well, it isn't that the tornado in its self-organizing way has developed consciousness and the, the anti-racist tornado intentionally destroyed the white people's, the white trash trailer park. Said, I see the black folks there. I'm going to be an anti-racist tornado. Well, what are we, what are we looking at when we're thinking this way? They say, I don't know, Vander Clay, you shouldn't think this way. You're just going to get yourself in all kinds of trouble. Well, yeah. Well, what do we mean? Well, the tornado didn't hit the trailer park for a reason. Well, except all the reason that we build into the system, the atmospheric pressure and the statistics and all of that. No, what we're saying is that, you know, good old aunt Mildred, who's been a racist all these years, went straight into her house. Well, now we're sort of in Pat Robertson land, aren't we? And Katrina hit New Orleans because of all the gays in New Orleans, but it was all the poor black folks who probably go to church every week that really got zonked by the, well, that's because of racism. So before it was Pat Robertson. And the reason was because of all the gays and in some district in New Orleans, but the real, or the abortions that people were having with the real reason was racism. So the hurricane was racist. Clearly the hurricane was racist because all those poor black folks in New Orleans really got clocked. Well, no, we're not going to say that Katrina was racist. We're going to say that global climate change is racist. Oh, so, and just notice how what we're doing with the agency here. And in many ways, the whole anti-racism thing is, I've walked this through on other videos, you have these different definitions of racism. You basically have motivational racism. You have propositional motivational racism, which is one person being an agent or a tornado sees a person of a specific color and either decides to mean them well or mean them harm. And so that's motivational racism. Then we have propositional racism that we say all trailer, I all white trash trailer, all white trash people live in trailer parks. Well, that's a proposition that we surmise based on valid or invalid or, you know, assumptions about people of certain races or classes, et cetera, et cetera. And then there's systemic, which basically says that, well, it's the outcome. It's sort of outcome racism. So you have motivational racism, propositional racism and outcome racism. And you say, well, people who got swamped by Katrina were disproportionately people of color. Okay. And then what you do sort of with a sleight of hand is you say, see, see climate change is just another manifestation of racism. Now, wait a minute, what have you done? You've just taken a motivational thing and just slid it right into the outcome thing. Oh, but you've done it at the risk of a propositional racism. Oh, but don't ask these questions. We're on a moral mission here. Let's fix the world of all the bad stuff. So we have this little mental drama, imagining the tornado as consciousness and a reason, a reason, not reason, because we say, well, there's lots of reasons the tornado hit where it did or Katrina hit where it did. Anti-racism sees their whiteness and the history of racism and or go straight for their trailer to target intention. So now we have intentionality and the white people's trailer homes. But now again, we're barking on the door of the we're barking at the door. We're we're barking on the door. We're knocking on the door. We're barking at the door of the meaning crisis, because as these great videos that have way too few views, and I can't think, but these little, you know, from John Verveke's first thing. Well, we got into this meaning crisis because the universe was dead. Well, it was dead because we saw it through one eye and we took all the, you know, Katrina isn't racist, meaning that the hurricane, there's probably a racist Katrina out there somewhere. So if you're a racist Katrina, leave your comment in the comment section and everyone else will will castigate you for your racism. The hurricane isn't racist. OK. Everything else is dead. It's just us that have intentionality. And so we learn to push the thread. We learn to to to find chemicals that if you put in my body, and I'm not a skeptic about science, you know, and I have this tooth extracted, you know, they gave me they gave me ibuprofen and Tylenol with codeine. And they said you're going to feel it for a while and take the medicine. And yeah, sure enough, you know, if I take that medicine, it's not so bad. And then I don't need this medicine anymore. Yeah. Just wait a few hours and you'll go back to that bottle that ibuprofen works, I think. But the universe is dead and I alone am alive. And so I get to perform the rituals and put the pills in my mouth. Well, is it a miracle if it's involved in a ritual? Well, if it's a minute ritual in my church, then it's a miracle, because if you've ever been to a Benny, Benny Hill, Benny Hinn, Benny Hinn, if you've ever been to a Benny Hinn crusade, there's lots of rituals about it. It's filled with ritual. Well, are you going to say that this is only efficacious to some degree? I think you might be surprised that some of the effication you find watch leap of faith, Steve Martin movie. It's a great movie. I love that movie. But these emergent things aren't alive, meaning that they're not conscious inside like we human beings are. And of course you have annoying Rupert Sheldrake out there saying, is the sun conscious? Don't ask questions like that. If consciousness is simply an emergent process by a certain configuration of electronic connections, he looks at the sun and says, it's got way more than any of our brains. Don't say uncomfortable things like that, Rupert. Rupert, you and your morphic resonance and all those ideas and studies about whether dogs really know if their masters are coming home or if it's timing or asking inconvenient questions. But are we alive? And that's where the meaning crisis comes from, because on one hand, we recognize that the universe is really strange. And all of this white-coated artifice of science and things to make the pills work. It's not always what it says it is, but at the same time, if everything out there is dead, what if we're dead too? What if we're the walking dead? What if we're the zombies? But are we alive? Or maybe we're all non-player characters. What if we discover that we are fundamentally group A? Remember, group A are things that are colonized, things that go on their own purely. Group B have, this is where Lewis comes in, have reason, because for Lewis, reason, capital R, is this thing that emanates. Now we have our emergence and emanation. Reason emanates from God. Well, is it only given to Christians? No, it's given to everyone, just like the sun and the rain, according to Matthew, according to the Sermon on the Mount. It's given by God. And reason is, and that's the thing, you get to Lewis, reason is, he doesn't want to say reason is supernatural, but he kind of implies, he doesn't want to say reason is miraculous, but he kind of implies it, because reason is the way that we push the thread. We saw how the thread went, so now we can push it. And well, you can kind of push a thread, can't you? But that tends to be our agency, isn't it? It's sort of like pushing a thread. Well, you can kind of crumple it up and do things with it. You can pull things pretty reliably with a rubber band, but it takes a little bit more finagling to push things with a rubber band. And so what if we discover we are fundamentally group A objects, then some other human or Voltron, groups of humans coming together into a principality, equipped with hyperobject, is going to colonize us and expose us for being non-player characters. Well, there's our meaning crisis right there. And so this is again why Lewis starts with reason, because this is how I think Lewis mentally argued his way out of the meeting crisis, because he said, well, look at the cover of the book. There's this emanation from above, which is reason. And Lewis is saying, most of the time we're really non-player character-ish. We're sort of like Katrina and the tornado. We don't name tornado so much because there's so many of them. Are they miraculous? Well, isn't miracle all about the odds? No, I thought miracle was about God or your religious tribe. Well, Lewis starts with reason because he's like, it's pretty amazing we reason anything at all, or that reason works because he starts out with reason and nature. And he says nature seems quite comfortable being colonized by reason. It's when we line up all the things and push the thread, or when we're really good, we pull the thread. It's his way out of the meeting crisis because reason is available to us and we do it, but it isn't something that is really controlled by us. And so just read the book. There's also an audio book. But he also resists pantheism, which is sort of a cheat. And I caught this when I watched Avatar and it's a pantheistic movie. And I love to see Lewis's chapter on pantheism in there. And again and again, when I talk to people, I talk about religion. Ah, no religion. But if I make pantheistic noses, they say, tell me more. And Lewis says, it's the oldest trick in the book. It's basically human religion. Well, what do you mean? Well, there's a, and again, read Lewis's chapter on language. There's, you know, a life force. Use the force, Luke. There's a life force. But the minute Luke tries to use the force, well, of course, modernists love pantheism. They only wish that they might be solipsists as well as pantheists because then they could be God. We resist pantheism because it's sort of a cheat. And suddenly when they're fighting the evil invaders and for unobtainium, is that what it was called over in that, in that world with all the tall blue people and they're flying these sort of dragon like things, but they connect with the long braids in their hair. And, and, but then suddenly then nature starts fighting for them. And it's like, Hey, wait a minute. If it's pantheism, those other people that are getting the unobtainium, they're just as much a part of the system as you all know. But you think because you're riding organic creatures with long hair and a pretty tree that somehow you have a privileged moral position over all the people with their metal machines who came from a different planet to colonize and take all your stuff that makes your little glowy tree go. It's all one big show, isn't it? So the reason that pantheism gets us so excited is because then we think we might be Luke Skywalker. That gets exciting. Why? We're ambitious. We have to come to terms with the terror of reality. Well, what is the, what is, what is reality? Reality is that which opposes my will and dismisses my power. I'm going to gather the family together and take the water from the tap and do our little ritual. And, and maybe I will feel better. Maybe if, if, if my family isn't enough, I'll call the neighbors and have them wear their COVID masks and I'll, I'll zoom in the members of my church and all of us together will exalt the, the holy water from the tap. And as I perform the ritual and say the sacred words and I drink the water, then in fact, they all might start feeling better too. Well, the miracle seems to be emulating, emulating out just sort of like reason does. See, and if I had said, if John had asked me, well, is reason miraculous? And I said, why do you ask me uncomfortable, hard questions like that in the middle of a interview where I'm supposed to uphold the Christian side and JP Marceau's video went out. I'm left alone here. Yes. Reason is miraculous. Well, what do you mean by miracle now? Well, lots of people who don't like Jesus use reason, but where's it coming from? And finally come to terms for CS Lewis with God and he surrenders. Well, what does that mean? Well, he starts doing what is unnatural says Lewis. What do you mean unnatural? I start not going just where I would go if I paid no attention. Chocolate cake, swimsuit edition video, free car, money found on the curb, just following all my little impulses. And Lewis starts being changed. And people look at that and say, he's not chasing free cake or, or girls or, or, or cars or money. Or for Lewis, it would be avoiding the world and just sitting in a quiet place and reading books all the time, because that's what Lewis loved to do. But here's where we sort of get to the nub of it, the best I can understand. And it's the, it's the relationship between pluralism and democracy. We are ardently democratic. And Lewis treats this in the book of the monarchical versus the democratic will accept pluralism. If we're allowed to demand equality, that's the trade off right there. We all implicitly demand that the center be accessible from anywhere and anyone and that no one has a privileged position. Don't have all your miracles be Jesusy and leave out all the other people throughout time who have claimed miracles. I only believe miracles that are in the Bible and I don't believe any miracles that I find Julius Caesar talking about or don't believe any miracles that I find Julius Caesar talking about or Donald Trump. Once you're into the miracle world, you're just there. And part of the reason people try to slam the door and keep it out is they want to keep out that mess, but you can only keep out that mess. I would assert by a degree of willful blindness. And it's a matter of faith that you say, everything that I can't account for is accountable via my which is exactly what the Christian is saying. We accept pluralism if we're allowed to demand equality. We are all implicitly, we all implicitly demand that the center be accessible from anywhere, anyone and that no one have a privileged position. This of course is the, when I mentioned I'm a Calvinist, suddenly divine election pops up and say, it's unfair, banish it. I can't believe a God would be arbitrary. You have no problem with an arbitrary nature. You were born tall or thin, fat or slow, dim or brilliant with great genetics that mean you won't get cancer and you can smoke for 40 years and your lungs just keep going. Or you have a weak system and by virtue of, you know, doing everything that you could to eat right, you still die at 50. Nature's like that. It's totally unfair. Where does this idea of democracy come from? Nothing in nature suggests that equality and pluralism can be paired together or that democracy is in any way true. It's all probably simply a product of Christian theology and practice. It all goes back to Jesus. We'll ask Tom Holland, he'll probably tell us. And this is where, you know, well, I get to choose my religion. Well, where did that come from? Well, you don't get to choose your facts. We've been listen squabbling about that for the last six years. The doctor will get to say, you don't get to choose your medicine. I choose your medicine Well, can't we vote on it? No. Christianity or a religion of your consumerist choice. And towards the end of the video, this is where I said, you know, what if in fact the most central features of something are the most rare or maybe the most universal? I mean, the history and reality is very uneven like that. Well, how many big bangs were there? You know, I love Jordan Peterson's line, which wasn't original to him. You know, give me one miracle and I'll explain the rest. Yeah. Well, we're going to try and explain that too. Oh, you're going to test it. Uniquely significant events are not always accessible to all. Well, the French Revolution. I don't believe in the French Revolution. I don't believe in the Protestant Reformation. I don't believe there was a door that Martin Luther hammered a piece of paper on or maybe used a sticky note that was very, very long because they had 95 theses. Unique historical events are not always accessible to all. Well, how do I believe in the French Revolution or the Protestant Reformation or any of these things? Does anybody have the paper that Luther nailed to the Wittenberg door? Does anybody have shards of the original door itself or did some janitor at one point say, this door is kind of a mess. Let's replace it. They put up some credit steel door because the young hoodlums of Wittenberg were breaking into the church and you know, sipping the communion wine. Well, this is sort of God's answer to Job because Job's like, hey, wait a minute. I'm getting the raw end of the deal here and my friends are telling me I've sinned. I want God to come down and, you know, account for himself. And God comes down and says, oh, you want to do accounting? Well, let me ask you some of my questions. Where were you when? Well, it wasn't, he wasn't there. Are you a personal friend of Socrates or Jesus or Siddhartha Gautama? Well, they're, well, you see, when you say they were dead before I got here, Christians say Jesus is alive and, well, I'm a personal friend of Jesus. Well, how? Well, why? Well, if I pray in Jesus' name, and then we have, of course, the unauthorized exorcist of which Jordan Peterson is perhaps a resident. He's just kind of rhyming from the unauthorized exodus, exorcist. You have all these, Jesus sends out his disciples and say, go and heal in my name and use my name. Say the word Jesus. Is that a placebo? Jesus says, spirit come out and suddenly they're not. Well, I think all those things that were schizophrenic. Well, I got a bunch of schizophrenics I'd like to heal with Jesus' name. And then the Bethel people come along and say, well, have you tried? Fair point. I haven't tied them down to a chair and, you know, put my hands on them and kind of want to tie them down because I have no idea where some of these schizophrenics, where that whole conversation is going to go. But I pray for them and they're still schizophrenics. And I say Jesus' name and they haven't happened. And it kind of seems like a placebo. Well, let's try this. Quite frankly, a lot of the psych meds that I see doctors prescribing to a lot of people I know, they might as well be placebos because try this for come back a month and tell me if you feel better. That's what I watch happen. So, and as I said to John, a hierarchy will likely develop. Well, I'll accept pluralism if you give me equality because this is basically the argument in Lewis's book that, well, what if there's one event that sort of makes sense of the whole story? That's relevance realization. Is it? Will it? Of course, these are assertions that Christians are making. They may be true. They may be untrue. Lewis says that dozens of times in the book because, no, we're human beings and we're making statements and we're making assertions. But is Christianity any more right or less right than Nazism? Most of us would say more right because we have a moral hierarchy around. And if we say Nazis are more right, well, then suddenly we're worried about being cast in with a whole bunch of other people. So Christianity is more right. And, well, everyone is all, everyone is created equal. All men are created equal. Who believes that? Well, that's a statement of faith. Well, equal with what? In what respect? Well, equal before the eyes of the law. Oh, well, then what is a person? What qualifies? How do we get there? So is a placebo a miracle? Well, we want to say no. Why? Well, Christians want to say no because, you know, if it's happening in church, which it happens all the time, then we say, yeah, that's that's placebo isn't a miracle, but a prayer is a prayer can be. Doctor says placebo isn't a miracle, but it's he's not even going to want to use that word at all. We want miracle to be reserved for something. And that's a good instinct. We want it to be special. We want it to be supernatural. What like reason, like being able to really think through something that's hard and find the pattern and see the pattern duplicated. And well, where do these patterns come from? Or do we want our miracles to be tribal? Only what happens within the walls of Livingstone's Christian Reformed Church will we consider a miracle. Therefore, we're barking out we're barking at the door again. We're knocking on the door of secessionism here. What would I mean by that? Because there's a whole group of well, miracles have ceased. Oh, OK. I don't buy that either because it's like, no, I don't think they've ceased. Well, you can't produce one. Ah, maybe that's a better definition of a miracle. Doctor, why does the doctor give someone a placebo? Because he can't produce a cure. If the doctor had a better thing than a placebo, don't you think the doctor would give it? Well, maybe it's a study. And so we're we're trying to fake out a group of people to figure it out. And so, OK, that's fair. But that's the point, right? Isn't a miracle sort of kind of going with something that you hope will have an effect? This whole video is miraculous. Or maybe it'll be a dud because maybe it won't have the effect that I think it will have. Is a placebo a miracle? Well, we're just arguing about the definition of a miracle. And what we really want to say is do really strange things happen? Well, yeah, do strange, wonderful, good things happen? Like people who had cancer no longer have cancer and people who are sick are no longer sick. And OK, well, what kinds of things are associated with them? Well, maybe they're white coats and sugar pills or maybe they're they're they're balding Christian ministers and dying churches praying in their little offices because the homeless people are leaving them some peace today for a little while until it rains and then it's all going to be a mess. What are we talking about? Maybe we're talking about all of our dreams coming true and maybe we're talking about the renovation of heaven and earth and maybe we're talking about the grand miracle, as Louis says, where somehow God becomes a man and goes down to the bottom and pulls up creation with him and walks out of a tomb with the flesh of creation. Two point. Oh, well, what does that mean? Well, can I get Jesus to do like a cheek swab so I can see if the DNA changed or or or and and and if you sort of follow this along, you can sort of see our contours because what we really want is would I like to have a placebo or a drug that really works like an antibiotic? Well, yeah, but those antibiotics, they're getting us into other trouble. And suddenly we find ourselves just sort of in the middle in the same mess we always find ourselves because the truth is we're awash in them. Take a look at Craig Keener's two massive volumes. He starts with the question of the credibility of New Testament accounts and this was this was written, I think, 2009. It was published. So it's sort of at the height of new atheism. And this book probably wouldn't be published again because but just read the book. He just goes pages after pages of accounts of this kind of miracle and that kind of miracle documented on, on, on, on, on. And you just basically get to the point of of Louis right at the beginning saying this isn't an argument about evidence. This is an argument about worldview. And we want to, we want to filter to decide which really happened, which of them are good. So, you know, I go and I visit someone and I pray over them and they die. Well, let me tell you, at this point, a good number of the people I have prayed over have died. It's a, it's a reverse miracle. No, it's if I didn't pray over them, they probably would have died. If I hadn't prayed over them, where they have died sooner or later. Sometimes when I pray for people, I pray for peace and sometimes death is the way of peace. I'm always praying over people who are dying. That's a big part of my job. So is it a miracle? Is a placebo a miracle? We don't know what a miracle is. What we're really in the realm is of is can we secure for ourselves the life that we think we want? Even when you don't have a real good idea over what we really want. Miracles don't do that much in terms of our belief system. Again, this is Louis's opening point and I see it all the time. And for those of you who believe in the Bible, you can read in the Bible. Jesus, at least according to the story, stills the storm and the disciples are just flabbergasted because what kind of agency does this man possess where he can stand up in the middle of a storm and tell the storm to shut up like I would tell my dog to shut up except the storm is way more obedient than my dog. But then when they come to arrest Jesus, they're going to rely on swords. Well, that's not reasonable. That's how we are. We see a miracle and then, you know, in the moment we're all our consciousness is flooded and the chemicals are surging through our body just like the lab code or the police siren or the opportunity or the threat or anything. Just our body fills with chemicals and then, you know, the day after the chemical, it's well, we might tell the story and then when we retell the story, the chemicals sort of flush again, but not as much sort of like the second time working at crack and on and on and on. And then here come the temple guards with Jesus and, you know, according to one gospel, I am he, they all fall back. You think, yeah, you don't really need the swords if you're walking around with a dude who can still a storm because if he can still a storm, he can play a Zeus and call down and a lightning strike and you hit that one because a lightning strike will take out the temple guard a lot better than a fisherman brandishing a sword will. But all of that gets forgotten in the moment. Then you might say, well, therefore the story is just a whole lot of hogwash because if a man had that kind of power, why would he allow himself to get arrested? Or maybe that's part of the story. And so the point about what we believe in miracles really has means very little because sometimes everything's a miracle and sometimes we can't find a miracle to save our lives because that's usually when we look for miracles. What we really want is to colonize others. And I really like the scene in that Superman movie when because he got, yeah, if some dude is flying through the sky and, you know, and the Avenger movies went there too because the Iron Man movies, because, you know, if you got a dude flying through the sky, moving the world and sending back time and stopping nuclear missiles, well, what point is the United States government and its military? What we really want to do is colonize others. And so when Superman shows up and, you know, Jesus in spandex and a red suit, well, and a red cape, people are the most complex, most resistant, most powerful thing we know. And so what we really want to do is be God. What do you mean by God? Well, this more than just simply a variable, something that acts, something that governs the erratic autocracy. It's something to colonize by a agentic monocracy. Monocracy, monarchy. We want to deny anyone or anything that power because, well, now we're back into why are you going to bring Superman before Congress? Can you trust him? Well, what does it mean to trust him? It means watching him. It means implying. It means mind reading. It means all the thing that religious people do about the world around them. Well, I just lost my job. Does that mean God hates me? Well, my mother just had cancer, but it's gone into remission. Does that mean my prayers were answered? Well, they feel better because I gave them, I gave them a sugar pill instead of benzodiazepine. Does, does, does that mean it was all in his head? Is a placebo a miracle? Now, this is why we talk to each other because we ask each other uncomfortable questions and they force answers out of us and we have to try to figure it out. And you know what Paul VanderKlay says in a video doesn't mean that much, but along the way we learn to trust each other. We learn from each other and I think we learn about God. So is a placebo a miracle? You tell me.