https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=tQ9WsecP9JA

 I just have conversations with people and then if there are Avoid legal snacks telling people they're being recorded. Well, there you go. You've now been notified You know what I usually do is I just as you can see from my channel I just talked to a lot of when some of the conversations I share online some of the conversations I don't usually what we do is talk for a while and you know, obviously I I don't record and and Don't share conversations without permission And you give people a chance to look at it first because it's it's your face and your butt that's on the internet But I but yeah, I I think I I've just been surprised that there's an audience for listening to these conversations and I I listened to your I was just listening to your conversation with Andrea and and I was very I was very interested in I Was very interested in the story that you you sent me on Twitter You know a little bit of your story and what you just said in fact before it started recording because I think there are a lot of people like you both in terms of Your absence from the country and then coming back and saying what happened but also a very interested in your own personal story of you know an immigrant family and You know kind of nominal Nominally Islamic at least for you more so than your parents and then your deconversion to Islam or we don't really have a good word for that and And just you're thinking out loud about those kinds of issues because they've that's that's very much the kinds of conversations I have with people. So so yeah, and we I'll record it and I'll share it with you and And you can use it on your podcast and Yeah Also the same thing like I always do that too Like if whatever whenever I record with someone before I release it, I send them a you know, here's the link This is what we putting out if there's anything you want me to take out. Let me know, you know, yep Yep, and yeah, I don't want to do gotcha. I hate all that stuff neither neither of us have enough status to have Anybody care about any gotchas with either exactly. I don't worry about being canceled because I've never been put on That could be a title for a show Well, why don't why don't we start with why don't we start I mean you and Andrea covered a lot of your story, which was good And but I think not everybody will have watched that So why don't you start a little bit of your background story and then we can get into the You know why you left the country what you did and then the changes you've seen between 2002 and and whenever you got back So, why don't we start there right? So, I mean I was born in India and my family moved to Canada Just after I turned six. So that was December of 75 I actually remember the date because the next day was my sister's birthday. So The date we came in And just okay six years old we get to Montreal And it's December and there's this giant snowstorm. I've never really seen snow in my life before and I was like Right, welcome to Canada But uh, yeah and then um, yeah, my family was uh, sunni muslim and Grew up in Canada, uh, you know following that tradition and But my family was never fundamentalist now you have to South Asia in the 60s and the 70s Was much different than what it is now Like pakistan up until 72 had a british-based education system india still pretty much does In 72 pakistan changed into an islamic education system now So my parents grew up in a Far more relaxed version of islam than you know what you would think of like a hohabis Style or the ayatollahs in iran And then I mean you have to differentiate between sunni and shia and then there's all kinds of flavors in between there, right? So It's not one big monolith. They share some things in common. So My parents were not strict devout fundamentalists, you know They were very plural they were very open my dad had Even in india he had a very strict They were very plural they were very open my dad had even in india had christian friends and hindu friends and you know seek and I don't know about buddhist, but You know, but my dad didn't care about that particular aspect of things so We moved to canada and uh Where my aunt and uncle were living and some friends of theirs It was starting to be ghettoized. My dad said no, I left india. I don't want to come back and move to a little india So he wanted us to assimilate he wanted the family to assimilate My parents took courses my dad even like took specifically to french courses But at that point too the government offered things to immigrants where they said, okay, you know here are your rights But here are also your obligations Which I think a lot of people forget these days like even citizens like if you're born in the country or whatever You're a naturalized citizen. You're or you know, you're a born citizen by birth or you're naturalized you're living there You have rights, but you have obligations and I think we'll forget that And so they I mean it went through this kind of stuff and My parents appreciate what canada offered them. They came from india india in the 70s was horrible Uh, and it's a lot better now, but back then there was no technology. Everything was government controlled We didn't even have tv you know, like You know, it was it was things like that. It was so It was it was not a great place to bring up kids. My my parents were very thankful for a place that accepted us Brought us in to care of us and you know, they felt pride in where they were and I think things like that like those courses helped. Um But my parents were devout, you know, my mom prays five times a day My dad would pay his zakat, which is like tithing um to the mosque and they were very respectful They taught us the traditions. They taught us the faith but one thing that always struck out to me was there's my uh I think it was around seven or so. It was the first apartment we were living in You know the the buzzer rings I answer it and they say we're here from the mosque And I was like, okay, let them in Now there's a thing that was done. Uh, it's they still do it and it's kind of an evangelizing But it's more of let's find muslims and teach them how to be better muslims and so they came in and I think in about 15 20 minutes my dad's like escorting them out And my brother and I like what's going on, you know, what's the old man doing? Yeah So and my sister was too young she was four And you know, she didn't really realize but so my dad sat us down after they left and then he said what those guys did Was wrong. He said, you know, he goes it's up to your mother and I to teach you their faith teach you their religion but Once you're an adult it is between you and your god There is no one else that can tell you what it means and how you should how you should practice now you know If there is any penance afterwards, it's between you and allah, you know it's we have According to the faith you have two angels on your shoulders one on the right one on the left The one on the right records all your good deeds the one on the left records all your bad deeds and you weigh them out And you will have to do some penance for the bad deeds and you work your way through. Um like If you're a believing muslim and you've committed sin And you don't commit the sin thinking this in the back of your mind all be washed away Um, you will pay a penance in hell But then your sins will slowly get washed away and you will end up in the lowest level of heaven But you will eventually end up in heaven so Like I said, if you're committing the sin with that in the back of your mind, then obviously you're not it's not going to happen It's like, you know confessing on your deathbed just to wash yourself, but not really believing right? It's the same kind of thing um so We had all that but my parents what my dad like when my when my dad did that I think that struck to me like You don't have to Blindly respect authority you can you know, you can't question the tenets of the faith at that point You know, I don't I don't think he was saying that but you don't have to you can question other people's interpretation of it And how they practice it? So that I think was pretty important Obviously at seven, I don't think I was articulating that in my head too. Well, but you know And then after that it was carl sagan My dad loves science shows. He loved nature documentaries. My dad used to hunt in india um Every time i've gone back i've gone hunting we we hunted here when I was growing up and so watch nature shows and science shows and He loved that carl sagan came on cosmos came on and That really got me interested. I mean I was I was curious about everything I I My dad would tell us stories and I would just take them apart, you know Just little things and i'm just being a kid and just being naturally curious But I think I drove my parents to like I think I pushed them a little too much The why question happened off a lot? but then when you know when sagan talked about curiosity and About the scientific method not just pure science Here are these facts learn these I mean for him those facts were secondary. It was more of this I don't even want to say proven because I don't think we can prove that the universe is 13.8 billion years old We can say the best of our knowledge with the best tools that we have that is what we see, right? um, but just follow the evidence and that's That led me to question a lot of things and by the time I was about 16 or so I mean as dan denett put it I broke the spell like and You know It if you accept that everything in the huron is perfect, which you're supposed to But then you don't accept that muhammad flew to the moon on a winged horse And you know and the moon split and also you got to remember the winged horse. He took a he had to go from uh mecca to Jerusalem and then from jerusalem to the moon because there's no direct flight you have to catch a connection, right? So, I mean You know If I don't believe that and if the book says everything in it is true and it's perfect And if there's that one flaw then Other things are going to start falling apart, right? Uh, there's a story of this guy who walks and you know And it depends on how you interpret it But it basically says that the sun he sees the sun setting in a puddle of mud every night Now we know that doesn't happen, right? You know, I mean so once once that Came about I I mean I just couldn't um Maybe i'm like what pas how pascal wrote and you know And then when he had his wager like those that were so made that they cannot believe, right? um So yeah, I mean I I don't want to And that that's that's what led me to it and then by about you know I guess about six or seven years later Spoke my folks and all that came out and Why no bad Like nothing bad happened to me. I'm no very good relationship with them and everything and I mean I um You know, I i've had some distant relations that cut off Communication basically they sent me an email to tell me because this is a pre social media, right? They sent me an email to tell me that well, i've never spoken to you before but now i'm never going to speak to you again And it's like, okay Thanks, you know like It didn't really matter. Yeah. Yeah your the section in that conversation with andrea about your observation about especially immigrant communities tighten it immigrant communities and the The in In that community the difficulty for your parents in having a child leave the faith That was interesting Yeah, I mean it's But I mean that's all tight-knit communities. Uh, yes. No, you're exactly right I mean, I i've spoken with You know ex-mormons ex-jehovah's witnesses Ex-orthodox jews uh seeing a couple of videos Of conferences with ex-armist people. Yeah, and I mean there are some recurring themes and things like that. It's if the Depending on how close that community is, right? and how it's uh how everyone's interrelated and You know, you only do business with these people you only You know you socialize with these people Or if you work, you know in Any company or any large company that's not within that community you're there for work you come home and then everything else is insular, right? um So yeah If something happens everyone talks about it's like a small town. I mean, I you know if you've ever lived in a small town Or you know like a high school with less than a thousand people in it Everyone knows what everyone's doing like all the gossip goes around and it's so it's it's that it's like you might be living in manhattan But if you're in a sort of jewish community You know everyone in that community knows what everything is doing I mean if you take something like the joehovah's witnesses where and I think even the mormons where they have like a discussion with the elders and they Talk about everyone's dirty laundry and oh my son did this and you know this happened and everyone knows everyone's business So it's a form of gossip. It's a form of Oh, well, you're not you know You're not good enough a parent. You didn't do a good enough job or maybe you don't believe enough and I mean that can have depending on how tight that the community is and how uh How fundamentalist in their beliefs that could those members are it can have an even effect of? Well, your son did this and your daughter is now looking to get married well, you know because the the shame your son brought upon your family then Your daughter's not worthy to get married, right? I mean Luckily that didn't happen. I mean my sister married a guy, you know an american guy from washington state But it was there was nothing like there was no stigma there. Anyways, if she wanted to find a none and arranged but um You know like a matchmaker type thing, you know, I think there wasn't any of that um, so And I want to stress something here like even within closed communities so like the Um south asian community It was closed yes, and there were ghettoization but Even in that there were people who were far more open who would have uh friends outside of that circle who would have you know, or if um, my parents were really into classical indian music and the friends that they surrounded themselves, you know, the core group of friends that they had were Majority of them were south asian because it's classical indian music, but you know there was Uh canadi like french canadians. There was uh, you know european Uh, you know canadians or european descent there were people from you know expats from the u.s that come up. So It was not just This it wasn't that closed a community. So they were more open and they had a little bit more um Outside influence let's just say but yeah, I mean there is that huge aspect though like there was What will other people think like, you know, keep it to yourself. What will the other people think? And again, I think having pre internet pre social media Not really I shouldn't say pre internet because email and stuff was around but it wasn't as ubiquitous and it wasn't Everyone wasn't using it. Everyone wasn't on email everyone, you know Then you know, you couldn't share things all over the place. So You still have that insurer feeling now you can connect with whoever you want wherever you want, you know Like you and I are talking, you know, i'm sitting in montreal and you're in california somewhere. You know, like we met Graces of twitter, right? Yeah. Yeah Well, and and it's interesting again your parents lose status because in their community because of your you're leaving the faith now so you You you went to public high school in in montreal And I mean that that's okay where I grew up because again my dad specifically said I don't want to live in a ghetto-wise neighborhood Okay my high school I think my grad class had Maybe 10 people that weren't white. Okay, you know, it was a very wasp Um neighborhood, right? You know white anglo-saxon, right? Yeah, it was very very wasp. Um But I not french canadian not french canadian the Montreal is a is like montreal is a island of anglo in in quebec and It's kind of divided east west. So the western part of the island is more anglo than the Eastern part. So where we grew up was the western side of the island. Um It was predominantly anglo so The you know the english school board and same thing we came in before bill 101 Which is a bill that said if your parents weren't didn't go to an english school You had to go to a french school and it affected a lot of immigrants It was basically to make the immigrants learn french, but we got in just before that so I got to go to an english school Uh, so I was in the english school board But even then I I think around the third grade I convinced my parents to put me into immersion so I could learn french so Okay. Okay. So you you got out you got out of high school and where'd you go to college? Uh, okay So the quebec education system is a little different than the rest of north america like the rest of north america grade 12 Than four years bachelors quebec it goes to grade 11 Then you have two years of a junior college system. So think of it like a community college system It's called sejep and then three years to do your bachelor So it's the same amount of time, but it's broken up slightly differently. So I went to sejep near my in montreal Near where I was growing up And then I went to a university downtown montreal. Okay. Okay. What'd you study? uh sciences and then political science and I loved sciences. I adored physics math chemistry I did well um And you know, I took the ap courses in high school All I got to sejep and the teachers I had uh, there's a thing called, uh Redox equation so it's basically breaking down the solution in chemistry And I was taught a way and like in the ap class in grade 11. I just taught a way to do it It made sense to me. I liked it The way the teacher taught it in sejep It was a little confusing for me So I just in my assignments and on my tests I just kept doing it the way I was shown now I did all my work all the steps everything was done Got the right answer Was told that if I don't do it the way he taught me he would fail me I kept running into this in science and i'm like, well, that's not what science was I was told what science was and i'm just like Yeah, maybe I should have stuck to it. I don't know but I I just like screw you I I liked philosophy. I liked uh, I liked history. Um Like I want to know everything I I know I won't but I wanted to know everything anyway So I was like, okay, I like all this stuff. It's interesting political science kind of touched on all that so I wanted to polysci and You know, I I got out of the sciences And then they ended up working in it Yeah Yeah, so yeah, I mean so so after college, um What did you you did you get married at some point or anything like that? after college I left uh, Quebec and I went to vancouver because québec was going through another separation thing And it was you know, I was feeling I was bilingual. I had a I would okay. I was a graduate with a bachelor's but a university degree I worked You know for insurance companies. I worked my whole you know From the time I was able to work i'd worked I'd experience I couldn't find a job because I wasn't french Vancouver Vancouver was doing yeah, whatever. I mean Vancouver is doing well Uh, I moved out there. I lived there for a few years then I came back to Montreal in 2001 then in 2002 I I can't remember if it was the end of 2001 or the start of 2002. I answered an ad in the newspaper Saying do you want to go work in bosnia or afghanistan? There's like and they gave a list of jobs and one of them was an it manager job and I was like And that sounds cool. I'll take that. I'll go A couple of months after that. I got a phone call on a saturday morning I go it was about the job and A couple hours later. I got another phone call from someone else and that thursday. I was flying off to bosnia and that was So yeah, that was after after the civil war, uh, yeah, okay, so the war ended in basically around 2001 there was still some Some tension in 2002 not much Yeah, so I mean it was at that point. It was called s4 which was stabilizing force and that was the nato mission and that was uh, I you know, I was there to support the the Military communication systems, but yeah, it was so it was just that and it was the biggest threat in bosnia when I was there Was the landmines? um I mean they gave you a map whenever you went anywhere We were allowed to drive in a civilian vehicle as long as you had a military Escort with you so you had a military person with you with a weapon in the vehicle um And that was if you were staying within the country if you went to croatia, you could do whatever you want. They didn't care croatia was not considered dangerous and Bosnia wasn't either but they would give you a map like so let's say driving to sarajevo from where we were in the northwest corner to sarajevo They would put red marks wherever there was known landmines The whole highway was one big line of red and Okay, okay So let's say you're cruising down the coast highway, right? Okay, I've got you know You feel nature calling you got to go you pull over the side of the highway and you kind of get off the road and go In the bushes a little bit to hide yourself, right? Normally, yeah, they're like, nope stay on the hard pack Do not go on anything. That's not hard because you don't know where there's landmines So they're like peeing on the road if you got a teepee on the road like it's Oh look sari I worked in sarajevo for a while I my house was From my house to the back gate of the nato headquarters base in sarajevo was maybe 200 yards My backyard I couldn't go in because there was three known landmines in my backyard They hadn't been mined that close to nato headquarters Wow Okay You know, it's uh, what a mess All right, it's it's and and that's where you You really see it like okay. I've always been an enlightenment person. Um since I started reading, you know Once you started reading that stuff. I'm like, okay This is this is the ethos. I want to believe in this is the ethos that closely fits Whatever form my worldview right be it nature nurture, whatever um but then you go to a place like bosnia and These were people who were living together You know peacefully Okay, granted the balcons there's been a war there every 50 years for the last thousand years So, you know, it wasn't a long piece but but still generation after generation these people had been there and they just you know Because it is a crossroads and where it's located violence does break up quite a bit But then they just turned on each other for Uh, you know their their croats we're serbs their bosnians we're you know, we're orthodox You know They're muslim. We're not uh, you know 500 years ago their ancestors did this to us And it's just I mean you see the the sectarian violence you see what it causes you speak to some of these people I mean Majority of people there were young that I spoke to and I mean there's one girl who was translating for the military Her family spent three years in a basement in sarajevo And she said when you go to sarajevo, you'll see a lot of people just sitting by the river and this was you know She told me this in 2003. So this is a few years after all that happened So, I mean it's still pretty fresh, but they were just sitting there because they'd hidden away somewhere like that And they just want to be outside and they're glad they're outside and but like you can see them in there You know and she goes you can look on their faces. They're not happy But they're they're they're happy that they're outside but you know, they're they're mourning like three years or you know Whatever years of their lives lost stuck in this You know in a basement or an attic or whatever Because of sectarian violence because people have decided I know what's right And i'm unyielding. Yeah Yeah And and now what you said when you start reading this stuff, what stuff had you been reading from the enlightenment? um John stewart mill of a voltaire, uh milton pain, uh You know lock and i mean even precursors of that like Milton I know people say enlightenment, but milton might be like kind of on a border of Do you really want to call it enlightenment? um you know, uh Rousseau I know a lot of people say is anti-enlightenment. I can see where that argument is but I mean like the thinkers from that time even if they didn't agree with it, it wasn't like the you know You know like how dare you question my identity thing now like like you know Disagreements were allowed to happen in a civil manner now granted we can go back to You know there there were there was People getting extreme on all sides again then too and you know, obviously you can talk about Martin luther burning the peasants and stuff if you want to go back a little bit further and like, you know Execution between autist and catholic that was still going on in europe at that time um so I mean it wasn't like it was all wasn't all rosy, but the people who were coming with these ideas were at least trying to talk and You know you gotta like I think at the same time you gotta go back and look at some of the and I if you ask me right now, I I didn't look them up, but there were people in faith traditions too who were trying to Temper themselves and say okay, you know, there is something rising instead of just Putting up a wall and or batting heads and you know Let's try to make some accommodation which Is I think that's something that's sorely lacking these days and probably myself too. Like I'm probably guilty of that, you know So how long how long were you overseas outside of canada? Uh, so I left in 2002 I came back permanently in 2014. Uh, I had like brief stints between contracts where I'd come back for a few months but yeah, I ended up working in Originally started in bosnia then I was in afghanistan Also did kosovo sudan In haiti after the earthquake afghanistan. I was there the longest just because you know, there's the most contracts there And it was um, um, I was there almost seven years And that was again off and on like I never went um, the longest I think I did in afghanistan was about 20 months And then you know, I'd go and then I'd come back on a different contract and Okay, and so then you you said I mean both both to me and the message and You said you came back and you were surprised at what you found in even in 2014 Yeah, okay. Well, I was surprised at what you found in 2014 Yeah, okay. Well, okay, so I I leave And I mean it's kind of taken for granted that You know we treat people How they act and how they think and how you know, you know the martin luther king thing you treat them according to the content of Their character not to color their skin. I mean, I thought that was a foregone conclusion You know normal civil society had agreed upon that I come back and know that that's no longer true. It's because he's a you know He or she is x or whatever the you know, this this person is this identity and because of that their word has weight Um, and I kept hearing over and over and over again. You can't say that. How dare you say that, you know, and then slowly starting seeing like uh deplatforming and people getting banned for the Silliest things um and then People all right calling for bans and saying oh, well, how can you ban them there? You know, i'm a free speech person that we should have free speech and then A month or so later there. They're like why isn't this person banned? It's like, you know If i'm angry that um Someone I respect let's say sam harris, right if i'm angry that sam harris got banned And I and I have done this. Okay, how did sam harris get banned? But yet isis has accounts right? I shouldn't be asking for isis to get banned Let's just say let me yes. I agree isis is bad. I agree, you know all that stuff, but So let's not even take it to isis. Let's say if i'm if i'm arguing that sam harris is banned Then I shouldn't argue for a danesh de suza to get banned. Let's just say right Now I disagree with danesh but awful lot of things I disagree with danesh but awful lot of things I think he says some very ludicrous things, but I don't want him banned. I mean danesh is willing to sit down and talk with people at least right And so I the first thing I thought is like these when did we start getting secular blasphemy laws? Like how did this come in? And it it just seemed like that to me. It was just um And I mean I mentioned milton earlier and that was the first thing that I shouldn't say the first thing But it started popping in my head. It was a quote from paradise lost Uh, and it was a bash the devil stood and felt how awful goodness is And saw virtue in its shape How lovely and pined his loss so and you know He felt how awful goodness was like satan Felt a goodness comes down all implacable unyielding Defeats, you know satan's armies and defeats the armies of hell I mean and people think that might be the loss of satan's pining But like I think this loss he's pining is he was the bad guy. He's supposed to be the awful one He saw how bad goodness was how awful goodness was and like he always saw virtue saw the shape of virtue and thought how lovely it was And he then he came to the realization that he is no longer the baddest person there. He's no longer the most awful person He suffered that loss as well. Not only did his armies lose And that's the way I read it and that's what these people were doing they're turning goodness awful And it's like, okay. Yes racism is still a problem I'm not i'm never going to say it isn't I think it always will be as long as there are human beings There is going to be some problem with racism. We we are prejudicial To some extent by our nature, right? You know um But we can curtail it we can curb it, you know, we can temper it But this anti-racist stuff is not the way to go about it, you know, um the the like the the things I see coming out and Don't talk about this. Um it's The more you tamp down on what you can't say the more you you say you can't talk about it uh It's going to curdle and it's going to fester and you know It's going to come out in the worst possible ways I mean like now after 9 11 the you know, people were attacking seeks and one thing that really struck me was this um elderly woman in washington dc Who was a lebanese christian who did arabic translation from her home and she had her apartment It was like a a basement apartment in dc like a you know on a triplex or something like that She had all the windows and everything broken in and people like vandalized it Because she had a lot of arabic rights and she was like, oh my god A lot of arabic writing in because she was translating arabic when she was a lebanese christian. Yeah, you know, so I'm not saying they were curtailing stuff right after 9 11 because there was the whole you know, the spirit of you know America united against this foe whatever but They people took on that thing. Okay, we're gonna have to go have to go muslims, you know And there was a fringe aspect that did it but then from there It's like well islam is a religion of peace and you know Like the overcorrection went that way like oh we can't say anything against it and now i'm afraid of an overcorrection coming in the other way like I I see it. Okay. I mean I see it in in the right way um, I see it Okay, I heard you speak with james lindsey and I saw james and peter burgosian speak with um, forget the gentleman's name. Um But it was like a three-part thing they did on his podcast They were speaking about critical race theory and social justice coming into the church. Yeah. Yeah It's also coming into uh progressive muslim circles Okay, and now Okay Now I mean like I mentioned to you when I when I spoke to you like i'm not some fire-breathing atheist So, please forgive some of this. Um, i'm a pretty forgiving guy. Okay, go right ahead. Okay, so Faith is a dogma right and we we can go into that later if you want, but this stuff is also dogmatic. It is pure dogma now If you've got some people who are Like let's just say take islam in the west It is happen islam in the west What's happening islam in the west is what happened to christianity during the enlightenment as far as I can tell There's an internal struggle plus then you had outside forces. You had you know, you had science Building up a body of knowledge. You had these enlightenment philosophers saying, you know, maybe try something this way so that's happening to islam in the west right now because total access of information governments more or less aren't Blocking things wholesale like they are in, you know, islamic countries or in china or north korea And there is an internal struggle of you know, progressive muslim groups reform muslim groups muslim groups who want to stay fundamentalist so It's slowly being whittled away from many different sides now Some of these people are going to look for a dogma afterwards or they're going to look for a meaning system, right? If they fall into this critical race theory and they blend it with islam I hate to see what's going to happen. I was speaking to a friend of mine He's a gay ex-muslim in london and he said he went to this meeting of a uh A mosque that wants to start it's an inclusive thing And they'll have women imams and there's no segregation and they have they're openly accepting of you know, lgbtq Community in islam, but they had to hold their thing their meeting in a community center not in a mosque because You know the whole gay thing There are some progressive mosques that allow it but not very many and the one and even if this mosque had allowed it How would you know that community itself was very closed would they have would there be some physical harm? But he said the majority of the thing the majority of the time they spent talking about how the white man is holding them down so the critical race it so They're not helping the people they actually need to help Because they're not willing to talk about the real issues here Oh, that's just colonialism. That's just you know, the white man's rules Oh in india the homosexuality in india pakistan homosexuality had been accepted until the brits came in they brought in the you know the anti-homosexuality laws And it's giving you an excuse to why you didn't do this stuff Um And I mean I I don't pay enough attention to what's going on in the churches it's just you know, it's There's too much out there to pay attention to but I mean I see the little fringes of it and You know, I don't want to okay I you know truth be told like I want to put like a hand to the bible. Uh, if religion had never been have come about I would have been happy with that right it's here. I don't want to ban it. I don't want to get you know But if we can make some accommodation with it we should try to but I don't think This stuff I think critical race theory and I think the traditional stuff that's coming in from the right that's going too far Uh, like I saw some guy tweet yesterday. Oh women, uh, just realize that you're only here to produce children this is the oh a man wants this this and this and this and You know all these whatever they say trad christians now on twitter like oh, yeah, this is perfect A woman's only there to you know, so basically just be there to incubate babies and take care of them And you know the guy said oh once your past baby age then you're you're no use to me It's like okay. Well, that's not a good way to look at things either, right? And I mean I don't want either of these extremes going like I think this is an issue where with people like sam harris and richard dawkins and stuff and I respect them, you know tremendously um but And it's not that they don't focus on islam But it's it's it's like when you have the uh You know you talk about the the feminist not talk you talk about mansplaining explaining or manspreading But not talking about the hijab and the niqab and the condition of women Okay Christianity for the most part in the west You know, let's just look at north america forget europe because it's a lot more denuded in europe than it is, you know in the u.s It doesn't have the same bite. Yes, there is the you know evangelical movement And if you want to go as far as the the the reconstructionist or the dominion christians, you know, we you know You have that and i'm not going to discount it, but They were losing power So if we don't at least acknowledge that and say this is a less of a problem then You know fundamentalist islam and islamic countries, right? And we can come to some agreement with You know people like yourself they you know like and Who as far as I can tell you you aren't on a pulpit breathing fire and brimstone and you know I think we should try to look at how we can get along and let's Let's encourage the advancements that have happened so far You might have said okay, they were slow to come to this point But if you look they are getting faster, maybe not exponentially, but they are getting faster And the the progress is coming at a quicker pace. So, you know, why don't we celebrate that instead of equating? You know everyone you know Okay, progressive muslims here progressive, you know Like progressive judaism progressive christianity Let's laud all that let's work with these people too. So everyone can get along let's Yes, there is you know, the jerry fallwells and the you know, I don't know the ken hams of the world, right? Let's But let's try to contain them we can have you know, they can sit at the kitty table and we can have a grown-up talk But I don't know that we have to contain them because going back to your point earlier We certainly don't want to de-platform them. But part of the part of at least the enlightenment idea Is that well, let's let's you know, let's let's let the people have their say let's let the people make their case and um I don't have a problem with ken ham making his case I don't have a problem with jerry fallwell jr making his case I don't have a problem with any of those people making their case I i'll happily sit down with sam harris and richard dawkins and have them make their case and i'll make my case but the You know the the we're at an interesting point where we're we're sort of feeling the loss of this open public square Which which has been a significant achievement of the west something that something that grew out of at least in the west grew out of the history of the protestant reformation where In in western europe the roman catholic church basically had a totalitarian grip on everything that got broken up by martin luther And the the german princes who decided not to turn martin over to the catholic church to have him To have him tried and and killed as a heretic and so So then of course in europe you have these years of terribly bloody war that go back and forth And at the end of it everybody is like they'll This got us nowhere and of course then the enlightenment comes up and you've got volterre Making the observation that well when it seems to come to money that the christians and the muslims and the jews can all sort of agree And then if you read there's a really wonderful biography of a of a guy named roger williams Who there was sort of this nexus between? Um that happened in the netherlands where you have these two places in europe that were kind of open places Was the netherlands and switzerland and this was actually the place where my little aspect of of christianity grew Um at least the dutch part so john calvin in in switzerland and then dutch calvinism over in the netherlands And and out of amsterdam Grows this you know grows this tradition of religious tolerance and that then becomes the You know the the new idea founded in the american colonies because whereas many of the colonies had their religious traditions You know they were anglican down in in virginia in the middle america states and the dutch were sort of in the mid atlantic states and then The reformed up in the up in new england and you had some quakers and everyone there They basically said okay. Well, we're never going to these states are never going to be able to agree on religion So let's have a secular let's have a secular constitution that binds them all together and and we'll have the thomas jefferson puts in the um the establishment clause where the state will Establish no state church for the united states and and whereas there was there was there was obviously A significant number of religious people at least in the americas Um, there wasn't a a religious test for for public participation within the within the within the public square, so so Achievement in the united states spread back over to europe So then you have these these countries like the netherlands and england that formally are christian countries but very quickly pragmatically become open countries where England stops warring between the The puritans and the and the catholics and they all settle out and so on and so forth And so you have this long history and and so then in in europe you have this this openness And but now you know i'm just listening to i've posted it on my channel a couple of times some quotes from tom holland Who just wrote a very interesting book? Um, he had written a book about the history of islam and a lot of islamic. Um, Individuals didn't like him poking around in the history of their faith And so they said why don't you write one of your own faith and he's like, well, I I I I grew up english, but I don't go to church or anything. So then he starts poking around said well, all right You know, he's right wrote about the roman empire and everything I'll write something about the the rise of christianity and one of the things that he noted was something that an indian scholar had mentioned Heard him mention was that when christianity grew around the world via obviously the colonial powers Two religions came one was sort of confessional christianity where people would make you know public professions of Jesus's lord and those kinds of other things and the other was secularity which said basically well There's this there's this space for people to be non-religious and once that space was created What in a sense it made was a definition of religion. So for example You know the the majority culture in india they they didn't know they were hindu Until the british came and named them that and you know, so this whole history gets going Even even though obviously there had been years of of struggle between Islam and what we call hinduism and you know jainism and the seeks I mean a huge history back there for all of that. So so anyway then in the west this This dominates, but I don't know if you've followed much of john vervecki's work. I've talked about him on my channel He's the one that really came up with this term the meaning crisis And and has sort of popularized it And a bunch of us who sort of found each other via the jordan peterson moment have have also sort of found John vervecki and I brought him into the conversation. He was a colleague of john vervecki at university of toronto and and vervecki notes that you know And I was so interested in both listening to the story that you've told here and then the conversation of where you're of that andrea sort of led you into on one hand You know, so so what sort of happens I think in the history of development, especially in the west was that states Begin to displace. Let's say traditional community of tribal and family structures And and these so in europe these states grow And increasingly such as in the 20th century you have a state a very statist Ideology of communism on one hand you have a very anti-statist ideology of nazism on the other hand Nazism i've been reading timothy snider's book nazism is this really interesting very darwinian nichian um Ideology that says we need to get rid of all this Metaphysical thought and just have human beings become the animals that they really are And and so when the the soviets come through they established the state and when the nazis came through they tried to tear up the state Because they wanted the state out of the way So natural human violence could lead to the you know could lead natural darwinian forces to the the evolution of the species Now that was nazi ideology and the west sort of stood apart from that and had this weird amalgam of private religion And open public space and and and use that to You know open markets open public space to counter You know the soviet threat then through the middle of the 20th century now obviously much bigger histories out there in terms of you know After world war one part of the real experiment was what was the ottoman empire that after their defeat You know attatürk establishes a secular state in Turkey, you know the british, you know when they leave you have this sort of secular state in india You know the communists bring in, you know, their own brand of secularism in china Japan has its own form after the second world war africa's working through those issues as Islam and christianity sort of try to carve up the remnants of animism on that continent So, you know, we're seeing all of this all of this incredible Movement going on over the last few centuries and and I think you're right in in that What what's happening now in the west is? a question of well How how christian is the enlightenment really? And and if you're a secularist are you in fact kind of a non-cretal um kind of a non-cretal thing You know that most of the most of the world will look at and call it sort of christian But now you see muslims and other sort of you know finding their way in it So there's a lot going on in this and then to get that other part of the conversation you you had with andrea about community One of the interesting things that that struck me about your conversation with her and in this conversation is Is the is sort of the turn that happened in canada you were you were sort of at the tail end of okay You're coming to canada now. We're going to formally indoctrinate you Into what it means to be a canadian citizen because that's a thing whereas Increasingly it's well you're in canada now, but we want you to To what to you know, and so I don't know so there's a whole bunch of stuff i'm throwing at you Yeah, okay there you want to pick up. Okay. The last thing you said the multiculturalism thing, right? It's a huge failure it is right Okay, when my parents came in it wasn't like an indoctrination. It's here is Here are it's not the don't don't cross this, you know, don't jaywalk. Don't break the speed limit. It wasn't that right? We have an openness here. You are allowed to practice your religion And you're allowed to practice your religion your faith. You can get services in your language so like You know if someone is a new immigrant, they don't speak english or french properly They can go into a government office and they will get translators Now that I know in québec there's some stuff going on. So someone might say oh don't do it québec anymore. Whatever um, so there there was this kind of stuff, but it was more of This these are the values we like now you have the right to Try to be closed, you know if you come in and say I won't hire group x because of their group membership Yes, you're going to run into trouble with the law. You're going to face those consequences No one's going to stop you from opening up your business. No one's going to stop you from doing anything like that No one's going to until you put though until you put your beliefs into practice And that's going to affect someone else Believe what you want, right? I think that was more the message I was trying to be I wasn't in those courses, so I can't say for sure but It wasn't a thing of like here are the laws. This is what it means to be canadian. It's like In canada, we do things this way maybe subtly or subconsciously. That's what they were trying to imply But then this multiculturalism thing that says that All cultures are equally valid You know that they're you know We can't complain about something bad in one culture because well we might have done something in our own culture, right? Yes, and there is some legitimacy to that you shouldn't you know When I eat indian food I eat with my hands because i'm used to eating with my hands and for some reason I think it tastes better right Okay, but there's no barbecue place in montreal It's like one of the best places for barbecue chicken in montreal and they have a big sign when you walk in it says Fingers were made before forks I could tell a story of a number of generations ago of where the reason on a certain branch of my family tree came to america was because Part of the group was eating with their hands and the other part didn't want to so they moved to america. So anyway, I do that Anyway, I do that So I mean like we we can't appreciate the differences in each other's cultures we can appreciate You know, we shouldn't just prejudice someone because they're from a different culture. We should give them the equal opportunity to Show us what it is, right? And i'm not saying canada does this i'm not saying any country does this Well, actually, you know what fgm? Right, that isn't a born practice I think the one of the female general in relation Okay, so there's been a law in the books in the uk for 30 years. I think like some of the first trials are happening now Because how how can we you know, how can we complain about their culture? How can we you know? Imprison them for doing something that's culturally biased or a part of their culture so Out of fear of being called racist or out of fear of being Culturally insensitive Little girls for the last 30 years have had Genitalia mutilated, you know, and they were trust up like turkeys Like i'm sorry. It's in the uk in the uk It happens in the u.s as well. I mean it was uh in michigan recently. I think The doctor was I'd have to double check but you could there was a case famously in the last couple years in the in michigan Where the doctor was found now not guilty because of religious exemption and the doctor was performing fgm in the states So in the uk, that's I believe it's 30 years that the law has been on the books and they're only recently started prosecution Now that is where multiculturalism has gone bad You know that is where? goodness has become awful Um, you know in the states you do more of the melting pot thing Which I think is a better way of going about it, you know, here is what an american ideal is you know come in Become part of the the the mixture become part of the stew, right add your own Uniqueness to it, but you take on that one ethic and I I don't I don't think like a civic and I don't you know, like the the ra ra nationalism like But but there should be some civic pride. There should be some pride in You walk down the street. You see some garbage on the street pick it up and throw it out I mean i'm not saying pick up every cigarette butt or whatever, but you know Someone drop like a bag or something or whatever. It's right for the garbage can like throw you'll pick it up. Throw it away um you know you're walking down the road and there's a A tree branch, you're not going to hurt yourself moving it move it off the road You know, don't leave it on the road for someone to get You know, just just little things like that Like I don't know. Maybe I just I just rambled off completely. Oh, no, that's fine. But see part of what? What See part of what's been happening in the united states and you know I think andrea was trying to go there in your conversation with her was that And and this is where this is where some of jordan peterson's work comes in because People The question is how do how do people how do people begin to agree on what is permissible and what isn't permissible? That There was a study done by a sociologist named christian smith He's now teaching at noter dame and he wrote a book he wrote a number of books where he he Questioned american young people, uh high school kids college kids asked them questions about basic morality And and discovered and and they were from you know christian all the various different christian groups catholic Baptists atheist muslim mormon just crossed the board and found that that generally speaking there was a fairly high degree of commonality between them which which sort of meant that the the religious traditions that were supposed to inform to basically inform people as to what is You know what is permissible and what is not permissible even to the point of that which is disgusting and that which is not disgusting and you know we can Female genital mutilation if we push that over to the side obviously there's a There's an increasing community that talks about male genital mutilation by which they mean circumcision Which is obviously a practice that's practiced in in judaism in certain branches of islam in christianity and and so A a group of people that has a unified identity generally speaking what creates that unified identity? It's usually a story and In american society they had these these they had these american stories now Part of as you said with multiculturalism part of the difficulty of these american stories was was that there were always people on the fringes Of these stories, you know the great pioneer story, of course comes on the heels of the great smallpox You know epidemic that wiped out and created the open lands I mean the dutch had this the boars had this in south africa I mean this happens all over the world obviously and so what creates a cohesive group is that they have a story and and so nations had stories and and so for example part of what we see it in the wake of the of the german wars of the 20th century in europe is what What what is the story of germany after world war two and germany's still wrestling with that story? And of course part of that was why they let in all of the syrians and well now they're worried about how those million Sudden immigrants are going to play in their culture What we're facing is that in a world of nets and jets Having coherent stories that help people give basic navigation In the world is difficult. Have you read much jonathan height? Yeah, i've read the okay. I mean I read his recent book with greg lucianoff but also then i have also read the happiness hypothesis and The righteous mind the righteous mind. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah all good books and height I think really is helpful in that because he notes that for many of us our Our instinctive responses about that, which is impermissible Are formed by You know, there's there's biological formation there's cultural formation, but it's formed by the stories and I I think we're at a point now where We you know, we don't know what to do Because in a sense the the naked public square has been exposed to have never have been quite as naked As we imagined it to be and and all of those young people that christian smith Interviewed when he'd asked them about morality they would all say well morality is just self-evident Well, that's true if you don't get out too much And as you discovered going to place like bosnia, it's like well Well, this doesn't work, you know Killing each other that doesn't work and and so You know one of the things one of the people that i've been reading more of that someone you might be interested in taking a look at Is a a guy named renee gyrard Who who basically asserts that ask the question of why did religion why did religion emerge in the first place? You know, I I heard joe rogan and richard darkins on on their podcast And and joe rogan and richard darkins are scratching their head about why why was why was you why was religion? ubiquitous Throughout the world You know with little tiny exceptions like maybe some little pockets of greeks, but then after the enlightenment we you know in You you kind of were able to create a a non-religious space and we imagined that that was non-religious But that now what we're realizing is that it's probably not as non-religious as we imagine and so what then could be The platform by which groups can live together peacefully And you know and and figure these things out so renee gyrard basically said Religion formed as a way to not have us kill each other which sounds strange to our ears because it seems that That people kill each other over religious reasons all the time yeah, I think a closer examination even by You know by a number of people note that religion is usually sort of a um Is usually sort of a a marker or a justification For violence, but but often the the causes of violence can tend to be very practical um very historical And and so yes, you see violence between christians and muslims But you see a tremendous amount of violence between christians world war one for the most part and and between muslims And between muslims so and so renee gyrard says violence was was religion was a way that christ that that Early human beings began to attempt to limit violence and channel Violence and so I would I would I would recommend taking a look at at some of his thought but yeah Okay, i'll take a look at that because I mean, I think I said this to andrea when I spoke with her which was that Okay, this is just you know my tin foil hat explanation of where religion came from right um so I was like, okay. Let you know we come out of the trees. We're on the savannah or even while we're in the trees small little packs So if you kill a member of your tribe your tribe is weakened your tribe can get harmed Don't kill a member of your tribe, right? Go on We go on in savannah we start evolving and getting into like like slightly bigger groups get a village Then you'll start agriculture build a town build a city Empire, right? Civilization I think in each of these steps those little rules Like I I don't want like I mean you can talk about evolutionary you can talk about memetic or whatever, but those little rules, right? Don't steal food from a member of your tribe because they'll go hungry They'll die the tribe is weakened. Don't you know kill them? You know defend your tribe against others don't take other people's side and whatever As we got into bigger and bigger groups You know go go past dunmar's number which is like what 150 right you go you go past that Things have to become codified things have to become You know written down put in stone You know oral traditions passed down the keepers of the knowledge the key, you know And I think that's how religion slowly started And then I mean, okay if you look at the the abrahamic myths You know if you look at the myth of horus and the myth of Horus is basically a common, you know, moses and jesus You know, you can find similarities in both their stories in the story of horus Right and that predates both of them So similar stories were around I mean if you and I can get into the metaphysical You know the metaphysical discussion around this I think at this point that discussion is kind of useless Unless you know you're at you're having some kind of academic debate about it But so I think that these stories work and I agree with you stories are very very important I think these are what kept us together and through those stories we You know again the keepers of the knowledge Kept that and this is that's what they imparted to the people And so you come to the enlightenment or you come to gutenberg and you get movable, you know movable type printing press And information is disseminal everywhere. So then That knowledge is not held by one class anymore you know Thomas more burning people at the stake for owning a bible in english You know in in the middle east If you look at the tradition of the golden age There's plenty of philosophers in the middle east that are not taught in the middle east that were so I've only read a few of them. So like al-farabi ibn khaldoon Avaros and avancenna, these are the four biggest ones And avancenna and avaros everyone even in the west people, you know people who study philosophy know them the and they're not allowed in in islamic countries because they opposed They opposed dogma they they they wanted free thinking right? So then you have someone like al-ghazali who You know brings in the dogmatic thinking it says okay And people kind of mistakenly say oh he said don't study math he didn't say don't study math He said don't study any new math We know enough math because we can do it all our engineering everything only And al-ghazali comes with comes with the sufi tradition. Now. We think of sufis as peaceful and kind of mystical But the whole sufi tradition was only study anything that is for the love and the glory of islam and allah And so that's what al-ghazali put forward and you can take that to an extreme and get what you have from al-ghazali And if you look at those two thought patterns that come through and you can say yes, this comes from an abrahamic tradition And some of the the things that avaros and avancenna and even khaldoon all these people brought into the west After the fall of you know, the golden age when the mongols sacked baghdad when that knowledge came into the west That line of thinking was part of the stuff that led to the enlightenment Al-ghazali led to thomas aquinas writing his rules for how to burn witches and heretics you know But only one tradition was kept in the middle east so you had that as well in the middle east like you know oppose and You know like like is it thomas moore burning people at stake or you know, uh bruno giorgian in italy being being burned at the stake for being a heretic I mean even capernicus if you look at it He was trying to find a better way to calculate easter when he found out. Oh, wait a minute The sun doesn't go around the earth right he was doing it for a religious reason. He was not He was not trying to break religion. He was not trying to defeat religion and prove religion wrong. He was trying to help it and But he couldn't help but you know kid. This is what my observations are showing me. So either God is putting a veil above his eyes and showing him this illusion and it's testing his faith Or he has to think that something's wrong here, right? So I I think that's like I said, that's my very simplified idea of how faith came about But I think those stories are important like you know the the cave paintings sitting around the fire and telling each other stories You know, uh making a hero of the best hunter in the in the tribe, right? You know So maybe that's where the story of hercules came from like it was one of the best hunters or whatever the best warrior I go with who knows? But like so we've lost that you know Everything is infused with politics, uh Okay, a simple thing in canada recently just around remembrance day, um Hockey night in canada, which is a tradition that goes on, you know every saturday night It goes back to on radio and for about 40 years now There's a little been a little bit segment in between the two first and second period called coach's corner with his guy don cherry Picture archie bunker. All right, just just just just just picture archie bunker really loud ugly suits. Okay Now he said something very stupid On remembrance day about people not wearing the poppy and he's talking about you people come to canada for our milk and honey and blah blah blah, and you don't wear the poppy and like, you know And people got upset now Honestly, like getting upset about don cherry saying something stupid is like getting upset because water's wet It's just like just raw you know and Now he got fired and there's all this uproar. Oh, what about free speech and oh, it's a private company But I mean it's no now hockey is no longer about hockey Right hockey the nhl as far as i'm concerned should be about laughing at the maple leafs and their fans Not about the You know And it's the same thing with kapernic It's you know I don't disagree that there's a problem with you know Police brutality. I i'm not saying it's as bad as black lives matter make it out to be but maybe it's not as well informed as I should But if he wants to use his fame And talk about it But to do it, I mean whatever like it I think we need some things that are on their own. I need we need some things that we can share as a society be it Seinfeld you're talking about the stupid thing Seinfeld did on a show at the water cooler on a friday morning after it aired on thursday Or you're talking about you know football on monday morning or the baseball game or whatever We need some stuff that we can share That we can have arguments about that don't really mean much right? You know You're a yankees fan or a red sox fan, you know, some people take that to an extreme But most people can have good-natured ribbing about that And we're losing so much of that And I mean faith provided people with those things and you went every week to your house of worship or I mean daily or whatever I mean And those were reinforced, you know, or you watch nfl every sunday and that gets reinforced you speak about it with your buddies You know watch hockey night in canada every saturday night in canada and you you know, you talk about that with your buddies You go in a hockey pool, you know sports fantasy, whatever You have something that builds you a community around your immediate people and faith was good at that like I mean like i'm not like i'm not one of these people like I agree to some extent with With hitchens when he says religion poisons everything but then I pull myself back to some extent because I think it should be dogma poisons everything I mean, I think it's when you get into that harsh dogmatic thinking That's what poisons everything um Like okay, eric weinstein said this a while ago. I think it was on maybe it was on joe rogan, but he was talking about how If you take a look at something like in the jewish tradition, you know Those that lead you away from the gods of your fathers, even if they're your brother kill them, right? You don't see many jews acting that out or even talking about that Because it's code that no longer runs right he equated as a computer code So If there are people of any faith tradition that are using these stories and they're and they're and they're keeping you know Like that kind of stuff out of it, you know, they're not Exemplifying a lot a lot for offering up his daughters to get raped because he didn't want the angels to get sodomized by his neighbors But now i'll take my daughters instead I mean if you could say okay Well, maybe that wasn't the best thing to do like you know You could you know, you can find the story of the good samaritan and you know And show like the goodness in that and you can kind of leave the fire and brimstone out of it Like, you know, okay, this is code that doesn't run. It's And so I mean if there are religious people trying to make those accommodations That's a good thing. Like I I think the good story of the good samaritan Is not poison but I think the dogma and everything that comes along with That comes that comes wrapped in that is what the poison is um you know, like I said, I You know, I don't know if I made sense there or not No, I you make you make complete sense and one of the things I get frustrated when I Listen to people like sam harris talk about religion and he says ah religion has slavery and all this stuff It's the show it show me a christian church in the united states that practices slavery Um, you know all these christians what they're hiding slaves in their house They they you know, yes they and and these are issues with christians and I think code that code that no longer runs Is a great way of illustrating that People have sort of managed especially within a secularized Enlightenment frame have sort of managed. Well, this is this is my holy book and I believe everything that that that says in it But well, well not really and in fact if you talk to christians theologians will say what what actually Theology has been doing all along the way is working through these questions right along the way and and part of what you Have a diversity of churches is that you have some churches that are very conservative Some churches that are very progressive and what happens throughout that spectrum is as that spectrum goes through time it's sort of like a filtering process where Throughout the community All these different aspects are trying out different ways of living and at least in a sort of marketplace way in the west You know some are attracting adherence some are pushing away adherence But within sort of a government frame for the most part that was fairly loose People had the liberty to practice the community of their religion within a certain amount of limits You couldn't you know, you couldn't kill someone for wanting to say go to another church or not Go to church that in many ways was sort of sorted out in the puritan experiment, you know Very early early on in american history So what we've seen throughout american history is all of this stuff working out, but I do want to go back to your The question of about the source of religion because and I think you're very right So you have a small group of small familiar group. Have you listened to jordan peterson's biblical series? some of it, um, okay, I I when jordan peterson first came on the scene. I liked what he said about free speech but then The the term douglas Murray used when he like he was kind of moderating the talk between him and sam harris the jesus smuggling Yes That kind because he was not he was kind. I always find him very quick like he didn't He wasn't firm on what he was trying to say and it was kind of like okay You're very much scurrying the issue and that's that's where he lost me. So I didn't see a lot of it I saw some of it. Okay. Well, let's push up to let's push them to the side then and and talk about okay So you've got people in groups of let's say less than 100 and they're all they're all blood related, right? And that's you know, and that's it. So jane good at all goes into and studies the chimps and discovers that Doesn't want to tell the world because at that point in the 60s everybody's thinking oh nature is wonderful and humanity It's very russoian, you know evil comes from human human institutions And she basically notes that even a member of a chimp tribe if they were to go to another tribe If they set foot back within the boundaries, you know The chimps would tear that chimp to pieces and that's how tribal chimps are and human beings are about that tribal If you know you can if you could still find one of these tiny little groups living, you know Living in a jungle someplace who doesn't have contact with the vast network of civilization that we all live within You know that they kill any new person that comes near them. That's that's part of what we do Sorry, I just want to interrupt but that was kind of pointed out earlier this year when that guy went into that that that missionary That's right. That's right And that's how people are and so then you have the question. Well, how how can you? Because here's the thing there's a dilemma for that insulated tribe Which is there might be information and technology and all good things out there that other people have and they're not your tribe How can we trust them? And one of the things that so i've also been following john verveckis work and and john vervecki notes quite rightly That if if you know if I ask you what you are You are I mean if I compare you now to you as a six-year-old or you as a 12-year-old you'll say you're the same you But the cells in your body are different. You look very different your your context is different You have you know different capacities so on and so forth what what you really are is sort of this this autobiography autobiographical story that you've been running in your head ever since you were three or four or five years old and You know until really you got to 25 years old But but really that's what you are much more than your body, okay and so in to a to a great degree what a person really is is sort of a story and I would argue that if you listen to to peterson's especially his first lecture in the biblical series And and you combine that with some of vervecki stuff if we are a story Story is the machine code of the human being And so what happens is that stories develop now now here's a question How do you make a family member of someone who is not a blood relative? And the answer to that is is is the oldest institution in the world not prostitution But instead marriage because what happens with marriage is you get married And you get married and you get married and you get married and you get married and you get married and you get married Now what happens is you take a non blood relative hopefully from another tribe very early on it was cousins, but then obviously it Expanded and you bring them in and you make a non family member a family member and from that new families grow Okay. Well, how do you negotiate that interchange between these two groups you do it via story And and because you have to do it via story What you really do is you set up other stories around you really do is you set up other stories around that make sense of your unified story. And so what one might argue is actually the network of civilization is really a network of stories and the sussing out of those stories and the creation of, let's call them archetypes or even principalities of, you know, why, for example, is Uncle Sam real? Well, what is Uncle Sam? Can you point to Uncle Sam? Does Uncle Sam have flesh? No, not really. But people fear Uncle Sam. They pay taxes to Uncle Sam. They'll even put on a uniform and go die overseas in the name of Uncle Sam. And so what happens is that these stories come together and it's via these stories that you can actually take people who are not blood relatives, that you can break the bloodline bondage that basically humanity is genetically sort of imprinted at and begin to trust other people who are not your blood relatives. And so one way of understanding civilization and one way of understanding religion is the working through of and the development of all of these shared stories and characters. And so what happens obviously with nationalism as it develops is that, well, nationalism are usually stories about ancient heroes. So George Washington and Abraham Lincoln and these sort of become churches in the West. They're sort of churches, but they're special kinds of churches that have some continuity, but some breaks with the far older, broader story things that religions are. And so what we have right now with enormously rapid multiculturalism is a clash of stories. And we simply don't have time to work through these stories. I mean, it takes a long time to work through the stories. And if you look at, again, Peterson talks about this in his biblical series, the development of monotheism, let's say. And you can even find the seams of this in the Bible, where if you read the Bible very, you know, Elohim, which is the Hebrew word for God, it's in the plural. And then you see all of this, you know, so tribes, somebody gets eaten by another person. So therefore, you know, Marduk, the god of the Babylonians, was greater than these others. And then you can actually watch it in the Hebrew scriptures in a book like the Book of Ezekiel, where what's happening in the Book of Ezekiel is they're actually parsing through the relationship between the defeated Hebrew god whose temple got burned by the armies of Marduk. And so what happens in that story is somehow for the Jews, Yahweh doesn't surrender. And in their story, what they basically say is that Yahweh is over Marduk and used Marduk to, not in those words exactly, to come and destroy God's people because they weren't faithful. In other words, I mean, this whole thing is a progression of stories. And the difficulty that you have when you have these clash of stories is that our morality is always sort of downstream from story. And we only process morality via story. And so, well, what happens is that if our stories are not in sync, I mean, watch what's happening in the impeachment hearings right now. We have Democrats and Republicans, and they have two different stories. And they're trying to work through these stories and trying to find one unified story that resolves the mystery of Donald Trump. Now, that's not going to happen for a while. But back with Nixon, it was the same thing. And eventually now we sort of have one story about Nixon that Nixon said, I am not a crook, but he was a crook. And he did organize the... And that's where sort of the story verse and the matter verse begin to line up. And that's also what we're seeking because they have to line up. But getting them all together is an enormous amount of work. And especially when you've got large populations, it takes a lot of time. And I think this is how religion developed and why religion is ubiquitous. And this is also why this strange imagined no religion is actually just another type of religion, but with different values. And so with the conquest of the Western democracies, first over the Nazis and then over the Soviet Union, well, what are we doing now? Well, in a sense, Islam, now we're dealing with Islam again via 9-11, but we're still working through these story questions and saying, well, can we have a unified story? And in some ways, the atheists come below and say, well, let's just keep it based on matter. But that's not how human beings work. Human beings, they themselves are not so much bodies as stories. And so politics is... See, one of my things is that religion is always, and politics is now. And so what's happening again in the impeachment hearings are that they're trying to figure out the story that works and the story that will win because at some point, Donald Trump won't be around anymore. And all of this... We hope. Wait, well, he's not going to live forever eating all that KFC at the White House. He snuck out to the doctor a few days ago. Nobody paid near enough attention to that. It's like... Anyway, so, but this is how human beings work. And now when you talk about community and the lack of community, well, there was a civic story that people could participate in. And usually when there's a war or something like that, I mean, the 20th century galvanized the United States among civic stories, and then they tried to marshal those same efforts to defeat communism, but along came Vietnam. And Vietnam, that was supposed to be a war against communism. And eventually what we had to realize is that communism was just sort of a front over Vietnam, and it was really a tribal national story and so then you had, well, the American government lied about the war and did not honor the troops. And then Nixon comes along and this hierarchy of trust just basically collapses, and that happens obviously in continuation with the 60s, with the counterculture and this whole change in the culture. So, I mean, all of this stuff is tremendously large, but again, story is the machine code of human beings and religion is sort of the deep story level and politics is sort of the surface story level of the now. And we're all trying to work through this, but all of this stuff, morality, community, meaning, it's all running on this code. And right now, we've just got so much information, so many different stories and conflict. We're in the painful throes of trying to get our stories straight. And that's my take. No, and I mean, I agree with a lot of that. And the thing you said about the atheism thing, right? I was on a panel in New York City a couple of years ago. And the question was about, well, how, you know, if because of all these signs, how can you still have people, you know, there was the engineers and stuff in 9-11, right? They were engineers and doctors. Now, my take on this was this, okay, I said, if you take a look at the Abrahamic faith, I was only concentrating on the Abrahamic. I wasn't going into the Buddhist and the Hindu traditions and all that. Now, it wasn't like people just say, the fruit of the tree of knowledge, right? No, it was the fruit of the tree of knowledge of good and evil. It was a specific knowledge that was forbidden. Now, whether you believe the creation myths in Genesis or not, or even the ones in Isaiah, where, you know, God fought the sea serpent and all that stuff, whether you believe them or not, that was the biblical science for a lack of a better term, right? God said, I did this, I created all this. Look at all these creatures. Look at this garden. I did this for you. Worship me. So the science was handled, right? God did it. That wasn't the question. The question was, what is good and evil? What is right and wrong? You know, those were the questions that were held. And again, that's what I think the priestly class held. So when I talked about that, like, you know, how you're saying, like, everything is in story. So, like, as we, as the tribes, you know, as these primate tribes codified this stuff, that's what that story became of. That's the knowledge that was held. So if you want to defeat religion, like I said, that's not my goal, right? It's not my goal is to wipe it out or whatever, you know, if it had never been created, great, but whatever, I'm not, I'm just, let's get along. But if that's your goal, if you don't provide that, if you just go in like Dawkins and break the spell and say, okay, here's why scientifically it's wrong. So you've shown them that it's wrong. You've shown them, okay, fine. You, you've wasted your life or whatever. You've followed this and it's wrong. Now what have you taught them how to think differently? Have you taught them not to think in a dogmatic fashion? Have you taught them when you see bad code, don't go follow it. When you hear a bad story or bad instructions, if the story you're following is telling you to kill every third person you meet, maybe it's not a good story. But like, if you don't give them the tools to, to not follow a bad story. So I mean, like, again, I respect a lot of what Dawkins did. I respect his science writing more than I respect the God delusion. You know, like I have no problem with the book, the God delusion, but I thought the blind watchmaker and the selfish gene were much better books. And I think that would do a much better service of saying, here's why religion is wrong. Or, you know, here's what it gets wrong or here's what it's wrong in the factual things. Here's why it's not the absolute truth or whatever. I mean, if that's the way you want to go, I think those do a better job than the God delusion does because they are explaining the story of the gene. They're explaining the story of how, you know, like how we pass things along. They're explaining that. So if you can, if you want to, if that's Dawkins' goal, I think he has to focus more on that, the knowledge of good and evil, you know, because I mean, okay, let's take something from Islam that the sperm is formed between the ribs and the backbone. Now, it's very easy to disprove scientifically. Now, if I disprove that and I shatter someone's spell about how everything else is wrong, like, you know, the moment flying to the moon, the sun setting in the in a puddle of mud, like you say all that stuff is wrong and you prove it. You still haven't taught that person anything else. All you've taught them is this is all wrong. So then they could fall under, there was a thing in Nevada about the story came out in 2016, but it was a bunch of ex-Muslims that had turned to a, they'd become Baptist or something. Right. And it was, they'd actually broken up a bunch of Catholic masses and they were calling them evil. They're saying the Pope is the anti-Christ and all this stuff. And so all the zeal that they had as fundamental as Muslims now was being thrown into the Baptist things. Right. That's right. And you see that all the time. So that's what I mean. That's what I was trying to say, like with the Dawkins thing, like, you know, don't just go in there and say, okay, this is why you're wrong. You're stupid. This is your, your it's all bullshit here. You know, I can prove to you scientifically or I can prove to you logically why all this stuff isn't correct. Don't believe it anymore. You haven't taught that person. You haven't given them any mechanisms to, you know, go through and say, okay, maybe, okay, what was wrong with that system? Why was that system wrong? Not just, you know, like, like if you're trying to teach a kid, uh, the, the quadratic equation in mathematics, right, you can just give them the answers all the time and say, this is what the answers are for the test. And then the kid's never going to learn what that equation is and how to work it out. But if you show them how that works and show them how, how you can give them any set of numbers, put them in there, he can figure out that thing, right? Or, okay, you have to solve for X in this one. We've got the rest of the, but if you just keep feeding the answers and that's to me, that's the Dawkins approach is that is just feeding the answers of the science. This is why science defeats religion. And it's just giving them the answers, giving them the cheat sheet, not having them do the learning themselves to come up to it. Well, I would argue, I don't know if there's a guy named Clay Rutledge, who he's, um, he's written a book and there's a lot of people who have made these observations too. When people, when people get rid of the, you know, when people get rid of the organized religion that they maybe were raised in, but you know, had problems with dinosaurs or what have you, they don't, they don't get non-religious. They, because again, our machine code is story. People are going to find other stories to try to live off of. And it's, it was very interesting to me that you can't even tell, let's say the substrat, the, the, what Charles Taylor calls the subtraction story or the story of evolution without telling it like a story, because that's simply how we work. You know, you can, you can have a wall full of physics or chemistry and you can have all those equations on a wall and maybe a chemist or a physicist might be able to navigate that. But the only way that actually gets into community is if it, if it takes the form of story, because that's, that's really, I think the only way that we can take, it's probably the most efficient way that we can process the insane complexity of this world. And, and that's why we always give illustrations when we try to teach something, because the illustration is a real embodiment of the thing underneath that is the pattern that we are trying to, that we are trying to put into our machine code so that it can become mimetic and others can pick it up. And so this, you know, part of the, when I look at, well, one of the interesting things, I'm also going to send you a link to a story, to a piece written by start, you know, Slate Star Codex, because what happened, and I got into this when I talked to James Lindsay and it's in my conversation with him, what happened was basically a big part of the woke movement. Now they have allies in evangelical Christianity, mainline Christianity, Islam, all along the way, you know, woke is the new, is the new powerful religion that's come onto the scene and it's unified segments of, of these various religious traditions. But that was actually a split within the atheist community. I didn't appreciate that until I talked to James Lindsay and this Slate Star Codex article basically talks about, he's a, he's a psychiatrist, basically talks about how that worked. And I think it worked because we can really only process in terms of story. And so then this postmodern woke religion became in the, you know, filled the vacuum of certain atheist tribes. And that of course created the split where Boghossian and Lindsay and Plekros sort of found themselves on the outs. And, but we're, we're human beings are always going to do story. We're not going to stop because that's how we're, that's our, that's our native language. Oh no. I mean, again, it goes back to sitting around the fire and telling a story. I mean, I mean, I mean, okay, camping with my friends. Okay. I love camping. I love being outdoors and you're sitting around with your friends, you know, you don't have your phone, you don't have anything like that. And it just, oh, you could tell stupid stories. You can tell ghost stories, but it's, it's how we, it's how you bond. It's how you get together. And it's, okay, I did a lot of work overseas. So, you know, there's a high turnover in these jobs and you know, no one wants to go to Afghanistan. And sometimes people get there and they're like, no, I'm going home right away. You know, they just can't deal with it. So you always knew people coming in. You're always so yeah, whatever. Fine. We're not sitting around the fire, but it's at the end of the day, we've had dinner, we're sitting in the, you know, like depending on the base, you could go grab a drink somewhere or go grab a coffee, you know, and you're just sitting around and you're shooting the shit and you're just talking and you're getting to know each other. And that's how you get to know each other. It's like, you know, yeah, you exaggerate a little bit and you know, tell tall stories or whatever, but you know, you get to know people's limits. You get to know, okay, I can joke with this guy about this stuff. I can not joke with this person about that stuff. And you get all that. And yeah, I mean, I find a lot of the, okay, a friend of mine, he's the guy who started Atheist Republic, Armin Navabi. And he's one of those fire breathing atheists where I'm just like, come on. And like, I've had it out with him. Like, okay, I shouldn't say I had it out with him. He had me on the, on his channel. We were discussing this very thing. Like it's not just enough to say, here, the spell is broken. Now go live your life. You have to give them a replacement for that. And I mean, like there's, there's, I'm sorry, I was going to bring something up and you're talking, when you're talking before, I was going to bring something up. I completely lost my train of thought here. But yeah, I mean, I don't think people give enough account to what that story is. I know, okay, I know Dawkins talks about it. He's like, oh, well, I can get that from Shakespeare. I can get this from, you know, I can get it from reading the ancient, you know, reading like Aeneid or yes, we can get these things from there. But I think in the, like what I'd mentioned, Andrea, like in the same aspect, and I'm not trying to say preachers are, some are whatever, let's not get in there. Okay, you know, Joel Olsteen and Anthony Robbins, you can kind of say something similar about them, but I give Anthony Robbins a little bit more credence, but you know, but you have to go back every week and the story has to be reinforced, right? Whereas I'm not going to read the Aeneid every week. You know, but I mean, you, you, that's why I think you need those little groups. Like you need that thing where you have, you know, you're a fantasy football or, you know, you're fishing buddies, you go bowling once a week, you know, there's little things which you share with people that are outside of your immediate circle that give you a broader view. Yes. I mean, I think that if, you know, if it was possible for every, you know, high school junior or senior to go on a trip for a week or two outside their comfort zone, like don't go put on a backpack with a teacher and go to Paris, right? Forget that. That's, it's too close. You know, go, go help something like the peace corps or whatever, go help them build a hut in El Salvador for a week or whatever, like, you know, go do something like that completely out of your and get to know what it is outside of your little zone and then try to find things that, you know, interest you that your core group isn't interested in, but then you find another group of people and you bring in new ideas. I mean, uh, Japan was just, Japan got writing, Japan got most of its advancements because of war, because they went to war with China. And I mean, China kept beating them back, except for the, you know, the, the, the, the, the kamikaze winds, right? The, the, Japan, but that's how Japan got their writing. That's how Japan got a lot of technology. That's how Japan got a lot of ideas. And then when the explorer, you know, the European explorers came in, they built those little enclaves. That's how new ideas kept coming in. Japan was a fairly stagnant place until these new ideas started coming in. So you need that exposure to other things. And I don't know what this woke thing, it's breaking all that down. It doesn't want any of that. It doesn't want to give anyone anything. And I want to ask your opinion of this, because the way I read it is, um, I know you talked about what James Lindsay, like the whole Calvinist total to poverty thing, but okay. Now I don't even in college them there. There are only the Alexa. You should act like the elect, even if you aren't, cause you might be in there, but there is salvation through acts and salvation through faith, right? Like there's some people look at acts and faith and how you can get, find some salvation in the woke thing. There is no, all the acts are sinful and the faith is all the acts are sinful. There is no form of salvation whatsoever. There is no grace. There is no redemption. And I'm like, okay, well how is this story being sold to people? And why are people buying into that? Usually they buy into stories that give them some hopefulness. And this seems so bleak and awful. And like I said, the red pill counter reaction to that is just as bad and it's just as crazy. And it's, you know, I think it's got potential to be more violent, but, you know, like, I don't know. When did we stop trying to bind to stories that actually meant something good? Yeah, yeah, yeah. That were constructive. No, and that's why, you know, I, people go, people go crazy over the woke thing, but I don't think it can last for that very reason. You can't, it becomes a, it becomes a tribe of accusation, but there can never be much coherence and cohesion. It can always only feed off of denouncing someone or something else. It can't take on a positive life of its own. I, you know, for a while, I mean, I saw this, I saw this rise when, you know, during, so in Christian denominations, the whole same sex, same sex marriage thing is, you know, kind of really causes issues within the denomination, just like, you know, women in church office. And so I was, I was watching these conversations and I was thinking there's, there's a new strain coming up in this. And so I found, I was listening to the, I was listening to the atheist feminists fight the trans community. And there was a, there was a philosopher out of the UK named Rebecca Riley Cooper, who was making some videos as a, as an atheist feminist explaining why this, this trans movement is death to feminism. I thought, well, that's interesting. So I was listening to her and she mentioned this website called Everyday, Everyday Feminism. And I thought, well, that sounds interesting. So I went over that website and started reading it. And I began to realize that this is the new law for the woke generation. And so I said, well, it's Everyday Feminism. I'll read the website every day so that I can actually do a fair amount of reading about what they're doing. And I realized that this law that they are promoting is, is more strict and more lifeless than the, than the, than some of the worst religious movements I've ever seen. No one can live like this, you know? It's awful. Okay. Okay. I was, I was just speaking to a friend of mine about this just now, before I spoke to you and it's okay. Like let's look at critical race theory and these, it's something like the white ways of knowing. I don't know how much you've read of that stuff. Right. So, and when they say white ways of knowing, they're talking about science and reason and logic. Okay. Now I'm sorry, but if you're saying that's a white way of knowing next time you speak to Dave and Wichita from Microsoft support and he sounds an awful lot like Raj from big bank theory, you know, think about that. Right. I mean, I find that so demeaning, like, oh no, it's a white way of thinking you use, you poor brown people will never understand that. Screw you. You know, like, no, seriously, honestly get bent. You know, like I don't want to be talked to in that manner. I don't want to be told that I'm lesser and I have to have a different way of knowing because I can't deal with a white way of knowing and it's not white way of knowing. There's a really good book by David Deutsch called the beginning of infinity and he starts talking about how we learn things. And he's, I mean, David is a physicist, but he also gets into a bit of philosophy and he came up with the term static or he talked about static and dynamic thinking. Now, like I said, I started saying this a couple of years back. I said, forget left, right, conservative, liberal. It's either you're an authoritarian or you're an enlightenment. Tarion either want an authoritarian system that's rigid and firm, or you want an enlightened system that allows for a polarity, a plurality of thought where we can discuss things like adults. Right. And I mean, I think that's, I think that's what it's coming down to that woke stuff, that red pill stuff, the evangelicals, the fire breathing, imams, the orthodox Jewish traditions, all of it, the Hindus, the vine, India. Now the Hindu nationalism, that's that static thinking. Right. You know, I think I mentioned this to Andrea might not have said, okay, you got to maybe change the way you think about your thinking. You can think of it as a foundation or you can think of it as a garden. Now, a foundation firm, rigid, very strong. You can build a structure on top of it. Once you build that structure, people forget about the foundation. It's the walls and the gyproc and the roof and the, you know, all that, that's your house. And that's what all your tradition is until the foundation cracks. You forget that it's there. Whereas if you think of your, if you think of it as a garden, you know, all the earth and the nutrients and everything, those are your first principles. And then you plant your seeds in it and you let it grow. And as things come out, it's like, you know what, this idea that we had over here where we'll kill every third person, it's not a good idea. That's a weed. We'll pull it out. You know, these things are good. You could add nutrients to it. You can. And I mean, if, if you really want to go forward, like if you want, you know, a garden doesn't have to be a small thing. An orchard is a garden. You grow big trees, you know, technically you can think of the Amazon as a garden, right? It's and so if we can think of, if we can think of our underlying thinking as a dynamic system that, okay, you don't get rid of, you know, the first principles, but you've got to be very aware that they can be washed away quickly. If we don't take care of them, you have to nurture them. You have to grow them. Um, you know, if you want me to get really spiritual in this, I can start talking about mustard seeds as well, but you know what I mean? Like I think that's, I think we need to change the way we think about our first principles. You know, is it a foundation or is it a garden? Because I think foundational thinking is going to do us harm. I think we, we got to get away from foundational thinking and think more of these are first principles and you know, we have to be able to let them shift with the times, but you know, you don't want to get rid of that earth and throw in clay and try to grow something in clay, right? Because it's never going to work. So you have to know exactly what it was. You have to think of it in a way. So you're always tending it and taking care of it and being very aware of it and not just think of it as a foundation. Then you build your structure on top of the foundation. Who cares until it cracks, until it starts leaking, until you need to, you know, you need to do a slab jack and then level off your house again or something like you forget about the foundation. And I think a lot of, you know, you know, the, the very strict religious traditions are that foundation. I think, you know, and I will say this, I do think that all religious traditions, no matter how loose they're getting at some under level, underpinning, there is some sort of foundation on it. And you know, maybe I can have that, maybe I can have my mind changed because let's just take the Christian tradition. You can't, and I know I've heard some people say differently, but unless you believe in Christ as a son of God, dying for your sins and being resurrected and 40 days later ascending to heaven, right? You know, like unless you believe, unless you believe in Christ being born and dying for your sins and his ascension to heaven, I don't think you can call yourself a Christian just in the same way that if you don't believe that Allah is the only God and Muhammad's is prophet and the Quran is his book, you can't really call yourself a Muslim. So that, that is something that I think would be like, like a kind of like a, so like a thin layer of bedrock over the, the earth of the garden or something like that. I don't know like how you, how you could incorporate that in, but this has just been something that I've been playing around for a little bit and I'm just trying to like formalize it more. I'll, I'll send you the link to, to James Lindsay, you know who Benjamin Boyce is? Yep. Okay. Did you see the conversation between James Lindsay and Benjamin Boyce? Yes, I did. That was a really good one. And, and one of the things that James Lindsay makes, the point that he makes in that, in that video is, is one which has actually been part of, part of my, my Dutch Calvinist tradition, which is a sort of presuppositionalism, which, which he basically noted that for the, for the critical theorists, for the critical race theorists to work, they need to have a particular thing that they will not deconstruct. And so they will not deconstruct race or they will not deconstruct oppression because there needs to be something, there needs to be some element in their system that is a starting point. And without that starting point, they, you can't organize a system. And it's basically the idea that if you have a value, you're going to create a hierarchy. The difficulty, everybody needs to, you can deconstruct everything, but if you deconstruct everything, then all you have is skepticism and all you have is, is, is a hermeneutic of suspicion. So in order to actually agree on something, and this is where I always disagree with the, the railing against dogma, because I don't think you can actually live in this world without certain dogmas. And whether your dogma is, you know, static versus dynamic thinking or anti-dogmatism, I mean, because anti-dogmatism is a dogma. I mean, there's always something that you have. And then the question is always, what is the thing that you have and does that thing that you have actually enable flourishing rather than narrowing? And, and, and I think, you know, it's these, and so then figuring out what those deep assumptions are and where they lead and what their implications are, this is, this is very important work, I'd say. I'm going to, I'm going to check out David Deutsch's book. That sounds very interesting to me. And I think you're, I think you're very much right about, I mean, the authoritarian versus the sort of the enlightenmentarian. The, but, but one of the things, one of the things that I think it's helpful to remember is that the enlightenment grows out of a particular tradition itself. And there's a lot of work in all of this, a lot of work to do in all of this. But, and I think what we're seeing, what we're seeing is, you know, even with the, you know, with some of the critical theorists is that the thing that you won't deconstruct is going to be terribly important to the system that gets built from it. And, and even your assertion that it's wrong to kill every third person. Now you and I very much agree on that. But that itself is built on something, and that's built on the assumption that human life is valuable and in a sense, privileged. And so, you know, there's a humanism under there. And then we have to ask the question, well, where does that humanism come from? So, you know, this is, this is a much bigger and longer conversation, but. Oh yeah, no, totally. Okay. And the enlightenment thing, all right. I, I have some issue with, like I have some issue with, it comes into the Judeo-Christian tradition. And just because, okay, first of all, the term Judeo-Christian, I think people didn't really start using it until about the fifties, like when they were going against it. Okay. So after world war two, because you know, that sort of shamed people out of a lot of anti-Semitism. Yeah. So what I'm trying to, yes, the individuality from, you know, from the reformation, right? Everyone's an individual that played a big part in the enlightenment. I'm not going to deny these things, but some of these things predate the Judeo-Christian tradition. I think they use that term Judeo-Christian because that tradition held these things for the longest amount of time, like don't kill, don't lie, you know, don't commit adultery, whatever. You can argue about the ways it was maintained, the way it was put on people. You know, we can have those discussions separately, but yes, this tradition for 2000 years brought things like that in. Then you had ideas of the individualism, but then it was the individual connection with the person to God. But if you believed in the wrong God, you were burnt at the stake. So it's, you know, we can talk about that and, you know, I don't want to discount it all. Oh, no, you're lying. It has nothing to do with it or nothing whatsoever. Yes. Then I'm being as dogmatic as someone I don't want to be, right? It comes down to another thing that the woke kind of use, like the critical theory and all that. It was a paper from Audre Lorde in 1979 that the master's tools will never dismantle the master's house. Now Audre Lorde was talking more about capitalism. She said, okay, I went into this meeting in the UN about women of color in these countries and there's, there was only, I was the only woman of color there. Everyone else was white men, right? And so she was talking about using capitalism, but now they're saying, okay, well, science can't used to be used to be used to dismantle science. Reason can't be used to dismantle reason. And I'm like, well, no, but you see those tools, like if you think of science as a methodology, forget the body of knowledge and forget the, you know, the, the, the very hardcore scientific, like I don't even like the term scientism or whatever, but science is I come up with an idea. I test it or I observe it in nature. If those observations in those tests match up with my guess, then I have something that's a little bit more valid. Then it becomes a theory that it gets tested and tested and tested and tested. And if it proves itself under all things, then it becomes a law. Like, okay, that's kind of the way it goes. So that methodology, like I just read something today where there was a Hungarian team that they were just publishing some preliminary stuff where they might've found a fifth force of nature. I mean, up until this point, they were talking about four primary forces, right? Now, this is going to upend every, if this turns out to be true, it's going to upend everything in physics. It's not going to break that methodology, but the tools of physics have been used to break down the house of physics, like if this comes true, right? So yes, these tools were made and were designed to break down the house. Whereas, I mean, like I think the authoritarian side of like authoritarian dogma, let's just put it that way, right? Like we can have that discussion of everyone has some sort of dogma, like a dogma of like a very authoritarian religion or a fundamentalist religion. If Constantine hadn't picked Christianity, I mean, I know there's, I know it was the emperor before Constantine that kind of made Christianity like his pet religion and Constantine made it part of the empire. But if Constantine had gone with another religion, right, that, like those blasphemy laws and that kind of stuff would have been perfectly suited to keep Christianity down. Right? I mean, if it didn't get that boost from Constantine and I know there was a lot of stuff I can't, I know there was another religion at the time, I'm drawing a blanket. There are lots of religions. Yeah, but there was another one that was growing ascendancy that Constantine might have adopted. I'd read something about this recently and I could go back or it might have been the emperor before Constantine and I'm mangling this terribly. But like I said, if that had been given prominence, you could use blasphemy laws, you can use the same laws in these fundamentalist faiths, like the fundamentalist versions of them to hold them down, right? So if this woke stuff is coming ascendant and they keep going with it and it's like, you know, deep platform this, you can't talk to this person, you can't do this, you can't mention this, this, you know, there are their own blasphemy laws. They would very easily supplant Christianity and then if something else comes along and gains ascendancy, uses the same tools. So yes, the master's tools definitely can break down the master's house. And I think that's what we got to try to be careful of. Let's not set up a system where we can, you know, I think we should invite whether you're in a faith tradition or if you want to be pure reason and logic or you're the amalgam of the two, I think we should look for systems that invite that challenge. That say, you know, yes, I'm the best system. I'll take on all comers. And if you're finding systems like that, you might actually have something that's worthwhile. Whereas if you're finding something like, nope, we're not going to take, we're the best and we're never going to accept the challenge. That's where the problem walled gardens seldom last. I mean, I don't know if you've read any of his stuff, but it was the one quote, Douglas Murray puts out and I have read some men can a while ago. It's, you know, the progress of humanity is being advanced by gay fellows walking down the highways and byways of the world, hurling dead cats into sanctuaries, proving that doubt was safe in the world. Now, if you go back to the biblical tradition or the Abrahamic tradition, right? Like, you know, the principalities waiting outside the garden of Eden after Adam and Eve had left, you know, after they were expelled, like with the flaming sword to me, it's like, okay, first of all, are they going to want to come back in? Maybe yes or no. But to me, it's sent that it seemed that, you know, the principalities were there to keep doubt out. Doubt had gotten in once. They want to make sure that doubt doesn't come back in, right? Because doubt's not safe there. I think we need to inculcate a spirit in ways of thinking where doubt is always safe. Doubt should always be safe. Yes, gravity works at 9.8 meters per second per second on earth. You know what? On the surface of the earth, maybe we'll get better tools and better measurement instruments or something will happen and that changes and that doubt should be allowed to live. It's your fault. In fact, Big G does vary because there is a, if you, there's an interesting guy named Rupert Sheldrake who asks a whole lot of uncomfortable questions about science when he noted that there was a, there is an office of constants. And he said, if they're constants, why do you need an office to main, to maintain the measurements of them? Because he thinks that Big G in fact does fluctuate, the speed of light fluctuates and it's like, well, what's with that? Anyway, we should, we should, I've got, I've got to go. So we should land the plane here. Yeah, I'm here. I mean, this was a lot of fun, right? This was a lot of fun. And I'm going to tell you something because of my videos, I have like, there's this whole community who are of people like us who love to talk about these things and there's atheists and Christians and just all kinds of folks. And so if I could post this probably sometime next week, but you'll get, you'll, you'll be invited into a lot more conversations. I could tell that already. Look, that's great. And I mean, I, I was isolated for 14 years. Well, for 17 years, 13 years overseas or close. And then four years, I was living up North. So, you know, the internet and things like this, well, war zones, no, but they're not going to let you speak to people. But, you know, but so, yeah, I've been like, I've been trying to figure out what's been going on. And the best way to do it is to have these kinds of conversations, you know, watch other things and try to listen to people. And that's it. But thank you very much. And this was, I quite enjoyed this. Wow. This was great. This was great. And, and actually Andrea noted it. Do you still live in Montreal or you're in Vancouver? I'm in Montreal. So, so one of the things that my, I have been doing with, so about two years ago, when I made videos and people started finding me, I started a meetup in Sacramento and we've been basically trying to organize other meetups around the world. And so at some point we'll probably be able to organize a meetup near you. That's what I'm hoping. And we're trying to, and basically it's the kind of conversation that you and I had. This is what we do. But this is great. I mean, and more people should do things like this. There, I don't know if you've, you know, there was the free hugs thing and I'll let you go after this. I don't want to keep you telling, but there's a group starting to say free conversations. So instead of like with a placard saying a free hug, you're setting up in the park saying free conversation. Come talk to me about whatever you want. Well, you'll, you'll trust me after I post this, watch the comment section. You're going to get a lot of invites. I could tell already. That'd be great. All right. Well, thanks a lot, man. Thank you. We'll talk to you later. Bye bye.