https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=8GkVTKVe4LE

 Hi, this is Paul. I just finished watching Jacob and Father Steven DeYoung do a live stream and it was great. I got, my name was mentioned a few times with respect to my commitments, but yeah, I thought it was great. Let me see if I can just drop the, and if anybody wants to join me now, if you have any, cause you know, they ended it and I don't know, Sam was there, Luke was there, a whole bunch of the regulars were there. This was a pretty anticipated, this is a pretty anticipated talk. I don't have a lot of time. Let me drop the video in. Let's see live, it should. I don't see it. There's often a delay in YouTube with getting it there. There you go, Christian. But I saw Sam and Luke and a bunch of you there. Yeah, new episode of Night Thief. Yeah, not too much. Not hardly, not hardly what. So I'm still looking for that. I can't get the link. It was just on Jacob's channel. He had a good conversation with Father Stephen DeYoung. I thought Jacob was his usual honest pugnacious self, but also very Jacob-like. Got a sense of who Jacob is and how he is and what he cares about. Let me see if I can pull this up. Hopefully I won't mess up my sound here, okay. All right, and then I can pin this to the top. Still playing around with this new system. There we go. So if you wanna join me, if you watched it and you have a thought to say, it was good, Mark. It was good. They covered a bunch of stuff. I don't know if they covered it in depth as much as they could. They were on for over three hours, but I thought it was, it started out slow. That's pretty normal for a conversation like that. You have to get to know each other and you have to sort of feel your way into it. And they talked about hypostasis in terms of some of the Jewish conceptions of it, at least in terms of Jacob. Part of the difficulty, of course, in evaluating these kinds of things is my ignorance is vast. And so I learned a lot from Jacob, but it's good to have, yeah, three hours. It's good to have other views there too. So I just was, I spent that time, I've been working on my office over this time and they just abruptly stopped and it was like, oh shoot, I'd love to continue that conversation. I don't know if I succeeded in grabbing the attention of the other watchers of that stream. It appears I have not. And in that case, in that case, I have failed. Wait a few more minutes to see if anybody jumps in because I'd love to hear what Sam has to say. I'd love to hear, well, Jacob said he was gonna run, he was gonna run to synagogue, so I don't expect him to jump in, but I'd love to hear what Luke has to say. And Zacharias was there. So, yep, doesn't seem like I caught their attention. So I think I will just leave this be and wait another minute or two. All right, so topics. Well, they talked about all of Jacob's usual topics, why Paul was wrong, why Jesus was right, why Paul gets Jesus wrong, why... Yeah, that's a good point. There are obviously difference. Father Stephen DeYoung was a member of the Christian Reformed Church and went to orthodoxy. And so he has his comments about Protestants which, yeah. And Jacob, of course, has his thoughts as well. But again, I thought it was a good faith conversation. I thought it was useful to present. I'm sure Jacob at some point wants to have a similar talk with me. It was helpful for me to have Father Stephen go first so I could hear what Jacob is coming with and think about it. Father Eric is gonna be on Jacob's channel soon. And I can at least post Jacob's channel on the... At least post Jacob's channel here, a link to it on the site, even though it always takes a little while for YouTube to sort of finalize the live stuff. So, no, and Father Eric in his conversation on Jacob's channel with Catherine and Amy and Wilson also talked about ecumenism. And I think many of us understand that there's been a lot of bloodshed and there's been a lot of bad feelings, a lot of hurt, a lot of damage done between us. And when I spoke about some of this recently, someone talked about truth. Is truth important? Truth is absolutely important. But how, in fact, are we going to deal with our differences in our claims to the truth? And I think having that conversation and I think having the kinds of conversations like we witnessed, I think is vital. Difference between advertising, marketing, and evangelism. Jacob has some very interesting ideas about evangelism. And yet Jacob also had some kind words to say. So it was very interesting and it was long, but again, I had plenty of work to do in cleaning my office and then putting in a new desk and I built a new computer and I put in a new monitor and I'm sort of fitting everything. So it was a nice way, nice thing for me to listen to. No one uses truth anymore, that's pre-pandemic. Are we gonna have amnesties? Are we gonna have amnesties? I heard something about a pandemic amnesty. So I don't know if that's gonna happen in Canada or not. Uh-oh, now I said, now we talked about this, Mark, and now I'm gonna get a COVID warning underneath this video. So I don't even think I'm gonna let this video stay posted actually, because again, it hasn't achieved. And why this corner feels the need to evangelize rather than be discovered organically by people interested. The, you know, that's a great point of the book. About this little corner. I think that there's a lot of discussion about on-ramping and I thought Grimm Grizz was right, the difference between on-ramping and on-boarding. I think a lot of people are excited about what's happening here and rightfully so. I thought Father Stephen ended on a great note when he said, you know, what I wanted to do was just begin a relationship and possibly a friendship. And I think that's actually what all these little conversations are for. Now, obviously, obviously, but from a Christian perspective and Christianity is an evangelizing religion, it would be a great joy of mine to have, it would be a great joy of mine to have new relationships and in a communion in Christ. And so I think as Father Stephen said, I think Jacob would love it if I would, I'm not a real Jew according to Jacob because it's from my fatherly line and not my mother's line, but I think Jacob would love to hear me profess a Noahide faith and no longer believe in the writings of Paul of Tarsus or the New Testament. I think Jacob would of course love that. I do not believe that's going to happen. I would of course love it if Jacob would decide to become a Christian. That's what I would love and Jacob would say to me, Paul, I really don't imagine that's going to happen. And fair enough, we're on the same footing there, but that doesn't mean that we can't have an honest conversation. And again, as I said in the little video, what this is really about I think is learning to love each other. Christians have, you're not pestering me, I haven't been able to listen to your conversation with Aaron yet as this podcast doesn't seem to work. Will I be releasing it on my channel? I haven't thought about that, I certainly could, I'd be happy to. My thoughts about Christian nationalism, the use of that term right now as a political weapon seems just hopelessly misguided, especially when it's used at the hands of people who know something about American history and still insist on using it. I find that dishonest. I think there's a lot that can be said about the fact that, and Jacob said it as well, our allegiance to our God trumps our allegiance to our nation. You find that right in the New Testament as a Christian, but also as a Christian we have this command to love our neighbor as ourself all the way up to and including our enemy. And figuring out how to love is a very difficult thing, but in my opinion what we're trying to do is love via conversation. And I think actually loving via conversation doesn't mean not telling the truth, it doesn't mean not sharing what we think, it does mean exercising wisdom to speak the truth in love, it does mean trying to articulate what we believe in the best way we can. And I think it also means respecting the agency of the other and not trying to play games that will, yeah, that are unbecoming to the spirit of the conversation. So, nope, I wasn't able to, we're all doing okay. I wasn't able to catch any of the folks that were on Jacob's stream. I probably should have arranged this with Jacob, but I didn't know it was coming. I still have to listen to Vervecky talk to, what's his name? I follow him on Twitter now, I had a conversation with him. He's studying Jordan Peterson doing his advanced work, so I was really looking forward to that conversation as well between John Vervecky. So I'm going to sign off and I'm probably gonna just delete this post. So those of you who caught it live, there it is.