https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=JoAHv6_LG_w

 So I am recording. So why don't you tell me a little bit about yourself, Jeff? Oh my gosh. So... Already stumped at the first question. I know, right? Let me just first say this is a very surreal experience because I'm used to seeing you in this frame but not having you be able to respond back to me. So I just want to point out how strange this experience is. I completely understand and many feel that way. They're like, he's talking back. I'd better see a doctor. I'm just used to watching and not being expected to respond. Man, I don't know, Paul. I have so many things, so many different directions that I could go in with you. I know you said to tell me a little bit about myself and I will. But... Well, the time is yours. So spend it how you'd like. Well, for starters, I just want to say that I do not think I'm smart enough to engage in the kind of conversations that you tend to have. And the people that engage with you, very impressive. They're very smart people out there. Just barely smart enough to listen to it. So if this does get posted, apologies to everyone. Don't apologize. I guess just tell you a few things about myself. I did grow up in church. Actually, my earliest memories of church that my parents took me to was a thing where it was very conservative. I want to say very legalistic in the sense that they didn't even call it church. They called it meeting because the church is not a place. It's a people. Okay. Yeah. Yeah. And you know, years after, I decided to try and look this up online. And the closest that I could find to it is something that went by the name of 2x2s. I don't know if you've ever heard of anything like that. But if you Google search for that, that's pretty close to what it kind of seemed like. I've known groups like that. Yeah. So I won't try to explain it because I was pretty young. They get very literalistic and so they're only going to do so they boil the New Testament down into very, you know, this is exactly what we'll do. This is the template. I've known groups like that. Right. So, I mean, eventually we were going to more, I guess, traditional type denominations, Baptist churches, Assemblies of God. Things like that. Through my teenage years. And then our family just eventually stopped going to church. And so I stopped going to church. Sometime in my late teens, I suppose, we moved around. I was born here in Texas. I'm in Texas in Dallas. Or just outside of Dallas. And then we moved to South Dakota. My dad got a job up there. He job hopped a little bit. And then not too long after that, about a year, we moved to North Carolina. It's been about five years there. We actually found a church in North Carolina. In my teenage years, that was the Assemblies of God church. So a lot of interesting things going on there, too. But anyway, I stopped going to church and in my late teen years, we moved back to Texas. And then my parents got divorced. And so I really started questioning the faith that I had inherited from my parents. And I wanted to decide, hey, is this mine? Or is it just something that was kind of hoisted or thrust upon me? And I wanted to try to make it my own. But I didn't feel like going to church anywhere. But I did have my Bible. And so I would read that. Anyway, this is going to be all over the place. It's going to be out of chronological order. That's fine. One thing that I'll jump into is kind of how I got into Jordan Peterson. It'll probably take a while for me to get there. But I'm a very big CS Lewis fan. And so when I first heard Peterson, it was in his biblical series. And though he had a very Louisiana quality, it kind of pricked up my ears a little bit when the specific quality that I have always thought was just mind blowing to me about Lewis. And there are several things. But the thing that got me the most hooked on Lewis was how he could make very old things new. He could present really old, boring, but apparently boring ideas that we've all already decided are boring and settled and stupid and just approach them from an angle that just blows your mind. Things you've never thought of before. And when, I can't remember which lecture it was, but when Peterson first started talking about the story of the fall and how that could be looked at as the dawn of human consciousness. And specifically how he talked about pains in childbirth. And how to a creature that has the consciousness and I don't know if he used this specific example, but a creature who has the consciousness of say like a deer giving birth with that level of consciousness we have no idea. It may seem very different. The pain is probably still there but the existential terror that could potentially come with that or does I'm sure. Well I'm not sure, but I would guess comes with that with a conscious human. It's a very different experience. I haven't watched that lecture in a long time, but just thinking about it in those terms and also thinking, hey, this is when we realized that our own death is impending and you're thrust into real life and you're thrust into suffering and you know the walled garden is not a place where you can live anymore. And I just found that fascinating. It just, that was the first mind blowing person that I had heard in like 15 years since I had first been introduced to Lewis. And you know for years I would wonder as I was reading and you know just looking for people out there. I was like when is the next CS Lewis going to come along? Why is this guy not alive anymore? You know I was born in 1974 so I'm just like, ah I was born, you know, after this guy died I can't, you know, there's no way to interact with him. There's nothing like that. So I just found that very, very interesting. So yeah, I found out about him, actually Peterson, through the Bible Project guys. I was really listening to a lot of their podcasts and I don't even remember if they mentioned his name but they were just referencing this University of Toronto professor who was doing biblical lectures and talking about it in a mythic sense and as a story and all those kind of things. And I know oh I'm forgetting his name. One of the guys at the Bible Project, Tim, Tim Mackey at the Bible Project, you know, I think Sailhammer was one of his professors in seminary and he said that was when he was first introduced to maybe looking at the Bible from a story that's just completely tied together from beginning to end with, you know themes and then, you know, major theme and stuff like that. And so growing up the way that I did in very conservative denominations is just like, yeah, you know if you just call this a story that means you just don't believe that any of it's true, right? You can't focus on the literal part of this then, you know, do you even think that Jesus was a real person? You know, I think coming out of that background now after I've been listening to Peterson a lot and just really doing a lot of thinking, you know, I want to come back and say, well, what do you mean by real? That's right. And so, you know, I watched a lot of Peterson. I actually was on a 10 hour road trip from the Dallas-Fort Worth area down to Big Bend National Park near the border of Mexico. And so I had a lot of drive time and so that's when I listened to, I want to say four or five of his biblical series lectures. And so I got to listen to quite a bit of that and started watching videos on YouTube and things like that. I actually took his self-authoring program. Now I'm around midlife crisis time. And so I was like, hey, why not this? That's right. Cheaper than a red sports car. That's right. So and then, you know, I figured this is very important. I just needed to make sure and tell you that I really appreciate you because it's actually Peterson that led me to you and your videos. Or I should say the Google algorithm, right? The first video I saw that popped up in my feed was your interview with Peterson. And I first saw it, you know, and I think you entitled it CRC Pastor Jordan Peterson, things about C.S. Lewis and stuff like that. And my first take on pastors is kind of similar to what, you know, it seems like Peterson was or maybe is with this whole lying pastor's thing. Not lying, but just a cynical eye. And I kind of, I kind of rolled my eyes when I looked at it and I'm like, oh, gosh, what is this? A pastor found his way into talking to Jordan Peterson. Riding his coattails, baby. But, you know, I watched it and I was like, when I first watched the video, I was like, wait a second, does he know Jordan Peterson? Because I think he referenced some kind of mutual connection in there or something like that. So I was like, okay, I'll, you know, I'll allow it. Let me watch this a little bit. I'll allow it. Okay, I'll, the judge, the judge in your consciousness Congress, okay, it's allowed. Right, right. So I watched that and then I started watching a lot of your videos and I watched so many more of your videos now than I do Peterson's because I just find, I still really enjoy Peterson and like many people, I'm waiting. Let's do the biblical. Let's pick it back up, dude. Come on. Cut the book tour already, guy. Come on. Get back to YouTube. Yeah. We're not going to finish it. There's no way, like you said, there's no way he's going to finish, you know. But, okay, come on. Let's at least do Exodus. There's some really good narrative in there. So let's hear your take on it. So anyway, looking forward to that. Some of the stuff that I wanted to talk to you about, actually just that last point right there was I just really appreciate your ability to bring perspective to it from a Christian perspective, a formal, professional Christian. I'm a professional Christian. But also, you know, something that I really appreciate about you is how ecumenical you seem to be. It seems like you have a very wide breadth of knowledge about the spectrum of the Christian, well, Christendom, probably not the right word, but just, you know, the conservative wing of the church all the way to the liberal wing of the church and, you know, even further. I've always appreciated that ever since I've been watching you. And one thing that I really do like is, you know, sometimes, as we all do, right, when we hear something or we see something we disagree with, we can get very fiery about it. I remember some of your commentary on Sam Harris and the Peterson debate. You know, I didn't sense any mean-spiritedness or anything like that, but I could sense frustration. But one thing that I also appreciated is, you know, you would come back and you would say, yeah, some of you in the comments are saying I'm being too hard on him and maybe I am. You know, I just appreciate that quality. And then I want to say there was another one not too long ago where you had mentioned talking about the, I can't use the right word, if I weren't here under this pressure, I would know exactly what to say. Holy Communion. Eucharist, Lord Supper. Thank you. The Eucharist. And the particular Catholic take on it, that it does, you know, become the body. And I think you had made like a passing comment about it in one video, but then you came back and you heard some feedback and you said, you know what, maybe I do need to think about that a little bit more. And my perspective on it is, since nobody asked, my perspective on it is, I don't know. From a materialist standpoint, anything spiritually is ridiculous. You know, something like that is ridiculous. From a man, would that be cool if that's true? Perspective? Yeah. That would be amazingly cool if that's true. And then I'm actually imbibing the perfect embodiment of what a human being looks like. But I'm taking it in and then it's transforming me. It's you are what you eat kind of thing, right? Keep going. This is good. Yeah. And I just think about that as, hey, if that's real, that's awesome. If it's not the truth, okay, no big deal. It's no skin off of my nose either way. I like to opt for what's cooler, you know? Not a bad philosophy. Yeah. I listen to a conversation that's on YouTube between Benjamin Boyce and Esther O'Reilly. Yeah, yeah. And I know that you talk to both of them and crap, I'm losing my train of thought because there were two or three things out of that conversation that I wanted to comment on. And now that I'm bringing her up, I feel bad. Oh, and him. Especially if this is broadcast. But that's okay. What was it? I was talking about the Eucharist and the thing that's cool. Oh, it's just a comment that Esther made, which, you know, perfectly true. You know, wish and don't make it so. And that's, you know, that's certainly true in my experience, you know. Yeah. Yeah. And so, yeah, you know, it's no argument. I'm not making any arguments. I'm just saying, hey, the stories that excite me the most, the ones that seem like they would be the coolest, those are the ones that I want to be true. And those are the ones that I hope are true. And so, if, and if there's something better than that, awesome. Bring that to me, you know. There's this one thought that has just been coming to me. It's kind of tied into some of the things that you've been talking about. You mentioned the last chapter of the last battle. And my favorite part of at least that segment of the book, my favorite part of all of the Narnia stories is the Emyth or Emyth story. Awesome. But my favorite part of the closing words of that entire series in the last battle is where he says something like, you know, this was only the beginning. You know, this was just the cover page. And the story continues where each chapter is better than the next. And I think you were talking to, it is your second conversation with Job where he had asked you what God is to you. And the coolest idea to me of what God is, is as soon as I figure out how awesome God is, the response is, no, you're wrong. It's even better. And then once I realize what that even better is, the answer is always you're wrong. It's even better. And that's what that part of the story makes me think of. That's I hope that that the God that C.S. Lewis presents in both his theology and every time he, the only interesting parts to me in the Chronicles of Narnia are when Aslan appears and starts talking to people. If that, if that's who I hope God is. Right? So one of the things I just wanted to tell you also is I've I've just felt like I think in your story with your story, your video with Alastair, I can't remember his last name. Alastair Roberts. Yeah. You guys started talking about your meetups and how, you know, people just want to come and talk and this is what I want church to be. Right. And you said, yeah, I didn't even realize that this is what I wanted the church to be. Right. I really do feel like there's just nobody that I can talk to about this. So I wanted to tell you, thank you again for just making yourself available and just, you know, thank all the people at your church and the people that you report into who say, yeah, this is cool. We'll let this be a part of your ministry. It's much appreciated. Much needed. At least for me. And, you know, I think you could probably attest that there's more than just me out there. There are. My gosh. I mean, so many notes. I'm not looking at any of them. But I was talking to a friend of mine and I told him, I got in. I got a, you know, I got a spot on the calendar. He doesn't watch you. He doesn't know who you are. He's one of my friends and, you know, we talk about spiritual things sometimes. But I'm just, I'm glad. I don't feel like I have anybody that has a lot of experience with this. I don't know. I don't know. I don't have anybody that has a spiritual and trained religious perspective that I can talk to about these things. And I know it's not true. I just, I just know I feel like it. I live maybe a 20 minute drive, 30 minute drive away from, I think it was the guy who's in the Greek Orthodox Church. Yeah. And I almost went this past weekend. But something came up. But I'm thinking about signing up for that and going and meeting there. He sent me, he sent me an email and said that, you know, if I get too many, if I get too busy, if I can't talk to everyone, that he'd be willing to talk to people. So I'm sure even if you can't make it to the meetup, I mean, if you wanted to take him out for a cup of coffee or a lunch or something like that, I'm sure he'd, I'm sure he'd love to take you up on that. Yeah. And they, I probably will. Most likely will. But my friend who I was talking to, you know, we do have some spiritual conversations from time to time. And he's feeling the urge to give in some way, like in a non receiving kind of way of some of the skills that he has. He's a business professional. He's like, you know, I feel like I don't give, you know, my fiance gives to her church and, you know, with money and time and stuff. And I don't feel like I give to anything. And so we were talking about maybe an opportunity for him to give his professional skills to a particular non-profit that I'm linked up to. Wonderful. And we got into a conversation because the head of the non-profit is somebody who I've talked to and said, you know, I just, I felt a calling that I needed to move into this particular area. And my friend and I got to talking about that and saying, you know, how do you know that you have a calling? You know, what is that like to have a calling? And so that's something specifically that he wanted me to ask you, you know, I'm asking for a friend. Okay. A good friend of mine. And, you know, I think I can give an answer to that to a certain extent. Part of my answer is I never necessarily feel like I know what having a calling feels like. But I'd like to throw that question, you know, toss the ball over to you and say, to you, what is, if you have, I'm assuming you felt a calling. But if not, that's fine. But either way, what feeling a calling is like or hearing a call from God? Some people, I don't want to dismiss this. Some people actually hear it audibly. I've known people that have experienced that. I think for most people it's a sense of urgency and direction that they can't dismiss. For, you know, for example, before I started making YouTube videos about Jordan Peterson, I had I didn't necessarily think in terms of it being terribly supernatural. But I had a sense of, you know, I'd always been toying with writing a book and I'd always often doing a fair amount of writing. But I just had the sense that people don't read much. And many of the people in my church, it's usually some women read, but a lot of men don't read hardly anything. And I thought, I should play around with YouTube. I should, I hadn't really thought of podcasting much, but I should play around. And it didn't go away. And so actually, if you go way back in my channel, you'll find some early videos of me playing around with some things, just experimenting and trying some things. And then, you know, when I came across the Jordan Peterson stuff, I felt a fairly strong call of, this is something, this is something you need to pay attention to. And it wasn't an audible voice or anything like that. But, so then you have to ask the question, well, is this distinguishable from just attention or interest or relevance? Not necessarily. It's in those kinds of things. But for many people, it'll be something that they can't shake. They'll feel it, and then they'll feel it again, and they'll feel it again. A lot of, sometimes when especially young people are trying to discern whether God is calling them into some kind of ministry, that takes on whole different valence often in conversations. And something that pastors will often say is, if one way to test that is to see if it's something you can possibly avoid. If you can if it's something that you absolutely can't avoid, can't do anything otherwise, then you know it's a sense of call. You know, the Bible talks about God hemming me in behind and before. It's like God saying, no, no, this is what you're going to do. Like the Jonah story. That's right, like Jonah. Yeah, yeah, go on that boat. Let's see how that goes. Alright, throw yourself in the water. Let's see how that goes. You think you can really play chess with God? You go ahead and try. And that's why I tell people, don't play chicken with God. He takes the kinds of risks we look at and say, no, you shouldn't do that. Say, oh, watch me. And you know, it's Aslan in one of my favorite parts of The Horse and His Boy when, you know, the lion and why did you do that? And Aslan says, why is that your business? It's none of your business. That's between me and that other person. You deal with me. That's exactly what Jesus says to Peter. Jesus says to Peter about John in the last chapter of the book of John, you know, what is it? What business is it to you if I want him to stay alive? You know, you follow me. So, God will get his way. And in many ways, it all depends on how much you want to let him tear things down until he gets his way. But he'll get his way. So don't play with God. It's just not a good idea. Well, yeah. And you know, I was talking to my wife about this the other day. I can't remember the gentleman that you had on. I think he's in Missouri. He's an illustrator. He wanted to be a missionary in North Korea. Yeah. Yeah. And then he went to New York for a little while. Anyway, he had mentioned how he had prayed to God, you know, just tell me what to do, you know, and I'll do it. What I'm doing now is miserable. I told my wife, I said, I think I'm just scared to death to ask God to tell me what to do because I might not like the answer. I'm scared. You know, very scared to ask that. And maybe I'll get enough courage to actually earnestly pray that prayer sometime. But I do. I was talking to her last night. My wife and I said I really feel this strong urge that I'm supposed to be doing something or no. Here's how I phrased it. There's something I'm losing track. I feel like there's something that I'm supposed to be doing or there's something that I'm not doing that I'm supposed to be and I just don't know what it is. I just don't know what it is. And, you know, I'm at that point where it's just like, all right, you gotta ask. You gotta ask. And I don't want to. But one of the things that I did ask is, you know, I knew our conversation was coming up. And so I did pray and I said, God, you know, and I have started kind of trying to pray in the way that Peterson has framed it. Or it's just like, just sit down and really earnestly ask and see what answer you get back. And I've done it like with writing, like writing out a question and just waiting and starting to freeform type what comes out. And so far the stuff that's come out is just like, dang, that makes a lot of sense. Yeah. Yeah. So anyway, I asked, you know, what should I talk to Paul about? And, you know, I appreciate the fact that this might be too sensitive of a topic. And so feel fully, you know, I will not be offended at all if you're like, you know, I don't want to comment on that. But I felt like I needed to ask you about death since you've been touched by it so closely so recently. And I have to, within the last two years, my father passed away. And his was not unexpected, you know, like your experience recently was. His had been expected for a long time. He was a severe alcoholic. And I feel like I lost my dad at least 15 years ago. So it was it was a very long process of losing, you know, the person just kind of fading away. And then eventually, you know, he did actually die. And so I'm not sure exactly what I wanted to ask you about death, but that's just what came to me in prayer. Maybe if I could put my point on the question, about 15 years ago when I started getting into Lewis, I was really hung up on hell and what happens to some people, you know, who in the traditions that I grew up in, hey, if you weren't saved, buddy, you're going to hell. Sorry, I've got a cat making a cameo. Yeah, cats are fine. Dogs and cats, they belong in the house. Dogs and cats, they belong on videos. So I don't really know what that question is. I've gotten a lot of help on that particular subject from the Ema story in The Last Battle. Lewis led me deep into George McDonald. I read through all of his unspoken sermons, which, hey, that's what Lewis stole that. Hey, Lewis said that. And, you know, he admitted to it. He said it. So I'm sorry. I feel like I was asking you a question, but then I didn't. So I don't know if you have any comments or any thoughts on that. I guess one thing to help frame it that's coming to mind for me right now is for me, I'm a man of faith. And this kind of ties into some of the questions that I think I've seen you getting and one of the questions that Benjamin was posing to Esther about why Jesus and Joe was, you know, how do you make the jump to Jesus? I feel like it's kind of a how do you make the jump from the frame that you gave us of, I don't know if it was yours, but you're who I first heard it from, God number one, God number two. How do we make that jump? Again, it's back to my philosophy of man, I really want it to be true. Jesus is the only hope for me that death is an unacceptable end to the story. It's offensive. Particularly for people who, I wrote you once on Facebook that made it into your Jesus the Divine Lobster video, you know, and I feel like my dad is one of those people particularly self-made, even worse. Yeah. It seems like. And, I don't know, the jump to Jesus is not a rational one. It's a, in some sense. But in another sense, if death is the end of the story, that is the most irrational answer that I could ever receive, that I could ever hear. Yes. And the jump to Jesus I don't know. I'm not trying to give people answers. You know, I'm sure smarter people than me could just jump in and say ah, it's ridiculous. You know, it's like the last video of yours that I watched was with Joe when he was reading the, I don't know if it was the appendix, but it was the last thing that Louis was saying in miracles where he was talking about oh, yeah, yeah, yeah, you have these feelings and then ah, it always ends the same way. You know, just put this stuff back. It's all, you know, it's all material. It's all rational. If that's all that it is I don't, I I think you mentioned it would just change the way I could, I would live very differently. I wouldn't want to live at all anymore. It's just like what's the point of life? And I remember you talked to an atheist very early on who has his own channel and he said I don't know. It makes life brighter. It makes it more valuable. And I can, that's an argument. You know, I can see things from that perspective to a certain extent. But when you're touched by death you know, it just, it doesn't make sense, you know. No. That people are just gone. Yeah. And some people might say well, hey, there's a doctrine in the very conservative one that yeah, people are just gone. They just end up in hell and you never see them again. And it's like yeah, that's, that doesn't sound like Jesus either. I mean, my answer is I don't know. But a big part of the Jesus story is is one of my favorite pastors out in your home, well, your now home state, Mark Foreman up in, I don't know if you've ever heard of him before. He's the, he's the he's the dad of the two of the founding members of the band Switchfoot. He pastors a church up in Encinitas or down in Encinitas from you. He says he got up. You know, about Jesus. The big part of the Jesus story is he got up. Don't believe that story if you don't want to. But that story is saying to us, we get to get up to the bodies that are that have been that have been stacking up in the ground for however many hundreds of thousands, however long, you know, this is where my lack of education comes into play. Hundreds of thousands or millions or however long the human race has been around, everybody has just stacked up in the grave. And the Jesus story is that's not the end. The door has been kicked open. That's right. So, I guess my question is more of me wanting to encourage you. And I know you're mad about your sister. It's not just mad about my sister. And that video I made early on, the Divine Lobster, that's for me one of that's a video I cherish. There's a lot of my father in that video because I thought a lot about my father when I made that video. And one of the things that so I saw growing up with my father and his love for people in Patterson, New Jersey was that he, you know, he ministered and he helped and he served people who this world will never know. And that even in North America, he did a lot of funerals for people who went into the Potter's field because there was, they, you know, they had, they were alcoholics, they were drug addicts, they were heroin addicts. These people had burned through their relationships with their family to the degree that when they die, you couldn't even track down family to notify. And then the, you know, the county would connect with, would connect with a funeral home and then they would call my father because they knew he was willing to do funerals for, for nobodies. And so he would go and he would, you know, he would preside over burying someone in a Potter's field. And you would, you would do funerals for people who had, you know, there were a lot of heroin going through Patterson who, you know, they, with heroin, they completely wrecked their families because a heroin addict, they'll steal, you know, they'll steal their mother's bread just to get that fix. And, and that's just the tip of the iceberg. And you start, you start traveling throughout the history of the world and think of the people buried in the Great Wall of China. And think of the people, you know, the children that were left out to die of exposure on, on dumps outside of Roman cities. And you just go, you just go on and on throughout human history and you're exactly right, the bodies stack up. And so when, you know, so Jesus, you know, the text I preached on when I preached at my sister's, my sister's funeral, when, you know, Jesus deliberately, you know, he gets the word that Lazarus is going to die and he tarries. And the sisters know that so they're angry with Jesus when he gets there. And if you had come sooner, my brother would not have died. And so Jesus, Jesus knew what he was about to put his friends through. And then when he gets to the grave, he weeps. And it's not, you know, sniffling in a tissue. He's angry. He, and, you know, of course I talked about this in the eulogy from my sister. Why is he angry? And it's exactly what you feel with respect to your father. Because not only is it that he's dead and maybe there are things that need to be said that haven't been said. Maybe that's part of it too. But it's also part of all of the like you said, you lost him years before to alcohol. And people have lost their loved ones years before to gambling or to Alzheimer's or to on and on and on and on. And it's all that loss. And when Jesus confronts the grave, he looks at it all. And God says no. I will not, that is not how my story is going to end. And you're exactly right. Part of the reason why I'm not, you know, why am I not an atheist? I couldn't stand it if I were. Because I can't stand to watch the suffering of this world and everything that people have lost and suffer and think that is the end. No. No. And so I don't care. The funny thing about atheism is, you know, you have all this pride about rationality. And I look at it and say, the really funny thing about atheism is that you can't tell me I ought to be an atheist. Because oughts don't go down that far. They only go down as far as pride or social, you know, social status. And I, I, I believe, you know, you know, it's actually a strange quote from Dostoevsky. You know, I believe like a child that, that God is going to change this world into something where the kinds of sufferings that you saw in your father's life will be turned to glory. And I don't know how. But I do have inklings that, in fact, we, we can sense and, and Peterson is right in this. I just finished a video where kind of to the end of the video I realized that for Peterson, meaning is his sacrament. And, and so what, what, what is a sacrament? A sacrament is what connects us with the other world, with the real world, with heaven. And, and meaning is his sacrament. Well, what does that mean? It means that for Peterson, he tastes heaven when he tastes meaning. And he is sharing that taste with people all over the world and they're tasting it too. And so, you know, death, I, I see that God can use suffering with meaning and make glory. You know, suffering plus meaning makes glory. And what that means is that there is hope for those who lie in the grave. And I am not going to live in the world without that hope. And, you know, I can have, you know, part of the reason I read Miracles so often is because, yeah, I've got those doubts and, and they're, in my consciousness Congress there's the secular materialist faction that, that keep, you know, you think it's hard listening to Sam Harris, listen to the faction in your own head. Deal with those squirrels. You know, and, and so that's why you have to work these arguments and you have to ask, do I really believe? But I, when it comes to this point, I will not give in because I have seen too much loss and too much pain and too much suffering in this world and I will not tolerate not believing that God doesn't have an answer. Because if he doesn't, then, then, then I will become something else because, you know, then what should I do? And it's not pretty. So, no, you're right. And that's, and so, okay, so once I'm at that point, the question is, well, how should I live? Well, I should live, I should live in this story as deep as I can be. Well, what does that look like? That means being Jesus as deep as I can. And many days that's not very deep. But, because why? Because, you know, Peterson is right in terms of meaning being a sacrament. He's right in that. And that's part of the reason he's, he's lighting up the world. And so, and when my sister died, you know, I talked to my mother yesterday and my older sister yesterday and you know, you have the, you have, so she died in November and then, of course, everything, everybody comes in, it's a big shock, you're numb, and then you're in the holidays, and then after the holidays, January, February, everybody goes home, everybody goes back to normal, and the grievers are left with their grief. And, you know, they talked about the kids, she was, my sister was a middle school English teacher, and she was a gifted teacher, and she, she poured herself out for those kids, and many kids, it was in Miss, it was in Miss Johnson's class that they, they had someone who saw them and knew them, and she brought them to life. That's why there were six, seven hundred people at the calling hours, those people stood in line in a New England winter just to be able to shake our hand and tell us what my sister meant to them. And to think that that just goes? No. No. And, and part of the reason I can't be an atheist is, what do you say at the funeral? Oh, at least they're sleeping now? No. Our works follow us, and I believe what the Apostle Paul says that we do not labor in vain. And I believe that Jesus did not labor in vain. So, no, I, I, on one hand, yes, I grieve my sister. On the other hand, I know that my Redeemer lives, and I know I will see my sister. And I know when it comes to, when it comes to doing a funeral for someone for whom you don't know what the testimony of their life indicates in terms of their participation in the age to come, all I can say is that my God is good. And he will do what's right. And, and I, and I don't think, the problem I ultimately have with kind of a cheap universalism is that it degrades history. And I don't think that whatever God does will degrade history. And so, you know, Lewis's The Great Divorce is a masterful work. It deals with, you know, all kinds of these difficult questions, and we can't answer them. But the good news is we don't have to, and we can trust the one who can. So that's, that's where I go with it. Yeah, that's my, that's my favorite fiction book of his that he wrote, The Great Divorce. I just think it's, it's a fantastic imagining of, you know, what could be. I, I appreciate the, the planes of heaven and the foothills of heaven even more so than, you know, how he's painting hell. And it just, you know, Peterson talks about in several different places, you know, he, he says, I don't think he says it in these words, but he essentially says that God is reality. And those foothills of heaven scenes, you know, when they first get off the bus, they're like these, these ghosts, these grimy phantoms that they thought were solid, you know. And I kind of feel like that, you know, Brett Weinstein called this base reality. And Elon Musk, you know, hints that, I don't know about that. And that makes me think of Lewis. And when you're stepping off that bus and once you're up against reality, you're like, I am not solid at all. And I can't handle reality. I can't handle it. It hurts me to interact with it. And, you know, that echoes of, well, speaking of McDonald, you know, he's the one of his guy that he meets, or at least his character's guy meets. And he, you know, that's a theme that McDonald writes about is, you know, God is God, the pain and some of the tortures that are spoken about. And Lewis even writes about this, I want to say, in The Problem of Pain, which is my favorite Lewis book. It's beautiful. So short, but so potent. Miracles, you talk about that a lot. I'm waiting for you to finish your Miracles series, Paul. I need to finish. I'm waiting on Jordan Peterson to kick up his Biblical series, but more importantly, I'm waiting for Paul to keep going with miracles. That's a good kick in the butt. I'll take that. The last chapters of miracles are amazing. Yeah. They really are. Fantastic. But that whole planes of heaven, you know, Peterson talking about God is reality, and we can't handle it. But the more that we interact with it, you know, the idea that's in there is the more solid we become. The more like it, like that reality, like God, we become, we become more solid. And it's just, it's just a, it's a picture that just fascinates me and excites me. And, you know, and then I get back to my normal, real, ordinary life, where it's just like, huh, am I, am I doing what I'm supposed to be doing? Yeah, I don't know. You know, I did my, I did my, my self-authoring program, and, you know, I just stream of consciousness wrote out my ideal future, and it just flowed and flowed and flowed. And, you know, then I created several goals from there. This was a little over a year ago. It was actually within six months of my father passing away. Some of the things, you know, have stuck, and I've stuck with them. I've actually, I never finished school. But as of the end of this semester, I will have at age 45 acquired my associate's degree. Wonderful! Congratulations! Good for you! That's harder to do when you're 45. Oh, it's much harder. When you've got kids and a wife and a job, and you're trying to, yeah, trying to pay all the bills. Anyway, that's why, that's why this, you know, YouTube makes it so much easier to learn, because I don't have time to read, you know, but I do have all this found time now, which is really good. Yeah. But one of the things I did in there that I just wanted to tell you about, that I think is kind of silly, but I still enjoy it. It's one of the things that's lasted in my goals of things that I wanted to do to kind of have a spiritual discipline, is it was back when I was listening pretty regularly to the Bible Projects podcast. Yeah. They were talking about Israel getting a king, and I know we're running out of time, so I won't go much longer than this. I have a lot of stuff to talk about, but I'm not going to even try. I have some flexibility. Keep going. I'll stop you. Okay, yeah. Just help me off when it's time. They were, this wasn't what they were specifically talking about, but they were just referencing when Israel wanted a king, and in Deuteronomy, you know, Moses talks about, hey, if you end up getting a king, here are some of the rules, guys. Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. And one of the things that was in there was the king should handwrite these, or should write this law, and then study it. And so I'm like, huh. So, for a little over a year now, I've been handwriting the Bible from Genesis. Awesome! I started, I decided to start with the message translation, because I'm like, alright, if I'm going to write this, I at least want it to kind of be in a common tongue, so to speak. And I've never read through the entire Bible in the message translation, version. Paraphrase. So I want to say, this morning, I'm working my way through it. I'm in Deuteronomy 14. So I've already made it through Leviticus and Numbers. Wow! Genesis and Exodus, those are easy, because it's story, right? It's fun. You get to follow the story. I'm in Deuteronomy 14 right now. I don't intend to stop. It's very, I don't know. I don't know how to describe it. It makes me go really slow. And I have no idea what, other than what you said about thinking fast and slow that book is about, but it just makes me wonder if like, this is a part of that too. You know, some of the stuff that I'm going through again, like particularly when Moses went up the mountain, it just seemed more alive to me as I was going super slow. And it just like all of these images of what that must have been like to experience in person just started flashing through my head like it never had before. So, now, I'm not going to talk it up, you know, like it's the greatest thing. It's a discipline. And sometimes you're just writing the same stuff over and over again. But it also gives me an appreciation for all the scribes over the centuries who were doing that, you know, just for their whole lives. And as it stands right now, I intend to just keep this as a practice for the rest of my life. Wow, that's so cool. If I even make it through. That is so cool. Yeah. So, that's cool. That is so cool. I've never heard of anybody doing that, but it makes a world of sense. I've never heard of it before either, and I was like, I'm going to try that. I love it. Wow. That makes a world of sense. Yeah, you will. That's exactly it. It slows you down and forces you. So even when, you know, when I, you know, if I'm working on a sermon or something and I'll go back to Greek or Hebrew, I do not read Greek or Hebrew like I read English. So, just having to work through the original language slows me down. And just even that change of speed really, you know, feeds, you know, no, that's good. That's good. That's really good. That reminded me of a question that I have for you. So, as I'm going through this, right, I know the, is it called the Tetragrammaton? Tetragrammaton, yeah. In Eugene Peterson's version, he just writes G-O-D capital. I think that's the same, I think that's what that means. No. Or maybe not. I don't know, but it's the name. It's the name. Okay. And that's what gets complicated. So, usually other, most contemporary translations will, will use Lord in small caps because the Jews, they pointed at Oni for the name, the Jews will say the name so that they can get around saying the name. Some people will say Yahweh because they're scholarly guesses that that's maybe what it originally sounded like. Jews will also say Aronai. So, but it's important to track between the name and Elohim, which is Elohim is more God, or gods, you know, it's plural. So, I mean, the Old Testament, the whole Bible is so amazingly strange and foreign to us. And that's part of the problem with with contemporary translations is that they, you have to tame it in a sense to make it work. And so Eugene Peterson's message is kind of fun in that it's like, ah, I'm just going to write this paraphrase. And that's what it is. He just writes a paraphrase. I have a little more trouble. I feel a little bad sometimes in my adult Sunday school class. I dig into, I put the Greek text for the New Testament, the Leb, which is a Lexham English Bible, which is a fairly contemporary literalistic, tries to do some word correlation. I do the NIV 2011, and then I do the New Living Translation. That's a very popular one. But it's really a paraphrase. It's not a translation. And so I go through the differences between these different ways of translating the Bible for my Sunday school class because they don't have access to Greek. But it's just fun. We're always working that. And it does also slow you down if you've got to read it three times. But it's no, what a wonderful idea. I'm going to steal that. And when people ask me, well, I want to learn the Bible, we'll start copying it. What? Yeah. You mean out of photocopy? No. I mean by hand. Well, why? Well, just do it for a while. And you tell me why. Yeah, just try it. Just try it. That's awesome. Well, that was just one quick question. When I see G-O-D, you know, here where I am right now in the Old Testament. And then I was like, I decided, hey, I want to flip ahead real quick and just look over like at one of the Pauline Epistles. And it's G, you know, lowercase O, lowercase D. And my question is, not really textually speaking, but just if you have a best guess or if you've heard, I mean, it seems pretty obvious that Paul's talking about the same person presence as the capital G-O-D that I see in the Old Testament. I'm, that, that's my only conclusion being raised in church that he's talking about the same thing. And if so, is it just a semantic kind of thing of because the original text said this specifically and over in the Old Testament and the original texts in Greek said this word, you know, what? I guess I was expecting to just see capital G-O-D on both sides, you know, the Old and New Testament whenever I was looking in this specific translation or version. Hmm. See, I just, I just pulled up the, I just pulled up the message because I have this Bible software where I have like all kinds of translations and stuff and I never noticed, see, and this is why copying that sucker by hand will learn a lot that someone like me won't bump into. So, so what did Paul have in mind? Well, Paul was, Paul was trained as a, trained as a scholar in the law in first, in Second Temple Judaism as it's now contemporarily called in scholarly. And so he, this gets complicated because, okay, God, there's God and then there's the Lord and there's Jesus and the Holy Spirit. But right away we're in a Christian, we're in a Christian-Trinitarian framework. So, generally speaking, we connect God and the Old Testament with the Father, which I think is fundamentally what Paul and the New Testament does. And then there's Jesus, of course, and then the Holy Spirit. And as is said, the New Testament has the doctrine of the Trinity in solution. It isn't fully formed. You get these glimpses of it like in the, in baptism in the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit. So, yes, there's that connection and that is what Paul understands is that this is the continuation of the story. And if you read N.T. Wright, he goes into a lot of this in terms of, this is, this is Israel's God redeeming and continuing his mission now through Jesus. And Jesus is Israel's God. And what does what we mean by is? And so, no, and I think that's for Peterson, perhaps Eugene Peterson, not Jordan Peterson. Right. For Eugene Peterson, who was a an author that I deeply respected, and I have tons of his books on my shelf. So when I, when I make quips about the message, you know, it's no disrespect to Eugene Peterson. And I'll look at it sometimes. Sometimes I'll put that in the column for my Sunday school class. But in a sense, Peterson, Eugene Peterson was like, I'm just going to do this. And he did it. And, and, and, we're going to publish, that's right. We'll see if anybody buys it. People buy it. Recently, David Bentley Hart did a similar thing with the New Testament. And the only problem is David Bentley Hart kind of said, well, this is, he kind of glorified his translation a little bit, which just threw the ball up in the air for the rest of the New Testament scholars like Denty Wright to say, I'm going to whack that sucker. Whereas if it's just kind of a personal project, here you go. This is, this is, I'm, you know, I'm doing devotions. And maybe instead of copying it out, I'm going to translate the New Testament. And that's what I'm going to do for devotions. And I'm going to share it, you know. And there it is. Make, you know, hope, hope it blesses you. But that could very well be what Eugene Peterson had in mind in terms of God in, God in small caps in the Old Testament. And then God in, because actually in Greek it's Hothaios. It's, it's usually with a definite article in the New Testament. The God. Which, you know, when we hear that, we're like, what do you mean God? In our, we just say God. Yeah. It's you know, it's, it's extremely and when you start talking about God and, you know, so I've been, you know, I've been working my way through. So you have God number one and God number two. These two aspects of God. And that really came out for me in the, I really only thought of it when I was listening to the Sam Harris Jordan Peterson thing. Because, okay, there's this God. And Jordan Peterson is like this idea and it's built into us and it's all throughout this world. And that's really kind of this, that's God of natural law. And then God number two is this God that we talk to. When we sit on the side of the bed and we say, okay God, what do I need to do? And then you get an answer and it's like, where the heck does that come from? And even Sam Harris says he doesn't know. So hey, there's something. But, but we, we, we relate to those relationally differently. And what's, what's interesting to me is that, so God number one is a lot of the questions that people have in terms of the problem of evil are really a strange intersection of God number one and God number two. So when the tsunami comes through, well, and so then lately because of lately a bunch of Christians feel the need to stand up and say, that wasn't God. Well, and what has happened then is God number one has completely just kind of gone away. And so all you're left with is this relational God that isn't so much all of God number one. And so I think part, there's a lot of reasons why Jordan Peterson has had the effect he's had. Part of it, I'm convinced, is that he brought God number one back on stage. And then suddenly God aspect one and two, I'm not talking about two gods, of course, I'm talking about aspects. Suddenly with both aspects, now suddenly we can understand the Old Testament in a very different way. Because I think people with God number one disappeared and only left with God number two, people feel kind of free to just kind of take pot shots at them. And this is someone that's going to be my divine butler, my plaything, my, you know, my, you know, my my answer of wishes. Well, read the Old Testament. You approach God in that way? Oh, you better think hard and long about that because you know, no ancient, many of which only had God number one, no ancient would do that. Because that'd be like, that's just dumb. You know, that's, oh, yeah, that lion looks cuddly. You want to put your hand through the bars? See what happens. You know, that's, oh, that lion looks cuddly. You want to put your hand through the bars? See what happens. And, you know, so the ancients very much knew God number one. And so when Paul talks about, you know, the power, the basically the power, and I can't think of Romans one. Basically the power of God has been revealed commonly. That's kind of God number one. But now in Jesus, we see God number two in a different way. And, but you need them both. Because what happened in the early New Testament period is that people disconnected the Old Testament from the New, and then they were left to kind of fill in a different God number one with Jesus, and that always warped it. So then it was like, no, we can't re-, we can't just retune the whole Old Testament according to our Greek philosophy. It doesn't work for it. And so there's a lot going on there. But, so I think Eugene Peterson, he's a super smart guy, and just a delightful, you know, delightful Christian and pastor. And Eugene Peterson, for a whole generation of pastors, became the pastor we wish we were. Yeah, some of the, some of the phrases that he sticks in there, and you know, verses that I remember from, you know, my whole life, is just like, man, that's a funny way of saying it. That's really an entertaining way to hear that put. It's really fun. I don't know, I don't know if you have to go, but if you, if you have just a little bit more time, there's one more idea that I'd like to unpack. Sure. And then I'll let you go. Again, I really appreciate this. Oh, this is fun. So my, my wife is a minister in a mainline church. Oh, oh, this is going to be interesting. Well, I'm not going to, I'm not going to get myself into too much trouble. I'm sometimes not too gentle on the mainline, which is probably not, it's probably something I should confess of, because I have mainline friends that will sometimes call me on it, and they're right. Well, I'd say you're much more gentle than some of the other stuff that I've listened to on YouTube before, so. That I believe. So how to start this? I know, you know, Peterson is kind of known for not going to church, right? And I know he grew up in a mainline church in Canada, at least into his teenage years, if I am remembering right. You know, this thought came to me the other day. I don't really enjoy going to church that much. I, once I went back to church. You are a seriously honest man. Your wife is the pastor. Yeah, well, she's the director of worship, so she's not like, she's not the senior pastor there, so I. You don't have to say, yeah, honey, that's sermon today. Oh, God. I really needed a nap, so thanks for that. No. No, no, no. Well, here's the even, here's the even worse thing. This will blow your mind even more. There this is going to paint it in the wrong light, and I don't intend to do it that way, but I so I I went through a divorce, so she's my second wife, and I met her while she was in seminary. And I have kids, and I had been taking my kids to a Wesleyan church in Plano for, you know, from the majority of the time that I went back to church. So it's been their church, and my son since moved out. My daughter, you know, is in her mid-teens now, but it's mainly the church that they've been going to since they've been growing up. So I don't go to my wife's church, but that's the primary reason. I say primary, you're like, why do you qualify with primary? I have gone to mainline churches in her denomination before, and I went particularly whenever I was going through my divorce, I needed someplace to go, and I didn't want to go to my familiar, you know, right-leaning stomping grounds. I needed to go someplace where I felt a little bit safer to, you know, not be perfect. And I don't want to say anything disparaging about the denominations that I grew up in, because they helped me tremendously, you know. And I even went to the first church that I went back to whenever I was, you know, early 20s was a mega church in Grapevine, Texas. Non-denominational, but read in parentheses, Southern Baptist. You're Texas after all. And, you know, it was very secret sensitive. I think the mentor to the head pastor of that church was the Bill Hybels was his mentor to a certain extent. So it was a very secret sensitive model, and it was exactly what I needed at the time. So this is one of the reasons why I'm a big fan of ecumenicalism, because people have different needs at different times on their journey. And if the first place that you need to go in is the far left side of the spectrum, because that's how you get in, great. Journey. Get to where you're supposed to be, you know? But my point about church is I really, I don't enjoy going to church a lot, but I do it because I, there's a sense that I have that it's good for me. I remember reading C.S. Lewis's, what he said about his, when he was asked about going to church, it's just like, the music is so good. And you know, my wife's a music minister, and I'm not saying the music that she chooses and does is no good. That's not what I'm saying at all. But one of the thoughts that came to me the other day, you know, there are a lot of things that are missing. There are things that are really missing for me at church, which is really highlighted by what you're doing, and that I wish that this were at church, you know, and this is what I want to help if I'm in a church, kind of push towards and move towards, right? Is we need to be able to let people in and have these conversations and it doesn't matter where they are, you know? It doesn't matter where they are in life, what they believe, what they don't believe, what they're mixed up in and confused about, doesn't matter, just let them talk. Like you said, if they say God is a cucumber, let them talk. That's one part that I think is missing, those honest conversations that I'd like to see. But then one thought that came to me that's really important for people who are thinking about, ah, why should I go to church? It's just something to consider. It's something that makes it even worse, but is necessary. Is it's a place to learn how, hopefully a safe place, to learn how to forgive and how to be forgiven? Because there is ample opportunity to do both those things. To learn how to forgive the pastor for saying something that you know is wrong. Learning how to forgive somebody who slights you or says something rude or doesn't pay attention to you or doesn't listen to you long enough. And to learn how to be forgiven for those things that you're not noticing that you're doing to other people. And to learn how to forgive people who you are sure are wrong about... I didn't watch your video yet. I know you talked a little bit about LGBT, but learning how to forgive people you are certain are wrong, is something that you are not noticing. Learning how to forgive people you are certain are wrong about affirming LGBT people or relationships or having the church condone it. And also learning how to forgive people you are certain are wrong who don't affirm it. This is the place for... If we can just be drug kicking and screaming by God into these doors for these polar fights that we have both in and out of church. You know, in politics, in religion, if we're going in honestly, these are places where we can learn how to love our enemies. That's right. And even... It's even more than just submit or it's even more than just forgive. It's sometimes submit to people we know are wrong. And that's something that the Orthodox do pretty well in terms of you submit to your bishop and, oh wow, well what if my bishop's an idiot? Well you still submit to him. Submit to an idiot? Yeah. That's what you do in life sometimes. And I think the main line, especially with the LGBT question, I think the main line serves an important role. Because one of the ways that the church learns is by testing the spirits as it says in 1 John 4. I've been on that verse for a couple of weeks now in Sunday school. So what you're going to have in the West is a whole bunch of churches that are going to be affirming and are going to be trying a whole bunch of different things. And we're going to learn from that. And so... There it is. And, you know, you may like it, you might not like it, but you're exactly right. That's what church offers you. Because well, what do we need to do in this world? Well, this is a lot of the basic things we need to do. You want to be... I remember before I was married, the pastor of my church said, okay, I want you to read Walter Wangerin's book on marriage. And Walter Wangerin, his book on marriage basically says in order to be married, you need to learn how to do two things. You need to learn how to forgive. And you need to learn how to not leave. It's like, you know, you're not married. It's like, really? Is that all? That's not much. You just wait, buddy. That sounds about as simple as love God and love your neighbor. That's right. I can do that. That's PS Lewis with one of the best lines on forgiveness. Everybody thinks forgiveness is a good idea. Until they have something to forgive. Oh, so, no, I think that's very, very true. And churches are, you know, so churches are the place that we do practice these things. And they are, you know, one of the big... So when I was growing up in the Christian Reformed Church, there was much more of a sense that Christian Reformed Churches were churches. And pastors would come and go. So my grandfather would be four years in one church, six years in another church. You just got to go from church to church to church. The churches were always the same. And if you had a pastor, it was kind of boring. It's like, wait a few years and he'll be gone. And maybe the next one will be a better one. And, you know, it'll all be okay. And what has happened to the church in America is that churches have become these cults of personality. And so, ooh, this church has a great pastor, so we all go over here. And then something happens. And, oh, this church has a better pastor, and I'll go over here. And this church has great music, so we all go over here. This church affirms LGBT, so we all go over here. This church is holding a line on LGBT, so we all go over here. And it's like, that whole dynamic is very not church. And so some people, you know, have basically said, you should go to the church that's geographically nearest to your house. And they're like, well, that just sounds crazy. Go to that one. Yeah. It's like, well, who knows what they believe? That's the point. It's like, really? Yeah, really. Oh. And who knows? I mean, believe you me, there's a lot of crazy churches out there. And I've got more sophisticated church tastes than most, because I listened to a sermon with a very critical ear. I wouldn't have said it that way. Well, I just, I didn't think it was wrong. I mean, it's terrible being a pastor and listening to other pastors. It's really rough, because we all think we're little gods. And God, again, says, oh, you think you're God? You really want to do that? Read Genesis 3. Didn't end so well. No, you're exactly right. You're exactly right. And it's, you know, part of the beauty of the mainline is that, well, they're trying some things out. And it's, they've, you know, mainlines, mainlines, mainline was at their heyday during the Cold War. And they've, boy, they've been dropping, they've been dropping like a rock. And it's, it's tough. And I think what will happen in the mainline is probably what happened in churches in Europe where, you know, the absolutely most stubborn and determined people will inherit the institution, and then it'll rebound. And it will, you know, who knows where it will go? None of us know the future, but that's what will happen. And they'll inherit all the buildings and the, you know, all the stuff from it. So God, like I said, don't play chicken with God. He takes the kinds of risks that we look at and say, no, you can't do that. Oh, really? Watch me, you know. I'll do things that you say, well, that's just wrong. Yeah, yeah, that's what you think, isn't it? But I'm me and you're not. So good luck, buddy. That's God. Well, Paul, this is, this has been a pleasure for me. I've never, I can't remember if I said this at the beginning or if I just wrote it down and was saving it to say, but I've never talked to a real life YouTuber before. So this is tremendous. There's lots of people out there with 10 or 15 subs, and that used to be me. And write them and say, could I talk to you? Yes. Yeah, well, it's a very meta. I can only imagine. It was meta to watch, but just, I'm sure it was a very meta experience to just start posting YouTubes about Jordan Peterson and then not only then talking to Jordan Peterson, but then seeing your name invoked in an interview with Jordan Peterson. And having him respond. Well, you know, when David and Oli came out from the UK and he contacted me, he said, we'd like to come to your church and do an interview and just take some footage of your church. And it's like, how am I going to explain to my church that these people are coming from the UK and they're going to be recording? And that was just a few months into this YouTube thing. And people at church are like, what the heck is going on? Why are they talking to our pastor? And now it's people show up for church completely and they talk to them. And I saw Paul on YouTube. Oh yeah, one of those. That was all time. No, I really, and Jeff, this is, I mean, when I started the channel, I figured, I figured I might go to 50 or 75 subs and I just have some, you know, one or two really interesting people to talk to about this stuff. Because I like you, who was I going to talk to about this stuff? I didn't know. So then I thought I'd started the meetup. I thought maybe two or three people will come. And it was more than that. It's like, ooh, what's with this? So, but it's for me, this is you know, part of the part of the joy of pastoring a small church is I have time to do this. And this is a ministry of the church in many ways. And so, you know, this is, this is what I do. And it makes me a better pastor. Because now the number of people I talk to is larger. I have a bigger frame of reference. I have more experience. So, it's win-win. So, no, I appreciate, I appreciate you reaching out. And I wish I had more time and more slots to talk to absolutely everybody who wanted to talk to me and to talk multiple times. Well, selfishly, yeah, I hope that you you don't ride the the status rocket selfishly because, you know, I'd like to talk to you again sometime and bounce some different ideas off of you. But, you know, if that doesn't happen, that's fine. You know, God's bigger than either of us. It's bigger than YouTube. We'll be taken care of. But, yeah, if I do get another chance and I have some more ideas and I can get in, I would definitely, you know, enjoy talking to you again. So, thank you. Sounds great to me. So, yeah, I will ship this to you. Your wife can review it. And if you give the thumbs up, then I'm sure I'd like to post it. Yeah. Yeah. I'll let you know. Okay, Jeff. Alright. Great meeting you. You too. Bye. Bye-bye.