https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=mHBVLEthbgk

 All right. Hi, this is Paul and this is an experiment. We're having a four-way conversation today and well, why don't, who's bright idea was this? Well, this was my time technically. Yes. And Luke and I have been, Luke reached out to me after my first conversation with you Paul, via you and he and I have been talking back and forth ever since then and in the comments of our conversation, Joe reached out and said, hey I'm gonna be in Texas. You know, let's meet up. Texas, you know, if you're in Texas we can meet. It's really close. So Joe and I met up in Austin. I drove down to him and we had lunch and we had some good conversations. So it was really neat and really strange to get to meet in person but it was good, not a bad kind of strange. And so then when Luke and I were talking, he had mentioned that he wanted to have another conversation with you Paul and I got to the point where I decided I wanted to talk to you again and you know sometimes it's hard to find a slot. Well, I eventually found one and I sent a screenshot of my book talk with you to Luke and he's like, what? How did you get a slot? And I said, well hey there's a slot on the same day like one hour before my session. You know, if it's still there go grab it if you want it. So he did and then in short order I just happened to be talking to Joe a little bit and I mentioned, hey you know Luke and I are gonna be talking to Paul on the same day and Joe said, you guys should just book the same time together. And I know that Luke needed to talk to you just to get some ideas out and I'm very interested to see how that conversation went. Just you know spoiler for everybody, that conversation happened before this one. And so I said back to Joe, I said, hey you're welcome to join me if you want to and I can't remember who said it but you know we should reach out to Luke too and just have him have him stay over. So that's kind of the genesis of all this. So it was, I think technically it was Job's bright idea. Oh yeah, I just figured the three of us should call it an ISIS channel. All right so here we are. Who's got the first thing to say that that gets us going? Maybe a little round of introductions because probably not everybody watched all the videos. So Jeff you first, just real quick. Real quick, I am in Texas. I was raised in church. You and I talked for a long time about several different things. I'm a big CS Lewis fan. I read George McDonald. That's a connection that Luke and I have. I don't want to steal his thunder so I'll pass the ball. Okay. Okay so I've talked with Paul now. This is today was our third time. The first one was unaired. All the vulgarity and things. No I'm just kidding. And I think I grew up in the church also and I've just been on a slow progression. I'm now I'm the guy that always talks about orthodoxy and how fruitful that's been for me. So I moved that way just the last few years kind of through this whole phenomenon and you and Jonathan Peugeot and I've been going that way for a long time and I live in Minneapolis. Okay. Job you've been on you've had more space on my channel than almost anybody I think. I think this is the fourth. Yeah that's right so so Nick's been on more so yeah. Okay. Hi I'm Job. I'm from the Netherlands. I try not to be religious but hey. I can't help but joke so I don't have to be serious about it. I'm not a believer. Luke disagrees. Well that was a complicated discussion. I just said we were we're gonna have some fellowship today. It's interesting. Evangelical code words there Luke. That's right. Coenonia. I'll just stick with the Greek. Considering myself I don't know recovering atheist I think works really well. I like the whole Christian agnostic but I have been reading about Pelagius and I like what he has to say. Yeah. It's yeah. Interesting. So Paul who are you? I'm me. It's my channel. People who found this video already kind of know who I am so I don't have to introduce myself. Oh hey Paul there was there was one other thing that I wanted to share. Whenever I was talking to my wife about us you know pulling this whole thing together I said yeah you know it's it's kind of like Paul's building his own Marvel Cinematic Universe. All of these one-on-one conversations are the standalone movies and this is the first this is the first team up of all of his online guests. Okay. This is a quick page. If I if I could share this so this is a quick thing we didn't get to in my talk Paul but I mentioned to you an email Gabriel Marsal. Who's this? I love him. I just I've started reading him but his general ideas I love but I had an idea for a t-shirt that I wanted to make that was Marcel greater than Marvel and it was just gonna be my little inside joke. Oh okay. When you brought up Marvel I just had to throw that in. Okay so so what's on your mind gentlemen? What's what's new? What's first what's what do you want to talk about? You want to talk about Jordan Peterson stuff? Did anybody else listen to the the conversation with Bishop Barron? Yeah it's hard to listen to. Really? Yeah because Peterson just sounds like he's unraveling. Yeah yeah. It's just like you feel you can hear the pain and the stress and and the stuff that's going on with Tammy. Yeah. And it's a good conversation but it's certainly one I have to listen to again so I can kind of try to distract my mind from engaging engaging too much emotionally. Before let's see Jeff what I liked is when I when I asked you what we should talk about you said hey how about this kind of weird thing of internet randos coming together on some Calvinist pastors YouTube channel and I think that is an interesting thing to discuss. I mean how these things happen and and I mean it's got to be totally surreal for Paul to begin with but like okay you know you guys have been talking you and Luke have been talking. We had some barbecue and now I've been talking to Luke and it's just this seems to go very naturally like Paul will have someone on some of us will think that person has something to say and then it goes from there and I don't really know if it's a subject that I don't know it's just I like the idea I don't know if it'll turn into an actual discussion point but I think it's if I may I think this is this would be my thought and hypothesis on it and I think it's I think it's inherent to the larger Jordan Peterson phenomenon that the ID intellectual dark web long-form conversations podcasts all of that I think that greater phenomenon is I think it's indicative of a deep hunger that people have for for real connection and conversation with people that I don't think was being met and I think that like for all of us like even my conversation with you yesterday Jobe and every interaction I've had with Jeff is I mean I don't I don't know where you stand on a host of issues and I and I don't care honestly I mean I do care but I I think one of the things that I love so much about Paul's channel is it's a niche of the niche I don't know of the larger Jordan Peterson phenomenon that's specifically taught about Christian religion or more so but but I think it's just filled with a bunch of people from myriad backgrounds but it's honest seekers it's honest searchers it's people that that aren't afraid to some degree to say well what they think it's non-ideological and that's what I've found to be most refreshing and that's what I find to be honest that's what I found to be most honest in talking to you yesterday I mean you're just you are you're an earnest person and I'm immediately drawn to that I mean we talked about that with Jordan Peterson it's it's admiration which is Eric's big point in my conversation with him it's a hallmark of a good community I mean the I'm a member of a couple of programmer communities and once in a while we have a conference and a good community a good community is where you you don't just talk about whatever this language does but stuff around it as well and then you you're free to disagree with each other and I mean I think that that's that's the same for for for this and and and how we see this sort of stuff branch out in the intellectual dark web I mean it's difficult you know because you hear people say oh we just want to we just want to learn from each other and we don't care if we hold different views and that's easy to say you know but I mean I'm just going on a tangent here but is there a Jordan Peterson community oh geez you know so my conversation with Dr. Jim Field and that I've had two conversations with him but the first one you know he basically I thought laid out one of the most plausible narratives narratives about why Jordan Peterson took hold in that basically the way he said something crystallized a whole disparate group of people who were sort of on the outside and gave them a rallying cry and or at least gave them gave them a something together around him but so then you have atheists who feel a little bit dispossessed feel dispossessed by the by the social justice warrior the identity identity politics stuff you have Christians who are feeling dispossessed for a variety of reasons and here this guy says appreciative things about the Bible you know and even the group of us you know I've Luke is Luke is exploring orthodoxy Jeff loves Lewis and is that a cat Jeff or a dog you have to have another cat you have another cat there we go every video is made better by a cat or a dog and so you know for you know so obviously just a select group of people who were listening to Jordan Peterson stuck on my channel there's probably been five or six times as many people who listened to a minute or two of me talking and you know clicked on to someplace else but you all stuck so the the question that Jordan Peterson has is very much a question that I have you know what's what's going on and I don't even know that's I don't I wonder that in terms of maybe you should start there why why did you all why do you all continue to listen to this channel so I had one of my friends the other day say I don't listen to most of the conversations they're boring and I thought well that's probably true some of the conversations are boring I just wait for your videos it's like oh okay but but there's a whole bunch of people who do listen to all the conversations and remember them so all right so what is that um well I'm I'm one of those people like I was happy to see you know today Cassidy showed up again so I just you know I watched Cassidy's video and even left the comment and I just stick around you know we we're doing other things while we're listening usually you know we're not just sitting here staring at the screen with our eyes glued to it at least I'm not you know I'm doing stuff around the house or I'm you know doing stuff at work while I can listen at the same time and whatever catches my attention and like breaks me out of what I'm doing you know there's uh uh that salience you know like Raveke talks about and and Luke had mentioned that whenever he talked about you know what he got out of watching my conversation with you and so I come back for things that just you know pop out at me or things that stand out and get me thinking in new ways or opening up um new vistas for me so that that's why I keep coming back okay okay so I think um I agree I think it's I don't know and Paul maybe you I think what you're asking is like why why are these things salient to all these people what's the common reason why um because I do I mean I watch I've stopped watching a lot of things and listening to podcasts but I probably I mean I watch almost all of your videos even your conversations I probably watch 95 percent or more and um and I think for me it really is um it's it's that it's it's honest inquiry and I haven't gotten far into it but Gabriel Marsal I'll bring him up again he he has a one of his big words and phrases and ideas that he talks about is his idea of searching um and it's people who are honest seekers who the way I've always said it is people who are committed to the truth outside of the truth that they currently apprehend um and I think your channel is full of those people and I think and I think that Jordan Peterson largely is full of those people I mean granted he's gotten a big enough um following now that I'm sure I mean he's full of I'm sure there's a lot of sycophants that are just following it to be tribal and to be on the bandwagon and who are honestly searching but that's always been my biggest thing of Jordan Peterson I mean frankly that's why I love the fact he won't answer the resurrection question I mean I love that about him I'm just like good thank you don't answer it wonderful you cannot you can't answer it authentically don't um and and I love him the more I mean people get mad at him but that's just because they want him on their team and that's gross gross even I think I do find it to be gross I find it to be a form of deception it's lying and I and I don't think it's I don't think it's pleasing to God to just want people on your team just because that's the ultimate thing just because they're on your team you want people on your team in authentically well you it's the your team the team thing becomes an ego thing yeah we want people on my team we want people I mean it's it's the it's it's it's it's it's sour we want people to reflect me I mean that's that that is deeply troubling and that's demonic you can't love and want that those two things are in are contradictory yeah it's otherness I mean it's trinitarian ultimately there's otherness but unity and love I mean you can't it's not everything being the same without ultimately it would destroy love it's just it's just stark white blank nothingness you know without contrast you know I mean you need difference in order to have genuine relationship and love I think sorry I won't I'll try not to just make this go into like a deep philosophical tirade as far as Peterson has has talked about his popularity I mean he has asked himself this question like what what the hell is going on I mean that's that's a quote and one thing he he keeps iterating and I think he also said it during his Baron interview with now not so sure maybe that happened anyway he will say whenever I'm talking at some place I this moment I mentioned meaning it just pin drops and everybody's hooked and I think that's a huge part of it and and it's like you know the first video I just happened to find by the guy I wasn't even looking for for Peterson in particular it's just this video about the necessity of virtue and it's just I watch it and like oh my god this is I've never seen that something in that and then you know that's an astounding thing to say about our culture that when we see a video about virtue it we stop and stare because we don't talk about virtue we don't glorify virtue we don't hold virtue up for admiration it wasn't so much that it was because I came I came from stoicism like oh let's watch something about virtue ethics because I was trying this thing of analyzing my every action of the day you know to really practice stoicism or focus on whatever the next thing you do and I find this guy and he talks about snakes and biology and and and Solzhenitsyn and Cain and Abel and and the logo is like oh no I'm enjoying somebody talking about religion you know this is about a year and a half ago so give me a break but that and then you Paul with your our analyses of the the Harris and Peterson debates which like that that changed me that video literally that that destroyed a couple of my axioms and now I'm talking that's really difficult to deal with I mean I'm not trying to make light of it I mean so why do some of us click and leave and why do some of us stay for me personally there's this whole new existence in which I think life is worth living and I'm still trying to figure out what to do with that life and I figure maybe maybe there'll be another video and I'll get a bit better at understanding what I should do with it and in the meantime I found that that something as simple and I look as we discussed yesterday something as simple as telling the truth is so absolutely fundamental so world changing that you know it's such a tiny thing I don't know I'm preaching now but but like maybe there's more like that and maybe we can find more if we talk to each other in conversations like this that's good that's like it well man Jeff when we met you know you you had all these ideas about about Lewis and and and I don't know I mean if we'd met I I wouldn't have talked the earth thought about these things like that or you know heard you read a whole blog post that you wrote about your thoughts I think that's just that's so interesting and you know talking to Luke yesterday and you know your ideas about orthodoxy and about what belief is and and and and maybe we're just maybe the those of us that stay we want this but we don't have it anywhere else the because not everybody cares sorry Paul go ahead no no that's right and and the meaning I mean one of the one of the things that I've continued to think about is the whole salience question and that because for the last I don't I don't have another video ready to go this week and I've got a lot of conversations this week and I just lost a really I just lost one of the best conversations I've had in the last few months just lost that it's driving me crazy but I you know I spent the last I spent a lot of last week getting through getting through Frank Schaefer's you know crazy for God and salience I start four or five books at a time and every now and then one of those books grabs me and I've just got to finish it and I want to make a video about it and it's like well what is that and it reminds me of Peterson's you know on the edge of the bed is going to become another meme for Peterson and I'm like I'm going to make a video about it and I'm like I'm going to make a meme for Peterson because he's coming back around to it again and again he did in the in the bishop baron video but you know that was obviously there in the in the Sam Harris God number one God number two video where Peterson in a sense sits on the edge of the bed looks down into the darkness speaks you know asks a question down into the darkness and out comes an answer and salience is like that and so a lot of my questing has been you know what we say well we're going to do what's worthwhile but where does that come from I don't know and God somehow holy spirit blowing wind I've been doing a lot of thinking about spirit and wind and those issues so and but it fascinates me you know so I actually said to a group said I just made a two and a half hour video and I don't really have my next video in mind maybe I won't make any more and last time I said something like that on the channel I got a bunch of emails saying no you can't do that it's like well I probably will make more but and I I know I'll make more but I will send John your way John Vendon okay so I don't know so I don't know I don't know and I look at the meetups that we have in Sacramento and I they so often wind up so good and I think I didn't do this you know this is and so one of the you know community is forming around the people you know there's I watch this thing happen I think oh my goodness it's just like a church except and and then at some point I I'm just sure the holy spirit holy spirit's gonna smuggle Jesus in and we'll have more recovering atheists and and yeah I just watch it happen and hope to not get in the way okay what do you mean get in the way well now I'm just gonna sound like Peterson you know do something stupid to to forestall the progress but I don't even know what the progress that's not entirely true you know what what do I want so so Peterson when he talks to Bishop Baron Peterson asks Bishop Baron what does he want and I know exactly what Bishop Baron wants I want the same thing and I want the I want the kingdom to come I want I want I want no I want I want the kingdom to come and all that that means I want children to be fed I want people to be clothed I want the insane to be in the right mind I want wars to cease I want I want all of this and you know I see what I'm doing as a part of it absolutely and part of why I can get away with this is I'm a Christian minister so I can just say it you know what's what's your agenda Vander Clay it's always been my agenda I don't think I've ever tried to hide it I just don't like propaganda I want people to speak the truth well and that's one of the things that's been one of the big things about your channel that's kept me here when I when I don't follow a lot of Christian channels I mean I used to just my podcast used to be exclusively sermons and I mean I don't listen to sermons on podcasts anymore at all because I mean I don't that's a fundamental shift toward orthodoxy I mean I don't the sermon is not the center of my Christian experience and worship but I don't I've never you're you don't have propaganda which is why I like it and that's the I suppose I was thinking as you were talking that's the salience that's the common salience thing to me is that all of this when you talked about bringing the kingdom it's uh and even with Jordan Peterson and maybe this is his tie to clean up your own room and psychology and and psychoanalysis and and health and bringing people out of depression and away from nihilism into taking responsibility is that's all connected to to health and if you take individual health and you manifest it like this is what Jordan Peterson talks about with with it starting at the individuals you clean your room and then what's best for you is not only what's best for you but it's what's best for your family it's what's best for your neighborhood it's what's best for your state it's what's best for your country it's what's best for the world it's all the same thing and if you get healthy which Jordan Peterson I would argue is leading a lot of people to get healthy at least in ways that means they're cleaning up the rooms of their mind and stopping lying is what you know Jobe and I were talking about that that's one of the first things you should do um and then you are assisting with that even though you're within a narrow tribe of that you let people say whatever they want because you recognize the danger of propaganda um those are the common things if anybody came along the Jordan Peterson train or the Paul Vanderklake train and they tried to take that and then colonize it and make a monarchical vision out of it that everybody else must submit to I'm definitely out of that group fast um I want nothing to do with that yeah you know what's one of the interesting things so again I talked to Nathan today and you can watch Nathan's story on his book on his movie becoming fully human so I'm not telling any turn out of school here so Nathan finds himself wanting to be orthodox and his wife isn't there and so he he goes to the priest and the priest says no you don't become orthodox until she's ready and it takes seven years and what impressed me about him telling that story was was the submission I mean in that moment he submitted to his priest and he submitted to his wife and I think part of what I want to avoid is someone might hear what you just said Luke and have that sound like a rebellious spirit just kind of you know neo saying I don't like people telling me what to believe or what to do and it's true none of us do it but at the same time there also has to be a point in which we submit because you you cannot be submitting you cannot be a Christian without submitting to your lord it's the definition of the thing right the difficulty and then you have the question of what are the mediating authorities sure and and it's so often been the abuse of that authority that you know Luke and I so in the conversation that I'll probably have to post it before I post this one but the conversation Luke and I were having you know I I made the point that the Protestant Reformation happened for a reason and a big piece of that reason was corruption and and if there's one thing that the church reliably stumbles upon throughout church history it's power and and the one thing that I think a lot are watching Jordan Peterson on is he has you know he's been honest he's been you know status rocket got attached to him and he has gained in power and wealth and all of those things you know what what does that do and and the the incredible thing about Christianity is it deals with all of these questions of status and authority and power and it's constantly reversing them Jesus who has the highest status you know Philippians 2 becomes the servant of all and and this got into American politics every time someone stands up and says I'm a public servant that's that's Christian language and we all hear it and the minute we see them acting not like a public servant you know where the the revolution begins yeah sorry I don't want to I want to say something else but I don't want to talk the whole time the thing the thing in response to what you said about me is being rebellious I would I would harken back to your conversation with Eric because this is something I've thought a lot about and admiration and respect and Job and I spoke about yesterday is that um and respect is involuntary it's something you do you don't have control over you either do or you don't respect someone and so when it comes to the church and authority or any I think when you talk about authority you also need to talk about respect and it's it is a false move to ask someone to submit to an authority they don't respect it's a false move and I think that's what the church has done a lot of times and and you can't do it you're asking someone to lie you're asking someone to sell their soul for the sake of your claimed authority you ought not do that yeah oh sorry so and I mean and then it goes and it goes I was saying this to Job I fundamentally believe Christianity is non-coercive and I think that's because it's all tied to respect God doesn't force people to bend the knee he woos them they drop to a knee because they can't do anything else which harkens back to a conversation I had recently too I think I think that harkens back to the height elephant and rider thing right even if you get people to submit if their elephants aren't in it then they can't do anything other than what their elephant you know instinctually leads them to you see you form you make them split yeah like Jordan Peterson said and then you have their head over here pretend either lying or being self-deceived thinking they're doing this you either create hypocrites and duplicitous people or liars yeah I mean you can't do it that we are whole people it all has to come together yeah I totally agree that's elephant rider for sure keep going Jeffrey were you done well I was going to say I had a couple thoughts flash across my little keyhole consciousness the admiration thing I appreciated you know what Eric had to say in his conversation with you and I think that's right and I think that's echoing something that I believe it was in one of your conversations with Job Paul where again I referenced this in my conversation he asked you know how do you get to Jesus and you know Jesus came to me through my life you know the people in my life everyone that I knew and I think that is an admiration part of it too right what Luke just said earlier you know he God will woo you and it'll happen in so many different ways it's funny in a in a brief exchange with Job within the last couple weeks I think it was when I was driving and I don't know where I got this idea but I just asked Job I said hey if I said something like if if you could have an experience where you actually believed believed probably isn't the right word and where you were convinced that you had an interaction with God number two would you want it and Job do you remember what you said to me oh god I I I could think I would say yes to to the question but that I probably wouldn't believe it if it happened yeah that sounds like me and the thought that crossed my mind wasn't merely to ask Job that question but it was oh you know ask Job this question and if he says okay yeah sure or something along those lines then just go ahead and pray for something like that to happen for Job and I told Job hey here's you know if you're if you're okay with it this is what I'll do and he's like yeah I don't really see how if a being like this exists I could do anything to stop that from happening anyway and so I did but I said you know it's it's not as if God number two so to speak does whatever I ask but you know I'll go ahead and ask and we'll see what happens and if something happens it will and if it doesn't it doesn't and whatever but you know all of all of the admiration piece I guess I guess just the last thing in that theme of you Paul talking to Job about how Jesus came to you is you know I I've read one Madeline Liengel well three Madeline Liengel books it was a trilogy it's called the Genesis trilogy and somewhere in one of those three books she makes the exact same point that you did is you know there's a lot of evangelizing out there there's a lot of people who are trying to to get you to come to Jesus to get you to bend the knee to Jesus and in Luke's language get on my team kind of thing and in her book she said you know that the most convincing arguments that I ever received or that people that I even talked to have ever had was well you know I wasn't really interested in church I wasn't really interested in the Bible but I was interested when somebody that I really admired I found out that they were Christian and that's what kind of drew me in and and you know speaking of Madeline Liengel you know admiration leads you to things the only reason that I started reading Madeline Liengel or that I felt safe to read Madeline Liengel is because she said some she said she admired C.S. Lewis and so if somebody admires somebody that you admire that's you know that gets my elephant's attention I'm just like oh interesting Luke you like C.S. Lewis and you like McDonald okay let me talk to you some more yeah yeah yeah no that's true that's true yeah that speaks to I mean that's why I read McDonald for the first time was C.S. Lewis I mean I read I read what Lewis talked about spoke about him and what Chesterton said about him and how all these people had such admiration and that got me into McDonald and I just I think that's how it works Paul and even forgive me your friend the pastor who you spoke with the author who writes the stories Rod I admire Rod right deal right and I do too after watching his video but like one of the and I think it's it's it's the right move for you to have people like that on too because the stories that he there's a reason the stories that he tell are powerful there's a reason they resonate so deeply with people it's admiration you can't you can't hear about and I forget the names but the people who served gave up their lives for the people and the sacrifices they made yeah Pete and Ruth I mean you cannot if you aren't moved by that story I mean I can't imagine someone not being moved by that story and that's admiration I mean I do think there's a I don't know there's a there's a big piece there and I mean and I think that's a big piece with the saliency and the Jordan Peterson and your channel I mean I think that's what's going on there's a there is a David French wrote a piece on national review the subtitle is is one of the best pieces of it second and I don't want to go to the government thing because but secular secular government is breaking the promise of liberty and the American Church is breaking the promise of virtue and and that you know that idea again I've still got Frank Schaefer's book ringing in my mind and the you know Edith or Frank Edith Schaefer you know had crazy inconsistent ideas of of status and virtue which were which are all conflicting and and young Frankie could see that Francis Schaefer had a temper and didn't always treat his wife with the and didn't always treat his wife with the kindness that he should have and there's inconsistency but the thing that I think really the thing that I think really grabbed Frank Schaefer was the corruption was the corruption of the evangelical industrial complex and the you know and Luke for conversations with you that's a that's a that's a continually revolving aspect of the conversation that in our search for power in our search for money you know we are so easily we so easily turn to lying and propaganda and and and somehow we know somehow we can we can we can when something is a lie we don't want to have anything to do with it yet we are liars and and that is the crazy thing this this thing that we can see and abhor in others we can't stop ourselves from indulging in and that is you know that is some you know the nature of our broken sinful nature and and you know what what what grabbed people about Peterson I think his his earnestness and his his conviction that always gets our attention but you know will it hold and it was amazing in the in the conversation with with Bishop Baron that Peterson at one point and I'm going to put these and I'm going to make videos about some of these clips in here but but this place where Peterson starts basically saying well part of the abdication of the church is that they don't tear into people anymore and tell them that they're sinners and I thought oh my oh my Jordan you really haven't been in church and and you don't know the the interesting dynamic of of of calling people out on their sin there are there have been many cases in my ministry where people have come to me and said similar things you need to call out this person on their sin and I would say to them is that a value of yours yeah that's what you should be doing pastor and so I'd say okay shall I start with you boom never ends well that's when the little animated sunglasses go come down you somebody's gonna make that somebody's gonna make that what minute are we in on this video somebody pause it so this you know and and this again I mean part of why you know Luke is all kinds of people are leaking out to to orthodoxy and stuff but I remain a Calvinist partly because I look at the complexities of this world and I have to say it's only by God's power and spirit that that we can be saved from ourselves because we are so I have so many ways of lying to myself I have so many ways of deceiving myself I have so many ways of of and and if I can do that to myself you know how much how you know why can't I do that to others in my life we are so deceitful and can I can I can I can I button on that okay okay so Paul recently you made this video oh lord what am I doing about Peterson how can anyone say they believe in God and then there was a two and a half hour your your very latest one yeah my last video no more after that yeah done over no more vennaclay okay uh there was a video you might catch whining at me sorry there was a video in that and um who was the name uh don piper that clip paul oh that's what you know I watch it twice like Mallory come here watch this this so it's it's this it's not even the music the music doesn't help but it's it's it's it's it's it's it's it's it's it's it's it's it's it's it's it's it's it's it's it's doesn't the music doesn't help but it's this it's this it's this it highlights some sort of a diabolical abusive relationship of of you are a despicable worthless creature and you don't deserve anything but I'm gonna give it to you anyway because I love you really is that how this is this it's like well you know I don't want to beat you but you keep pissing me off honey I just can't help it that's what that reminds me of it's like oh so I'm a horrible fallen creature and I don't deserve grace but I get it anyway really so so who made that creature can remind me who made this creature that doesn't deserve grace to begin with and if it's so important why is faith a gift why don't I get it when I'm born if it's if it if it decides my eternal salvation really you're going to give this to me halfway and so I might feel a bit strong about this but no honestly I do I misunderstand the theology because this really is that how it gets because that's the whole that's the whole that that goes into these shitty atheist arguments of of the burglar in the alley who's like well you can decide not to give me a wallet but then I'll shoot you so it's really up to you to condemn yourself or not which doesn't seem like a very proper argument but it seems to me that something that is so so utterly utterly important and that's where Peterson steps in Peterson no wait a second you're not a child you're not an infant who needs to be given something no here's something for you to carry and through that you'll reach salvation and that works that that that's that's Pelagius man that's like suffer up that hill but that's orthodox that orthodoxy is Pelagian no I think well so the whole Pelagius it was interesting I would love to talk to Job sometime about what he read about my understanding well right and so and so I've read that too and my understanding of Pelagius is that and this is what happened with all heretics they burned all their writings so what we know about the heretics are what the people who called them heretics said about them that's just one thing but if I read Pelagius's Wikipedia page which I did too I was like I don't even think Pelagius is a Pelagian that's what I thought when I read when I read the Wikipedia page I don't think and this gets into what Paul and I we didn't talk about this in our chat but I would I would love specifically to have you talk to Dr. Nathan Jacobs about because he knows way more than me I mean he understands reform doctrine very well and um and my see see that's the thing that happens is we we I was telling Paul this we have these Augustinian frameworks and we come into this conversation and then we'll call something Pelagian well that's an Augustinian framework that's not what we're talking about we're having a like orthodoxy I mean if you want to call theosis and carrying across up the hill and following Christ taking up your cross and following me Pelagian I guess go ahead call it Pelagian I mean I just call it being a Christian I mean I just call it being a Christian so what's interesting to me about your reaction is that I could compile Jordan Peterson clips to nearly make those John Piper quotes because Jordan you can find Jordan Peterson telling you you don't know your hand from your butt you have no idea which way is up you have I mean Peterson Peterson gets on that often now Peterson is not a believer that God well Peterson Peterson via the one more thought conversation with David Nasser I mean another trigger point yeah he's clearly right there in the question of agency and here's here's the difficult here's the difficult well this is this is in a sense what the west has been working on for 1500 years via Augustin is where is God's agency and where is our agency because even even if you let's say okay so let's go full Pelagian let's say well okay so maybe I'm not the dimwit that Augustin says I am maybe I have enough of a spark of divinity to to carry that to even have the good sense of picking up the right cross and choosing the right hill when I get to the top of the hill I'm going to sing with Frank Sinatra I did it my way and I don't think that finally works either I don't know how to and see and I wonder yeah I know Luke I know Luke Luke wants it on this I think I think all of these questions are framed within a lot of different backgrounds and part of the difficulty we have in conversation is that we're using this tiny little channel pulling from a very limited set of words to try and make this thing work and fit and I'm not trying to say I'm not trying to punt by using the word mystery or paradox but these questions you very quickly fall off the other end and you say well then it's just up to us and I think a lot of this hinges on the question of we don't know when God is working and we don't know when I am and so as a Calvinist I tend to feel more comfortable say I tend to feel more comfortable not trusting in me because I know just how untrustworthy I am all right Luke go ahead you want well I just want to I want to mention this so it gets in the notes but if you stop taking notes oh well I'll even I have to make notes in the aftermath oh sorry so um so dr Nathan Jacobs has a podcast with Hank Hanegraaff where I think he he talks about what you were just mentioning he talks about a lot of things we talked about what you were just mentioning really way in a in a way that I think you can that's really clear but I think it's essentially the distinction in the early church fathers and he argues he says you you really needed to understand the new testament too but the difference between energies and essences and the energies that are in the bible because I would argue that you can have you can have both an incredible seriousness of sin and of your own I won't use the word depravity because that's a word that triggers and has a lot of baggage but you have your own brokenness fallenness sin you are I agree with John Piper you are much worse than you can imagine I affirm that I don't think that's wrong however I think at the same time because of Augustine and through the dominance of worldviews like original sin and total depravity we lost the fact that man is heaven and earth together we have the divine spark we have god is god and his energies is not the the dualistic god that's the deistic god that's out there he's also in us he's out and in he's everywhere this is why I talk about panentheism so you so like the pelagian dragging your cross up a hill it's impossible it's a false category if you drag your cross up the hill and there you meet christ and you're in union with him you can't do that on your own of course not there is no such thing it's like a it's a round circle or it's a round square how so because any because anything good comes from god that's what James the brother of god says all good things come from god and the only reason that would even trigger you is because you have dualistic categories oh is that so I wouldn't know I honestly would know man I but I did identify a lot of dark I have so I'll admit to that I mean the only one I can see I shouldn't speak so I tend to over say things strongly so forgive me if that was overstated okay I like let me put it this way I'd rather walk with someone up the hill than be dragged up it and that's what it feels like lately and I'd really been climbing I don't like to be dragged and then I then I fell back down and there was two weeks of shit so okay I clearly need to get up that hill but so that's it that sounded like a Calvinist you're being dragged up the hill that's what it feels like it's not like I want to deal with all this religion ideas have people yeah quote that hashtag it's just you but honestly if you're saying all good comes from god where does it okay okay so how do we prevent humans from becoming infantilized by the necessity of of of god or by the necessity of grace we can prevent it I think that's how we start okay yeah maybe I mean I don't flesh out what you mean I'm not sure I know what you mean well I don't think humans are broken I think that's where I when I hear something like that I think okay explain the world but you think you're broken in ways I mean just think of it think of it this way like when because we have all these sin categories ten is just missing the mark another another word for it like you could easily translate when in I believe it's in first Timothy but when Paul's telling Timothy like do everything that accords with sound doctrine another way that you could translate sound doctrine is health the the Greek word that translated that you could equate with health so I mean there are definitely human beings that are in unhealth yes agreed but I don't think that the ability to choose good and evil is in the sense that is is defines us as broken I think that defines us as in working order if we could only do one and not the other well that's yeah again that's that's augustine in total depravity and original sin damn it sorry I thought you didn't like labels okay so am I I'm trying to am I interpreting the how am I I'm assuming I'm interpreting it wrong how am I interpreting that video wrong I think I I think that we have I it's here's again the point I was trying to make before it is really hard to describe a human being especially with a sentence or even a paragraph because on one hand we are these creatures that have are made in the image of God and have an astounding capacity for nobility brilliance we are we are royalty but one way that Neil Plantinga says we are we are fallen royalty and and so this and so this is so we're trying to figure out how to describe human beings in their in their state and you know I think about at the end of which book was this of Kellers he tells the story of of Eric Little Eric Little was an American sprinter the movie chariots of fire was made about him Eric Little was a missionary in China and when the Japanese invaded he went into an internment camp along with all the other American missionaries and expats who were there the Japanese put them all together and I'd have to look up the resource I've read it on my on one of my videos once but there was a guy who wasn't a Christian who was in that camp and so you'd think well this camp made up of all of these missionaries well that would be you know that should be a stellar experience and he said as food was short and as as circumstances were horribly confined these these missionaries became just as game playing and as and as horrible as everyone else the only exception was Eric Little who who was known in that camp as being consistently loving and selfless and it seemed the worst the camp would get you know the brighter he's shown and and then of course he dies and it's it's experiences like these that that draw us to ask that draw us to try to talk about this now in some ways the story itself is better than my capacity to theologically describe it and and it's and it's that and it's that reality that and I don't know it's so often we can't get beyond some of these things and so you have the question of you have the question of of of divine election in Calvinism and and people in Calvinism and and people kvetch about that but I I look at I look at that and say well so you have a problem with that well how do you explain the fact that I grew up with Stan and Barb in Patterson New Jersey and you know has had three square meals a day and wonderful opportunities and advantage and how many of the children that I saw and worked with in the Dominican Republic who are Haitians have nowhere near what I have at all so you have a problem with divine election but you don't have the problem with the the kind of selection we see around us I can't answer those questions about why I was have been given so much and others so much less but I do know that there are that there are things that happen in this world that speak of another and CS Lewis writes about this I think very well in the beginning to get Jeff into the conversation Jeff we don't want you to be a bystander at the beginning of mere Christianity where there there seem to be whispers of another world and the problem the part of the reason I don't have a problem with a loving God psychologically maybe it was because I had wonderful parents but with if I look at it rationally the the thought that if God is anything but love if that is the case then basically anything that we do here and now is perp for the most part for the most part completely meaningless because if God is a tyrant we are so lost and so screwed at a level that we can't even begin to think about and the real question about this world is not why is there so much bad it's why is there so much good and Peterson sees that which I really appreciate about him so I should shut up I talked too long I have videos to talk on I shouldn't talk here so much that's one of the things that me and Luke talked about is you know it seems like whenever anybody has a conversation with you they're doing all the talking and we wanted you to do a little bit of talking so I think it's okay but but something joke that you said in your initial when you articulated what your response was to that Piper video it's something that has been in the recesses of my mind for the longest time and the first time I ever tried to articulate it was last night I was I was talking with Esther a little bit and I said you know and I shared this with Luke a little bit too I think I maybe I'm a heretic too so maybe this is my heresy but it's that piece about what you said Jobe is like who made me who plopped me down into this existence where I have this ability to well again it depends on the tradition it depends on the strand of Christianity I guess but if you were to say yeah you have a sin nature you're born with it okay well I didn't I didn't ask to be born with it and that's that's fine right my conception of God is not the one that tells me you need to feel like garbage because you have this in your nature I don't I don't in my in my heart believe that that is what God is saying to any of us I think my my heresy comes in potentially when I say God says no the way that you were made and the way that you got plopped down that's on me I'm taking it on me literally I'm taking that to the cross it's all on me and then everything that you do from there is yours you you you do with what I give you what you will and the sin Jeff that you are responsible for is all the times that you choose anything other than me all the times that you've ever chosen to do wrong instead of right when you knew what the right thing to do was and you chose to do the wrong thing that is your responsibility in a certain sense but guess what I'm also throwing in what I did on the cross to cover that too because I love you that much I'm glad that we don't burn heretics at the stake anymore well there's oceans and continents between us so it'd be hard to get at each other so there's um I want to I think this is I mean not to make this too theologically nerdy but I think what you basically articulated in talking to Esther well and since you were talking to Esther I mean that sounds a lot like like Arminianism and libertarian free will and and through all this conversation maybe maybe I tell I tell my orthodox friends and like my priest that sometimes people will ask me orthodox opinions and things and I'm like listen I've been going to the orthodox church for like a year so I mean I speak about it what I know but I'm not I know about hardly any sermon what in the orthodox church oh yeah the sermons are small but um but you're being formed by the liturgy Paul um so uh so I mean it seems like we're framing it what I keep hearing a lot and this is probably the embedded orthodox that's been being formed in me there's a lot of discussion about choice and I um and I I don't know I think I've shared with you Jeff before Father Stephen Freeman's he has a little lecture on choice and he says that Americans especially uh tend to focus much too much on choice because really like if you follow if you follow the logic down causally and this is where I would agree with Job I mean ultimately the buck stops with God if you're talking about theodicy and the problem of evil and all those sorts of things I mean that's where that's where atheists aren't wrong within that framework but I would suggest so I would suggest a couple things George McDonald's sermon on justice is phenomenal I think everyone should read it and then this is one of the things I wrote down that I didn't get to in my discussion with Paul but um so Father Stephen Freeman quoted Gregory of Nyssa in his lecture on um on modernity that he gave recently in Seattle and I've been when when he said this um you talk about saliency it just went boom and I mean and I don't I don't I think I'll be trying to understand this sentence for the rest of my life but I think it's true so Saint Gregory said this um he said the journey toward salvation is marked by a successive elimination of all that we have in order to reach what we are um and and salvation is marked by a successive elimination of all that we have in order to reach what we are and I'll email you and I'll email you the lecture um but it's a um um what why that struck me so much is like I told Paul and I've been really getting into Gabriel Marsal who's this French existentialist but one of his primary books is called On Being and Having and the distinction between the two and um and I think choice and volition is caught up in I would just say it this way choice and volition and that framework agency is caught up I mean depending on how you parse it out agency's complicated but it's caught up in the world of of having your your thoughts your egoic mind your intellect it's caught up in the world of having what you are I would say is most the the goal of what we should be and what God calls us to be in our beingness in our ourness in the way of grey greenness I think is most is best illustrated by the green lady in Paralandra and I'll just leave it at that because stories explain better than my propositions I don't know that reference so so that is um in my first discussion with Paul I talked about CS Lewis's space trilogy because I also like Jeff loves CS Lewis um and uh that's his second book in the CS Lewis space trilogy is called Paralandra and um and when you um I think the childlikeness that we're called the innocent as doves wise as serpents um I think all of those things are illustrated incredibly well in narrative form in that book um and I think I think what that green at the end when you see I mean this is spoiler but at the end of the book when you see perfected man and woman they're fully they are fully in the world of what they are they have they have ceased to be in the world of what they have and I think actually I think what that book is is the unmanned the the demon character it's essentially a garden of Eden story the the Satan character in that book is essentially trying to make her live in the world of have and he does it over and over throughout that book I mean just it's illustration after illustration but that and and so I mean I just the focus on I would just say that total depravity and original sin and being born in that is repulsive to God is not an eastern framework so if you're equating that to the totality of Christianity just know you don't have to that's all I would say I don't know we're getting a little close to some orthodox propaganda here they have cookies I've heard well John Vendonk has harder stuff in his living room yeah oh Job and I talked about whiskey too we're both scotch fans although I'm having Dutch Geneva this this evening there's no there's no question that trying to trying to relate you know it's it's a telling thing that one of the things that human beings have been trying to do non-stop is to attempt to represent reality in how many different media they possess language books clay drawings paint film and and we it's kind of a it's kind of a it's kind of a strange humanist touring test can we represent reality good enough to fool each other and still haven't done it and theology is obviously a language that is obviously a means that attempts to do that of course the the challenge of something like the Bible I think perhaps what the Bible is is a representation of reality that is intended to shock us into a clearer picture rather than the you know I love the part the beginning of Peterson's conversation with Roger Scruton when Peterson talks about you know how what we see are these memories in front of us all the time and lately both in the Sydney conversation and in the Bishop Barris Baron conversation Peterson's been he's got these these throwaway he's got these pieces of the conversations that are about consciousness that I think we're all looking for the the gotcha tribal the things we're paying attention to but those conversation elements those consciousness elements of the conversations I think are some of the most important ones because we're so desperately trying to represent reality and I think it's it's at that moment that if we ask ourselves why are we trying to represent reality and I think it's because if we arrive at a representation of reality I believe we we we hope to be able to get our hands on it and manipulate it and I think it's in that moment that we become like God and it's it's for that reason that on one hand God makes us sub-creators and says please re you know make and remake you know make glory for me I want to see my children do what I do but in that one moment we we try and get our hands on it and our hearts you know are bent on taking glory from and in every case we diminish glory so this is part of this is part of the idolatry of theology and philosophy and language that we keep on one hand as God's children encouraged by God to represent and to create we're trying to do this but on the other hand our greedy hearts take it and and then use it to become Sauron I don't know if that made any sense it did to me so sorry I don't I feel like I'm talking too much just tell me to shut up Jeff text me and tell me to shut up if I'm talking oh he muted himself somebody muted him I muted him oh perfect I have I took power and I muted Luke you should if I talk too much you just you have my permission oh Paul you're turning into another person I thought you were I'm done with this that's it no more videos no more watching I'm corrupting so in that so in the Dr. Nathan Jacobs I just I want you to re-record a video and have it on your show because I just repeat what he says in his podcast with Hank Hanegraaff he talks about the balance they talk about the balance between mystery and reason and where that proper line is and how the early church fathers balance that really well because reason is our gift to get to things but he said once you all of our thinking is analogical we think by comparison you think it's like this it's like that that's how all of your thinking happens but the problem with is is when you're talking about God when you get to certain things you reach a point where there is no more analogy to go into an analogy is to make a mistake and that's where you have to go to mystery because you have nothing else it's beyond your comprehension he said he said the phrase in English to wrap your mind around he said is actually telling because what that means is to circumscribe you wrap your mind around something you can't do that with God he's ineffable so that's where you punt to mystery he said there's an appropriate place to do it you don't if you you can do it way too early and be inauthentic just be like mystery it's mystery it's mystery that's just lazy but to try to reason things that you cannot is a mistake too and um and I don't know if that speaks to what you're talking about but but that's the proper use of language I think but but then when you use language in a way that's manipulative into control I mean that's propaganda that's George Orwell you know that's that's you know the opposite of that's anti-Christ it's anti-logos well we use when we use language to represent which which is what we're doing all the time it's you know then you get into the question of motivation so am I using it in order to take I always liked um I forget his name right now he's a pastor Greg the pastor in Minnesota Greg Boyd Greg Boyd Boyd yes yes Greg Boyd you know he had power over versus power under and I really liked that that distinction that he used and I I I very much agree the the crazy thing about Christianity is here in the 10th command you know in the 10 commandments God says you shall not make a representation of me because the only elements you have to use in order to try to make a representation of me come from my creation and I make the point in my Sunday school class that that would be like a a person who makes cakes um and I a statue of a cake representing the cake maker and and God so clearly says no Jesus comes along and Jesus fills us with imagery of the father and and and and and Jobe your point about you know if you if you have a hard time with that clip from John Piper you know read some of the things that Jesus says ask anything in my name and it shall be given you know your your father in heaven loves to give you this this and it's dramatically generous and and just by using the word father which of course the Muslims know because and and and and for this point that father brings a reference of God in that is so powerful so there's there's so much going on here that's really hard to deal with that that's part of the reason I have no problem with people sitting down and telling me they're honest heresies because if you look at this stuff yeah and and if if you don't if exclamation parts aren't going off you're not paying attention because it's it's something and I I okay so I'm not a pastor so I'm way out of my depth here so look Jesus seems to bring that stuff a bit differently though I mean doesn't he and you know because oh man I shouldn't have started this it's like fighting a bear look even when when when you would try to approach Jesus you know because Jesus doesn't say oh you know you did well maybe he doesn't I just glossed over it but you just say oh you're this terrible oh you're this terrible fallen creature you know you you you wretched thing that breathes it's it's like no you have the potential to walk on water if you apply yourself properly so that's encouraging that's what peason says people need encouragement and they're like well you know kiddo you're screwed basically admit it to yourself you're just you're just it's like it's like a schoolyard bully who says hey twerp I could beat you up but I'm not gonna I'm gonna be nice to you you'd better worship me for it that's not very encouraging that's that's that's tyranny with extra steps that's just but but saying hey you can walk on water come on just give it a shot you've seen me do it that's how easy this is see and you go and try it come on you climb up that hill I'll show how I'll show you how it's done that gets to Luke's point because he only walks on water when he's looking at Jesus and it's when he looks at the waves that he sinks yeah and and you know so that so the quote I mean Jesus says asking it shall be given to you seeking you will find knocking the door will be open to you for everyone who asks receives and he who seeks finds and the one who knocks the door will be open which of you if your son gives you ask for bread will give you a stone or if he asks for fish will give you a snake if you then though you are evil I mean he puts it right together that's the thing about Jesus he takes these two things that you say these things can't go together and Jesus takes them and says here they are ask whatever you want because your father is so generous and we hear that and we say I don't dare believe that and you're right Jobe you're right because Peter he says to Peter you know first they think Jesus is a ghost and then and Jesus says no it's me and Peter says well if it's you bid me to come and Jesus says come on and he walks and he looks at the waves and he sinks and Jesus says oh good try attaboy next time we'll get it Jesus says you of little faith I'll just show you how to do it yeah Yeah that's okay. I'm sorry Jobe I shouldn't have done that. No this is great because I was probably going to be wrong anyway. It's the I mean naturally I'm trying to adopt Christianity to my preconceived notions on how it should be I can't help that. I'll try to adopt God in the same way. I mean as a person named Jobe I feel kind of I should be telling God how to run things. Well I appreciate you you know bringing those up Paul because it is so easy to fall into seeing Jesus in one way and you know the gentle Jesus meek and mild but no he's you know he's a lion too and this was a story that I told Jobe whenever we met for lunch I said you know there's a portion in I want to say the silver chair from the Chronicles of Narnia and I couldn't remember the girl's name I should have looked it up but yeah with the river yes that stuck in my mind. There's something. Do you know this scene Paul from the silver chair where she she gets separated from the the boy character I think it was I think it's Eustace in that in that story. It's Paul. Paul's with her him right it's Paul and Eustace and Puddlegum in the silver chair. Yeah yeah and it wasn't me reading this story that made this resonate with me it was you know I talked about the pastor that I would listen to all the time out there in California Mark Foreman he told this story once in one of his sermons and it just like resonated with me and it's always stuck with me since then and in the story I think her name is Jill she's like been wandering around in the wilderness and she's like parched like she's dying of thirst and she's just worn out from the day and she's lost she comes across this beautiful clear stream and her you know her spirits just start to rise by seeing it and she's like oh finally I can go get a drink and she goes to get a drink and then she sees that there's this huge lion sitting in the middle of the stream and she's like oh no I dare not go get a drink and she says to the lion can you can you go away please so I can have a drink of water if you don't I'll die and he's like I'm not going anywhere and she says well if you're not going to go anywhere can you at least promise not to eat me I make you no promises he says and she says well do you eat people and he says something along the lines of I've eaten kings I've eaten it's just terrifying right and he says but you know what yeah if you don't drink you'll die you have to drink this water and that's about as far as I went with it in the story but you know that that's a picture that's that's one of Lewis's genius gifts is he can paint the image of Christ as he displayed himself in the gospels and in ways that just completely get past our minds right that talk to our elephants and I didn't really see Christ in it but I didn't think was really good story well in in in Narnia Christ is basically represented by that lion throughout all different portions of the story and Lewis shows so many different snapshots of Jesus as he was portrayed in the gospels in the form of this lion and when he shows up which is very sporadically and how he interacts with the main characters um and that's that's just one of the pictures where it talks about yeah you're I am essentially I am the source of all life in this river here and and for you to be able to drink it you also have to risk losing your life to me yeah I I can't make the how does Jesus represent death by mauling versus death by thirst oh that's a serious question it's a good question that's a Jordan Peterson question so which do you want death by mauling or death by thirst there you are all life is suffering well that's that's no easy choice hey there's there's another picture that he paints that might help a little bit more and I swear this came up in in some conversation that you had Paul it might have been with with Ron Dart maybe not but it's in the voyage of the dawn treader where the same character that I referenced before Eustace he's just this scoundrel of a of a bratty kid and he goes off he gets pulled into Narnia with his um are they his cousins I think they're his cousins and he goes and wanders off and he finds this this pile of gold in a cave and he finds this bracelet that he really likes and he's going to just take it with him and he puts this bracelet on and it turns him into this horrible dragon and in my interpretation the imagery is he basically takes on the exterior of what his interior life looks like how wretched and terrible of a little snot-nosed kid that he is and he puts this bracelet on it turns him into this horrific scary looking dragon and he tries to go back to his cousins and the the party that he's with and they don't recognize him they're just like oh my gosh this horrible dragon is trying to attack us and he has to run off because they don't recognize him they're scared of him they want to fight him and he's just he's desperate he knows that this bracelet is what is what uh has has trapped him into being this dragon and he's gotten so big that it's it's swollen onto his arm or his wrist and he cannot get it off he he tears at it he claws at it he can't get it off he he lands he's flying around he lands um you know basically distraught and the lion shows up the lion starts talking to him and he basically says there's only one way for you to get out of this you're gonna have to let me claw your dragon skin off of you i'll tear it away i'll make it go away but you have to submit to this very difficult very painful very agonizing process and you know louis doesn't pull any punches and how he describes the tearing away of the skin and the way that it's described if i remember remembering right and you know paul and and luke you guys can call me on this he describes it as it's it's agonizing pain but it's also inexpressible pleasure at the same time because his his regular skin his humanity is being restored with each claw and each tear that's destroying and ripping away this false him that is that dragon imagery uh i was just i was just going to say that i couldn't undress because i hadn't any clothes on and suddenly the thought that dragons are are snakey sort of things and and snakes can cast of course thought i that's what the lion means so i started scratching myself and my scales began coming off all over the place and then i scratched a little deeper and instead of just scales coming off um here and there my whole skin started peeling off beautifully like it does after an illness or as if i was a banana in a minute or two i stepped out of it i could see it lying there beside me looking rather nasty it was a most lovely feeling so i started to go down to the well for my bath and i'm not sure if that's the piece i'm just looking at it fast so but no you're you're right and and this is this is so hard to capture so so here's the question do you do you come to jesus because you want him or do you come to jesus because you need him well kind of both but it's not really the same kind of wanting because again as peterson says in the dare i say i believe in god video we are we are not masters of our own houses we don't know what we want and and what we want when and what we want how um and that's where i don't really have a problem seeing people as as as really quite small and not terribly bright because that's how i know myself to be and and i also don't see us i also don't see us radically i also don't see us radically differentiated from the story i mean when we when we pull these kinds of things you know would i be you know how would i be if i were a woman i wouldn't be me there'd be a not terribly attractive woman running around um you know it's kind of splitting ourselves from our story so now i i think so esther wrote this article recently it made me think of it because you said what if you tear off the dragon skin that you find more dragon skin beneath and i thought that was an odd sentence but it makes sense now yeah paul something that you said just reminded me of uh of a i'm sorry i'm i'm monopolizing with c.s lewis instead of my ideas but i just wanted to read this really quick this is an excerpt from the problem of pain which i mentioned before is my absolute favorite lewis book uh lewis says it is a poor thing to pledge our allegiance and i'm paraphrasing there to god when the again paraphrasing when the ship of our lives is sinking under us a poor thing to come to him as a last resort to offer up our own when it is no longer worth keeping if god were proud god were proud he would hardly have us on such terms but he is not proud he stoops to conquer he will have us even though we have shown that we prefer everything else to him and come to him because there is as we might say nothing better now to be had paul if um do you i don't think i talked to you about this but i think i mentioned mentioned it to my priest um so you spoke with when with eric you spoke about silence right i think this is yeah i think this is a um silence the movie silence and the book silence shizaku are you guys familiar the movie scorcesi made into a movie a couple years ago i'm sorry no i haven't seen the movie i read it's um i strongly strongly recommend it the book is phenomenal um but there is a i mean i guess i don't know i guess spoiler alert uh but um but the the central scene in the in the movie is there are in the book is there are in japan i forget the time i believe it was the 1700s um but there were a couple um i forget the order i think they were francescans i thought they were jesuits no they were jesuits you're right uh priests from spain were sent over to japan to kind of um resurrect the church because there had been some um emperors in japan that had essentially completely squelched christianity from japan but one of the things that they would do to to stomp out christianity because it was mainly at the time was mainly catholic i think or this was centered around catholicism these are jesuit priests is they would they had this um essentially like an icon or an image or a symbol that was would have a cross or the virgin mary or something on it called a fumi and um and they would make to to make people renounce their faith they would set it on the ground and they would make you step your foot on it like to which is a i mean symbolically is a pretty significant move you know like it's beneath my feet the bottom of your shoe all that stuff and um especially in a japanese culture and uh and so this is something the movie is set up around that and um and there's a great hero of the movie he's this father rodriguez who is going over there when all the christians are underground and persecuted you know all this they're being made to step on the fumi and all these things and eventually um he's captured yeah and eventually rodriguez is captured and he and he gets to this like climactic moment uh where there's a fumi and and he's you know and the whole movie is just going back and forth like you you almost feel like his capture is inevitable and you're like what's what's this guy gonna do like is he gonna is he gonna deny everything he is and his christ and step on this thing renounce his faith is he gonna cave or is he gonna be a hero is he gonna be martyred you know what's gonna happen all the people all the japanese christians are looking to him as as their hope as you know as their priest as their father their earthly you know the earthly representation and uh and he gets to this point and i remember when i was reading the book i was reading in a public place rodriguez is set before the fumi and you know he's having this moment everything's been leading to this um and uh and he essentially i believe he has a vision or he hears a voice and it says step step it's for this world that i it's for this reason that i came into the world um is to be shamed and it's uh when you said that about god's um humility and his um um you know i think of philippians too you know christ as the image of god who did not count equality with god something to be grasped grasped he didn't seek to have it but made himself nothing taking on the form of a servant even a servant who gave who who gave it up to death and death alone and shamed and spit on um that that is the icon of of god that's what god is and and i think the movie silence in that moment uh the the resolution of the book is i mean it's so beautiful i mean it kind of leaves it in limbo like what is the fate of this rodriguez what does that mean what does it mean to step on the fumi like does that mean you're not a christian does it mean you've renounced your faith and um and my take on it you know to speak to your point of god not being proud um i require mercy not sacrifice um god and this is where i would harken back to the i don't know the george mcdonald justice sermon is god is infinite in all of his attributes he is just but he's also merciful and he's also love and all of them are infinite and he's good that's the more than that jonathan edwards has these god and his diverse excellencies you don't expect to see you don't accept you don't expect to see hear the mute you don't expect to hear the distinct instruments of the orchestra at that voltage or at that um at that volume still scaling up you'd expect the tubas to drown out the violins let's say but god and his diverse excellencies they don't drown out they keep going and um no that's you know trample trample it is to be trampled on by you that i am here and my conversation with eric too it's so fun to see what what conversations do and so my second conversation with eric when he talked about you know his his friends mocking jesus and and jesus is un-mockable because yeah go ahead um and he's on the cross and you know he saved others but he can't save himself and to me i always in that moment when i read that i think no he's saving others by not saving himself and this is this this is this peterson always says well it's archetypal you can't get around it well this is the aspect of the story you can't get around because that's that's that's how that's how the story works and yeah for the when you when you were talking about walking on water i was bringing up to you the book loris and there's a line from one of the most significant lines from it that stood out to me is um because you talk about death and it's the main character one of his his name is arseny and it says no no oh arseny that only he who does not fear drowning is capable of walking on water and it's um because joe i i would i i mean i would agree with you i agree with both of what paul and you were saying in that in that instant but that's that's what jesus did and i mean i think one of the only books of the bible that i when i was early on in my faith i did like the mccarthur john mccarthur bible study method and the first year that i was curious about my faith i all i did was study the book of first chrinsians that's all i did i read it over and over and over and over and over and marked it and and made graphs and made sentence diagrams and um and it's still to this day i mean it's it's deep deeply within me but the first three chapters of first corinthians are on the way of the world versus the way of christ and and uh the way of christ seems like folly to the world because it's fundamentally of a different character it doesn't use power it doesn't use violence it doesn't use coercion it doesn't use manipulation it uses self-death self-denial suffering servant love and that's why i mean it's it's it's one of the most profound and simple things there is but it's it's it's not you know it's not simple to do as any significant in your life will will demonstrate to you um because because you have to act like christ essentially to have any relationship in your life go well yeah that's the truth or to have the most significant you can go okay with your um with your with your supermarket if you act like a but but to be with your children and to be with your spouse yeah you give your life and it's the and i often tell people i says if you live life if you live like christ you will die like christ and you'll be raised like christ and then of course they only get to the die like christ and said yeah but i don't want to i don't want to go like that and well it's because you don't actually believe you'll be raised like christ either and they say well what what made him think he would be raised like him well yeah it's uh he was the first so it's much scarier for the first but we can point to him and then we're back to the resurrection where you say well do i really believe that if i if i pour out my if i allow myself to be poured out and i you know i talk to anyone in a in a bad relationship that there's you know not all bad relationships should be stayed in i'm not i'm not about to say that but talk to someone who is suffering in a bad relationship and is called to continue to love now love is not a doormat love is not always yes love has plenty of no in it but that's the good parent lays down their life for the child in a serious way and that's what relationships are about and that's why i think christianity is true this is this is actually the only way the world works one other quick thing that i was thinking of when you said this i have to quote this because i quote it every time but lewis one of my lewis quotes is what you see in here depends a lot upon where you're standing it all depends upon the kind of person you are that is a fundamental that is a fundamental tenant of of i would say how the orthodox view things is that the holy will see god if you think that you can believe and see god and understand it rightly and believe in the resurrection without entering into the way of christ and holiness you can't you you won't see it until as you approach holiness god will make more and more sense which is which is one of those statements like the kinds of thing calvinists say that really tick everybody off because it's inside my tongue but we have just a few more minutes and we should wrap this up um so okay so let's talk about christology let's talk about uh uh when someone can call themselves a christian we can just we can do that in eight minutes um it's yeah i don't know we can we can also round it up i mean it's it's 10 to three guys seriously yeah well thank you job i could sleep for those eight more minutes yeah yes i really enjoy talking to you all likewise uh i'm okay with publishing all right that is the question so i mean yeah i'm good with it you've got the most to lose probably who you me oh nobody knows who i am so i'm good uh so it's only my soul oh you don't believe you have one anyway see i have to go to sleep but if you lose it for if you lose it for christ's sake you'll find it so you're fine luke luke luke with the propaganda just bringing it down look at some point i i just i just there has to be like a a basic theology talk where i can just spout all my shitty informed atheist talking planes no i'm serious and just have an honest conversation about those and and most of them i don't want to do that because yeah we've heard those all before but yeah but that's maybe for another time but you can't do it in seven minutes no no i'm kidding don't start no this has been fun and yeah if you know everyone agrees i'll i'll post it i should probably post it after i do my talk with luke i also had a talk with mary today and all that talk with nathan jacobs i feel i i can't i cannot i cannot believe that happened i never lost a conversation before and why that one so good sacrifice mine delete mine and post his i what if i could i can't it's as if i never recorded it i don't know how that happened i know i hit the button i check this this is recording so it should be all good but anyway so i get my i give my thumbs up for posting too even though i'm risking uh putting my heresy out there into the into the foreverness of the internet for lewis's this is already out there if we've spoken truth for this should be nothing to worry about oh lots of trouble for speaking the truth you get you often get into bigger trouble for speaking the truth and lying yeah i know where you're going i know where you're going with that so only the best kind joe the best kind of trouble yeah all right everyone i will bid we will bid job a good night and a thank you to the rest of you for dreaming up this crazy idea and i guess if others if others want to have group conversations they should probably sort of do likewise arrange some people who will agree to be on with you and let me know and you know we'll try some others it's it's a different kind of thing so we'll have to see how it goes yeah same time next week got it uh now seriously thanks guys i just want to say thank you so much for for coming on for giving your slot yeah absolutely thank you thank everybody all right stay care all right all bye