https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=7xipmt_ioqk

 Let me just set up a few things. Make sure, there we go. How you been? Good. Good. All right. Good. How you been? I've been good. It's been, I've been having a lot of fun. It's been kind of crazy busy, but yeah, crazy busy isn't all bad. No, no, I've been really enjoying the videos lately. Good. Oh, good. Yeah, there's, I've got a whole bunch of conversations kind of backlogged, but I'll have some vacation time coming up. So that way I can, when I'm on vacation, there's just a lot of conversations coming out. Yeah. I just finished watching the ones you uploaded today, Ryan and Jory. Yeah. Those were pretty good. Yeah. Interesting. This world is full of interesting people. It was so fascinating when Jory started explaining it. Very into your conversation, you started just articulating how needed someone to bear the burden of that weight. And you're like, yep, that's penal substitutionary. I was like, wow, that was like, that was pretty cool. And then yeah, that was, that was, that was cool. It's funny. You're like, you just articulated the Heidelberg catechism. The stuff just doesn't come, it's not arbitrary. It doesn't just float up from no place. Yeah. Yeah. It just happens. It's funny that people are arriving at these different points, just sort of like given the framework that can start navigating these places without having the theology or the core knowledge of it. Yeah. So what's on your mind? Well, I don't have too much organized. I have a couple jumping off points that I just wanted to talk to you about. Okay. That had been mainly like I wanted to, well, firstly, I guess not mainly, but the Zizak and Peterson debate. For me, it was a pretty big deal because I listened to Zizak as much as I've listened to Peterson before Peterson. Oh, really? I mean, Zizak doesn't have as much content video wise and I never read Zizak. And from what I understand, like his books are very philosophical while his talks are more, I don't know, he's Zizak when he talks, when he writes, he does more circles. He does more serious philosophy stuff and gets more into his Hegelianism. But one thing I just wanted to get your thoughts on was Zizak's differentiation between competence and authority. So he says, let's see, I wrote down a quote, but he differentiated between competence and authority I think to kind of poke at Peterson's idea of clean your room, the Western patriarchy isn't built on tyranny, it's built on competence. And he makes a differentiation between competence and authority and then he brings in the idea of the master figure. And the quote was, which I thought was interesting, he said, we often need a master figure to push us out of an inertia that forces us to be free. Then he says, the highest function of an authentic master is to literally awaken us to our freedom. We are not spontaneously really free. But his idea of the master figure is similar to Peter Rollins, because Rollins borrows a lot from Zizak, but it's that psychotherapeutic thing that I think ends up coming from Lacan, is like you've got to free yourself from this master figure because I don't know exactly how it works. I haven't figured. But there's this master figure that's imposing on your life somehow and it actually enables you to rationalize doing different things that are harmful to yourself. And so the Lacanian psychoanalysis is to realize who or what is playing this master figure in your life and then to free yourself from it. But then Zizak in that thing says, we need a master figure sometimes to push us out of an inertia. And this is what he would, I think he said, or at least I put it together, that that's authority. So the master figure will use some authority. And he says the authentic master figure is one that will push you towards freedom. So you have this master figure that could be ruling over you tyrannically. You can use psychoanalysis to set yourself free. But there is a time when you would need a master figure to exert some authority on you to push you out of an inertia, some sort of social or psychological or whatever inertia. You could see this playing out as Jesus cast out demons. You could say you had authority to cast out, to push people out of this inertia they were trapped with. And then I also think that it was an interesting idea because one of the critiques of Peterson is he's kind of acting like this father figure for these men who are aimless and whatever. And they're like, how is this good? And playing to the idea of a tyrannical alt-right guy who would want to lead people into tyranny somehow or whatever. That's a caricature of Peterson that the left plays out. But it's interesting that G Jack would say that it's almost as if Peterson is playing a master figure in this kind of G Jack idea, pushing these men out of this inertia of nihilism or an inertia of just getting stuck places in their life. And he pushes them out to be free, ideally, whatever. But Peterson never talks about authority. Maybe he does in a roundabout way. And I'm just trying to piece together like if he does and how he does it, because he does talk a lot about competence and a lot of his get yourself together and clean your room and take up your burden, carry it up the hill. It's all about your ability. It's a lot about competence. And always speak the truth because then you'll be more able to do more later. And then you build upon things. And who knows how much the good can build up. And then yeah, I don't know. Do you have any thoughts on authority? Because this seems like it just stuck in my mind and I've been spinning it around. And that was kind of the thing that started it. So when you think about, let's say, the history of the West and Christendom, you have some of Zizek's thinking, and I don't know anything about it besides what you've brought to me. I remember listening when I, you know, one of the things when I heard Zizek talking about this in the conversation, it reminded me of some of what Peterson has said about Nietzsche and the Roman Catholic Church and the kind of tyrannical master that was on the West to force the West to really get disciplined. And so then when I heard Zizek talking about it, I associated it with that. Now part of what happens in the West is that part of the escape route from the tyranny of Christianity was the idea, and Charles Taylor goes into this, of providential deism. That the celebrity atheists like to tell the subtraction story where there was just all bad science and superstition and then, oh, this bad science superstition doesn't work. Well, let's just throw all this superstition away and live in the bright, clear sunshine of being able to manage the world ourselves. There is no God telling us what to do and what not to do. So that providential deism, that very much gets into the clockmaker universe where, but what it also does is it pushes God away. So God is no longer, you're no longer living in your father's house where your father is going to tell you what to do and what not to do. Now you're off at college living on your own and no one's there to tell you to go to church on Sunday or to clean your room or to not have sex with your girlfriend or all of these things out there. So now the authority is gone and you're living in freedom. The tricky thing about the word freedom is that it can mean a lot of different things and there are a lot of different aspects to freedom. So I like some of what Zizek is playing with with respect to when I hear him through you talking about freedom, I hear more freedom for and not just freedom from, which is kind of the cheap cultural assumption about freedom. Now when you say Peterson doesn't talk much about authority, I think that's a really good observation. I hadn't really noticed that, but I think you're right. And I think part of that is Peterson's modernity in that it is a world absent of authority, which then really seeds the field to competence. In other words, it's what can rather than what should. Now this gets very interesting when Peterson talks about his Darwinian epistemology in that, so he talks about weaponizing Ebola, let's say, or weaponizing smallpox. Peterson would say that that violates Darwinian rules. There's no tiger bombs. But we say, oh, but there are hydrogen bombs. So in a sense, Peterson has to compensate for this lack of authority. It's really tricky. Well, he exercises authority in a way. He exercises it through his competence, which he displays through how he weaves together the scientific and the mythological and religious into this. He's weaving something together into a beautiful pattern that speaks something greater. And he's not trying to wield authority. But he also says things like nobody ever gets away with anything. Now, okay, so is that karma, which is mindless, or is that authority where there's a personality and a person that one must engage? So is it a father or is it a mechanism? And in a lot of ways, many of the issues that we bump into in these conversations very much deal with those issues. Peterson is always talking about, you know, we have these sub-personalities in us. When we talk about principalities, those are personalities, and they're best construed as personalities. Now, it's interesting that even when we use that language within this frame, we are asserting that you can have a personality operating without it actually being an agent or a full-blown person. And it kind of gets to like the touring test. I mean, if I pick up the phone and I listen to a voice, can I tell whether I'm talking to a computer or a person? Does that distinction matter? I mean, these issues tie into a lot of other things in very interesting ways. And the other thing with Zizek was Zizek's interesting points, which I didn't deal with in my treatment of his video, where Zizek made the point that in communism, everything was supposedly about competence. That you have, you know, in some ways, the, you know, we have this right now with the Trump administration, because obviously, many say Trump is not competent to serve as president of the United States, but Trump is president of the United States. So in a sense, he has authority, and critics would say he has no competence. And Zizek kind of flipped on that when he said, you know, you had all of these bureaucrats who supposedly were elevated because of their competence. That's a very Soviet system, you know, all of this imagined competence. But we also have, you know, ultimately, we would prefer that someone's authority is based on their competence. But you notice that authority is the much more powerful term than mere competence. Yeah, you could you could almost see that like, like, Steve Jobs was the authority, and then I forget, what's the guy's name that actually designer? Yeah, all of his engineers, they were they were the competent ones. That's right. But they had to be put into motion by Steve Jobs. They wouldn't have gotten together on their own to make all those Apple products. Steve Jobs had to come in and act in authority to drive the whole machine. Right. And that word is built into authority, because, you know, we have author is obviously the Steve Jobs was the author of Apple. Yeah, he got all the credit. And whereas obviously, there were smart engineers and Johnny Ives, the designer and all of these people, Steve Jobs was the authority. He wrote it. And when Steve Jobs died, you know, many have continued to speculate that Apple has lost its authority. It's lost the thing that Steve Jobs brought to the organization. And that's where you have, you know, with Jonathan Beigeot, these conversations about about, you know, principalities. Steve Jobs was the principality was the prince of Apple. Right. Right. That's interesting. We were just finishing up the book of Matthew in our church. And so at the very end, Jesus says, all authority in heaven and earth has been given to me. So there go for their go therefore. What does that mean when Christ says I have all authority in heaven and earth? That's what a point I make to people sometimes is people are like, well, I don't know about the Virgin Birth. And I think, have you ever read the end of the book of Matthew? Have you ever heard what this guy claims? And the New Testament scholars that say, well, Jesus didn't really claim that. I think you're just being a weenie. You know, you're not, you know, either just deny it, you know, or, you know, or say he's, you know, then you get into C.S. Lewis's trilemma, because to actually have a guy stand up and say, all authority in heaven and earth has been given to me. Yeah. Yeah, that's the last day I talked to you. You're nuts. Right. Well, and then just say that and not to like, then just go march on Rome immediately. Exactly. He's like, all right, all authority has been given to me. Now you guys go. Yeah. And then he disappeared. All of you incompetence. Because if there's any, if there's any, if there's any characterization you get of his disciples by reading the Gospels is that they're incompetent. And Jesus is himself regularly frustrated with their incompetence at every level. I mean, he gets in the Old English, he gets vexed at them because, you know, oh, you of little faith. I mean, how many times does he have to say that? And you're exactly right. And I've often thought about that, that, okay, Jesus rises from the dead and it's like, all right. We're just going to teleport to Rome and I'm going to tell Vesuvius, you know, take care of Pompey right now. And you know, but he doesn't. And now a skeptic might say, yeah, that's because he can't. But so then you have to ask the question, what game is Jesus playing? That's a good question. Yeah, it is a good question. He tells his disciples and you know, beginning of Acts one, you know, I love it because the disciples are like, now will you restore the kingdom to Israel, which is a very, I mean, this is, this is, this is why. That was their teleology. That's exactly right. And that's, and when they ask that question to me, that's that mirrors so much authenticity because unless you have a deep understanding of what was actually happening, you wouldn't ask that question, especially if you were someone a hundred years later making up the story, they might ask, now will you scratch Rome or, you know, now you restore the kingdom to Israel. These were, these were old Testament, you know, these were people within their context saying this and Jesus' side steps. It's not for you to know the times or the place, but you know, you'll be given power and you will be my witnesses. And then you'd think, okay, power, so maybe they're going to go out into the world and do these crazy things. And in fact, you see Peter and Paul doing miracles in the book of Acts, but like the miracles of Jesus, they're never the kinds of miracles that we as politically motivated people would find useful. Yeah, that's really interesting. They weren't, yeah. Wow, I never thought about that before. Because you know, so, so, you know, just watch Darth Vader, because Darth Vader exhibits the kinds of power we would find useful. You know, I find, you know, the guy's joking or, you know, that's how we think of power and authority. And Jesus teaches, but he teaches as one with authority. Well, that's interesting. But then he never uses power the way we expect him to, according to all of the narrative lines that we would imagine. You know, we were entering a campaign season. And what would if, you know, if Jesus were to hire a consultant, what would that consultant tell Jesus? Well, well, here's the playbook. First, you've got a big crowd in Galilee. So now maybe you take a garrison and you get them armed and you start taking a few camps. And then you, you know, maybe you negotiate with the Samaritans, kind of deal with them to get Galilee and Samaria. And then we'll see if we can flip Judea and bit by bit by bit, we'll, you know, play Alexander the Great. Right. My personal pet theory of Judas is that Judas, of course, Jesus hand, that was what Judas had in mind. Yeah. And Jesus and the other disciples are like, don't go down to Jerusalem now. This is, this is, this is crazy. They're going to kill you. And Jesus says, yeah, they're going to kill me. And Peter's like, I'm not over my dead body. And then Jesus calls him Satan. And I mean, crazy. And Jesus seems to in the gospels, not only are the disciples incompetent, they have no idea what he's doing, but he is, he, Jesus seems to be going down this road and he's going to do this and he's going to die and he's going to rise and nobody believes him. And then he's going to do things that also don't seem to make sense. You know, I, you know, if I were Jesus, first stop out would be Pilate, you know, and Herod, you know, how do you like me now? Right. He doesn't do it. So what game is Jesus playing? And so then when, you know, you think about world history, well, how do they conquer Rome? Well, they do it in the most crazy way possible. I mean, even then when you get to Constantine, which finally seems to make a little bit sense, okay, you have an emperor client, but you know, he's Aryan and the whole thing is just nuts. So, and so I have a great deal of sympathy for people that say, it's just all chaos. It's just all, you know, I can understand that because I too have trouble sometimes watching the thread, but as Peterson points out again and again, things are just awfully good for chaos because you see a lot of chaos and chaos usually doesn't yield iPhones. Authority yields iPhones. Right. What do you think? What do you think this, okay, how far do you think Peterson can get, how far do you think he'll go just with competence? Because it seems like it's speaking to something, but how far is he going to get before he's going to run into, like, I think he's going to run into an authority issue of some, well, there's another interesting thing that, like, I think he's aware of something because when he asked for the prayer at Liberty, it was like, I know I'm going to mess up. I just hope that it's not too bad or whatever. Which I, you know, I'm reading into a bunch of stuff here, but like, it's like he's relying so much on his ability to go out, perform these speeches, to tell the truth, to, you know, do all these disciplines that he's worked into his life over the years and through his trials and struck with his family and his, the sickness and depression and like all this, he's built up all this, all this work that he's done to build into his life. But he seems like he's still scared of, like, there's no grace he can fall into. Like he's scared of the fall because, like, maybe I'm just a different type of person, but like, when I think of like, I'm like, yeah, I'm going to screw up, but there's the grace of God. And that gives me like this peace that I know I can rely on. You know, when it happens, it would be terrible or whatever if something happens. But maybe he's more, I don't know, is he good? Maybe he sees something that I can't see. Maybe my idea of grace is a little naive or something. But I don't know, because I could see how relying so much on competence could really, you're working so hard to keep this competence machine going that, yeah, you can't keep it up. I guess he's, yeah, go ahead. I think it's important to recognize that when he talks about competence, he's almost always deconstructing the assertion that everything around us in the West has been built on patriarchy and white supremacy. Right, right, right. Yeah. That that's really a silly argument. Is there a male chauvinism built into the West? Absolutely. Is there racism built into the West? Absolutely. Has it been built upon the, as Abraham Lincoln said, the sweat from injustice from the slaves? Absolutely. All of that is true. But to dismiss it as merely the product of chauvinism, of bigotry or sexism is just a foolish, foolish assertion that frankly, the people who make it themselves are hypocrites for making that point. And I make this point to people sometimes, if you really wanted to divorce yourself from the white supremacist patriarchy, don't get on an airplane because it was obviously white men. Don't use electricity. White men. Better give up the English language unless you're born English, cultural appropriation. You know, you can't live this way. So no one's pure enough. No one's pure enough. That's exactly right. Now, Peterson, I see it the way you do. Our religious formation embeds us in a world where, so Martin Luther, when he's going through the woods in a thunderstorm, cries out to, I think it was St. Anne, to rescue him because his starting position was that, boy, he was going to have to work hard to win his salvation, and so he becomes a monk. Now, Luther's going to work hard to win his salvation. Now, Luther's going to work that stuff through and come out the other side with this Protestant ethos that finds salvation by grace. All right? And for people like you and I, born and raised in this stuff, we have a sense that, finally, God is in control, and the story of the world and our stories as individuals will have happy endings. We have been, this has been built into us from hundreds of years of Protestantism. Peterson does not have that built into him. Now, when I say that, I shouldn't communicate that you and I shouldn't be deathly afraid of the consequences of our sin and the consequences of our shortcoming, because those things are true, too. But I, like you, saw Peterson's prayer request at Liberty University, and I really felt for him. Oh, yeah, me too. Because what I really wanted to say is that, you know, God's grace is sufficient for you. But it's important to remember the passage that yields that amazing statement, for you, is a passage where Paul is really wrestling and struggling. So, Peterson, we all bear the liabilities of our theological presuppositions. And as I've said before, Peterson has a, theologically, he has an Augustinian anthropology, which I very much agree with. He tends to have a Pelagian soteriology, which means it's finally up to him to save himself. Now, if I am my own savior, I am in real trouble, because I know how incompetent I am. But if, which is why part of, you know, so I'm a Calvinist, and misery, you know, misery, deliverance, gratitude, the Christian life flows out of gratitude, not out of misery, and not out of deliverance. So, what his prayer request was certainly touched my heart. But as a pastor, I would sit next to him and put my arm on his back and look into his eyes and say, Jordan, you know, grace is sufficient for you. I want you to know that. I want you, the point of, so what Andy Kivenhoven, who was an editor of the Banner, wrote a book on the Heideberg Catechism, and it was entitled Comfort and Joy. The first question and answer of the Heideberg Catechism is, what is my only comfort in life and in death? That I am not my own, but belong body and soul and life and in death to my faithful savior, Jesus Christ, who has fully paid for all my sins with his precious blood, and delivered me from the tyranny of the devil. It's the first question and answer of the Heideberg Catechism. That's what I was raised on. I would want to look into his eyes and say, Jordan, his grace is sufficient for you. I will certainly pray you will stumble and there will be cost. I'm totally with you on that. But his grace is sufficient for you. I want you to be able to rest on that grace. When Zizek brings up Christ's doubt on the cross, you talked about it on your rough draft for Sunday. I just said that today too. You ended up making it into a division between, instead of God existing or not, because Zizek goes down the atheist route. From what I understand, it's interesting because he said before, I mentioned this in a comment on one of your videos, but he basically says you only can arrive to an authentic atheism through Christianity. That's that Lacanian master. The only way you get out from under God is God dies, and he dies for you to free you from himself. Something like that. And so, which makes Zizek really weird because he takes Christianity extremely seriously because he sees it as the point at which he can be free and be an atheist. So he sees it, you come through Christianity out from the death of God. And Rollins does something similar, but Rollins retains his Christianity somehow. And this also gets to the point where I think why Zizek likes communism, or likes being called a communist, even though he renounces everything that's had to do with communism is because he says after the death of Christ, we have what? The Holy Spirit. And so what's the Holy Spirit? It's the commune of believers. That's how he says it. He's like, it's the group of believers, and this is what we have after the death of God. We have the group of believers. And he's like, that's what I believe in. So he's like, I believe in the Holy Spirit, and I believe in the commune of believers. And that's why he's talking about... This is Zizek? Yeah, yeah, yeah. This is Zizek. This is Zizek. There's one good video. Maybe I'll try to find the link and send it to you. He talks with... I forget what... He's a Jesuit priest or something. And amazing conversation. He talks about the book of Job in there. And yeah, I love that. But yeah, he talks a lot in that video about how he comes through Christianity to atheism, which I think is fascinating. So anyway, Zizek briefly said about how the gap between God and us is actually inscribed within God himself, this gap. Right. And that's the gap between the father and son as Jesus is on the cross, paying the price. Right. And that this is like an eternal truth within the Trinity that just is. The son sacrifices himself in obedience to the father, this kind of thing. So I was actually surprised when... I guess I've been listening to Zizek and Rawlins for a while, and the death of God is kind of a theme that pops up in these kind of emergent church stuff that I was listening to and reading. And for any sort of postmodern Christianity and deconstruction, liturgist, whatever. And so I was really interested by Peterson's reaction because he actually... Like you see, he never thought about that before. And he talks a little bit about... There's like a grace in there. And I was like, that's God's grace that the confidence can't account for. I can't put it together, but I just thought it was interesting how he reacted. And then you mentioned at the San Francisco event, he mentioned it again. Like he's been stewing on it. Well, Peterson's take on this. So you have the Chesterton quote, so I put a blog. Yeah, I read that too. I traced all this stuff down because that's what I'd usually do. Because it's like, okay, Zizek is ripping on Chesterton. I want to know what Chesterton said. Then I want to go back and hear exactly what Zizek said. And then I want to see what Peterson is... What aspect Peterson is focusing on. And Peterson is focusing on the suffering aspect, which makes perfect sense given Peterson's view of the world. That the world is suffering. And suffering can be so bad that God would doubt himself. Now, there's a funny thing about the relationship between God's existence and God's goodness. C.S. Lewis points this out. Tim Keller points this out. Many people have pointed out, C.S. Lewis does it quite poignantly. He notes that when he was an atheist, he was angry at God for what? Well, for not existing and being the kind of God that Lewis thought he should be. That's essentially. That's where this... Because of the problem of suffering, which is a relatively new problem, which again, which Tim Keller nicely lays out in his book on pain and suffering. Peterson hones in on the idea that God himself would suffer to the degree that he would doubt his goodness and maybe his existence. So you go from Chesterton to Zizek to Peterson, and that's where Peterson focuses on. And that's interesting because so much of... So if we're going to play the psychiatrist of the psychologist of Peterson, many have noted his... So Peterson had a daughter who suffered terribly. That's hard on a parent. It's, interestingly enough, in cases where... In cases of a real good parent may in some ways suffer worse than their suffering child. Right. And you get that sense from Peterson. I mean, he loves his daughter. He wants the best for his daughter, and he couldn't... And he watched his daughter suffer horribly from this illness that there's no cure or remedy for. That puts a parent under enormous stress and suffering. And so Peterson is a product not only of the anxiety from the Cold War, but the suffering of his daughter. And that comes clearly through his stuff. Yeah. And so that also bleeds into his prayer request, too, at Liberty University. And so it makes real sense that this would fascinate Peterson. Peterson continues to be fascinated by Christianity. But I think, and as I've said in a number of places, becoming a Christian is more like falling in love than buying a reasonable used car. And if you're going to try to construct Christianity in a modernist way, from the tools available through science, you're not going to get there. And you might say, well, that's because of God, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah. You're also not going to fall in love through that means. They're two different universes. And reading the existentialists, he should know that. Yeah. Do you think there's something about, like, if you're going up from the ground up through natural theology to try to explain this stuff, like Peterson's doing, that's all you get is you just understand suffering and responsibility and these kind of more, I guess, stoic kind of principles. Like you're just dealing with the harsh reality of life. But then something steps in and then, you know, you, I don't know, it's like, you can only get so far with natural theology, right? And then something has to step in, and then something has to step in and pay the cost for that, you know? I don't know. Well, even our tools, so the modernist project attempts to become a tool that can see everything by adopting this monarchical vision whereby consciousness and subjectivity is excluded. Yeah. So what's been happening lately is I think there's been a broad communal recognition that that itself is a limitation and a problem, so we'd like to remedy that, but nobody knows quite how to do that. Can you get grace out of the natural theology? Can you arrive at grace as a... No, because you don't have, you really lose personhood. In many ways, all of our word pictures of grace are, think about Jean Valjean and the Monsignor, and he steals the silverware, and the Monsignor comes out and says, Jean Valjean, I'm very angry with you. You forgot the candlestick. Right, right. And, you know, buy these candlesticks. I have bought your soul at grace. Right. So it's not like, like that's the role Christ plays. He provides grace by coming in and paying the cost for what we... Because we can build up a... Karma doesn't know grace. If you look at the YouTube song, you know, karma and grace are living in two different universes. So now in the verveci stuff, people are trying to figure out, okay, Logos and Agape, how do Logos and Agape relate? And that's very hard. But, you know, so think about Peterson and his daughter. Let's say a rationalist would come to Jordan Peterson and say, Jordan, your daughter is defective. You'd be better off euthanizing your daughter and having another. And Peterson would, you know, he'd never accept it. Well, why? Well, because he's got the image of God and his daughter is in the image of God. And he'll say, I will, you know, I will fight until the day I die for my daughter. The suffering is worth it. Right. That's Agape. That I'm going to, I am going to do whatever I can for my daughter. And even if I suffer greatly because of her, it matters not. I love her. She's mine. That's why it doesn't compute in this form of objects because they're finally... CS Lewis has this great essay on membership where he says, the modern conception of factories, we imagine people are widgets that they're interchangeable parts. And we don't see that each person is in fact a unique individual image bearer of God and has that value. Right. How much time do we... Oh, we got only like 10 minutes? Five minutes. Five more minutes. Let me ask this question because John DePageot said in his question and answer video, he mentioned you and said that he wanted to have a conversation with you about God number one, God number two, and he just made the offhand comment. He's like, there's no difference between them. Right. He's like, they're one. They're one. Yes. And I just wanted to hear you say something about that. Yes. Yes, they're one. And I think this is what happens when you get to this moment of providential deism, that what providential deism did was separate God from his creation. And this then gets into the question of agency. So when Peterson is having that very interesting talk with David Nassar and they get to the point of Peterson is wrestling with the question of, how does God's agency show up in Christianity? Because if you listen to a very Protestant version of it, and especially a Calvinist version, well, Calvin, a very Protestant version, especially an Arminian version of it, boy, I'm going to get into trouble. Arminianism, in a sense, tries to have a line between this is what we do, this is what God does. I don't know that you can draw that line. What line? I never heard that. Well, Arminianism says, well, we have to somehow meet God halfway. We have stuff on our side of the line to do. Now, on one hand, yeah, we do have responsibility. Right. But I like, so John Calvin has this very famous section in his commentary on Genesis with Isaac, not Isaac, Isaac doesn't do anything, with Jacob wrestling with God. And John Calvin says, with one hand, God fights him, and with his other hand, he strengthens Jacob in order so that he can fight him. And so, you know, part of, and many people have criticized Calvinism for this, is that the agency questions are all muddled together. But that's right, we can't answer those questions. So we're still stuck in there. And so God, number one, the reason I labeled them God, number one, and God, number two, is split them is because of the Peterson-Sam Harris conversation. Because Sam says, well, what kind of, you know, what do you mean of when you say God? And Peterson rattles off this list of things that he's reading from his computer. And then those, generally speaking, were all God's imminent aspect. And then Sam Harris says, that's not God. And then Sam Harris lists off a whole bunch of other things. And when Sam Harris says, basically, you know, you're just making this up, it's like, no, Sam, you don't know theology. If you actually knew theology all the way back into the Bible and Church Fathers and all those things that Jonathan Pujol is reading, God is built into the system. And that's what Peterson is pointing out. That's what Jonathan Pujol is always pointing out with his symbolism. There's no God, number one, and God, number two, it's one God. But something happened in the West whereby we split them. Right. In our minds. And it's helpful. So then the question is, why, when Jordan Peterson reads all these things, suddenly are people interested once again in God? Well, it's because God is suddenly, God is suddenly all around us. Now, the problem we have in the West is that people then have just kind of swung into pantheism, which is all God, number one, and no God, number two. And so we keep having these, we keep shorting one end or the other. There's a distinction between eminence and transcendence. That's why we have two words. And God is fully both. Right. And if he's only eminence, then we have pantheism. And if he's only transcendence, then we have this weak God that shows up in moralistic therapeutic deism and other weaker strains, or even Gnosticism. It's gotta be both. And in Christianity and in the Bible, it's both. Right. But we keep splitting them, just like a kid tries to split the parents to get his way. Just whatever one suits your purposes to do whatever you want to do. I think God is in everything and everywhere. Okay, so that means you're the only transcendent consciousness around to colonize and be God's master. That's the neat trick of pantheism is that, oh my goodness, there's no one on the throne. I'll sit in it. Then we find that in the story of Adam and Eve. Then you can just do whatever you want and everything's God. And then a lot of the village atheist arguments that Sam Harris and people like him wield, they're all God number two things. If God is not built into the system, then God is this fictional character out there that doesn't really make much sense. What's funny is I had a long conversation with one of my atheist friends, and I went through all of evolutionary argument for the image of the father and the serotonin and why we have hierarchies and what that means. I went through it all. I was on a roll. I was trying to convince him. He pulled a Sam Harris on me at the end. He was like, yeah, but do you think God actually reached down and wrote the Bible through somebody? I'm like, have you been listening to what I'm talking about? The exact same thing. He's like, no, I'm wondering about this God who does things. Not this natural theology. It's funny. Well, we're out of time. Sorry about that. I got someone else after you. All right. Thanks a lot, Paul. I appreciate it. It's great talking to you, Jess. Do you want me to send this to you or just have permission to post it? Just post it. Okay. All right. It'll be a little while. I'm kind of banking them up because I got some vacation coming. Thanks a lot, Paul. It was good talking to you. Good talking to you too, Jess. Take care. Bye-bye. Thanks.