https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=FNuJHXej8-w

 Hi, this is Paul and this is Rough Draft for Sunday where I run through the current version of my Sunday sermon and this week because of the tour and I was in Southern California and Arizona, didn't have much time so it might be pretty rough. Last week we looked at the question of Jesus as why doesn't God, why doesn't, if Jesus is God why doesn't he just fix everything and we saw the transfiguration where Jesus reveals himself and in many ways the disciples and many others think he's some sort of super matrix superhero or he's one of these gods that you might recognize from the ancient world or someone come down and if we do religion to him, if we are loyal to him then he will reward us with the kinds of things that we need and in the temptations, the sermon that we looked at last week that was directly addressed. But now the personal, religious and political all get bound together in this. Why doesn't Jesus relieve my personal needs? Why doesn't Jesus reveal himself and vindicate my religious choices? Why doesn't Jesus take up the sword and fix the world because well we need healing, we need the right religion and we need person and we need justice. Now Israel for many centuries had a very determined faith. Israel survived, was survived and was purified by the Babylonian exile and they continued to await the restoration of God's kingdom through Israel that God would express his approval of his people through historical political restoration and supremacy. Now in the first century there were various groups within Israel that were trying different ways to come to terms with the absence of God's vindication for their loyalty and allegiance to him. The Zealots were trying to use the sword to free God's people and purify his promised land. The Essenes were praying out in the desert for God to destroy the infidels and their collaborators. The cultural elites were adopting Greek and Roman ways and the Pharisees were resisting by policing obedience and compliance. Now when Jesus comes on the scene the Pharisees take notice because of all the political factions Jesus perhaps might be closest to them. Could Jesus be recruited with the power he clearly showed to maybe ally with the Pharisees and together they could perhaps win this thing? So a Pharisee, a man named Nicodemus, who was a member of the Jewish ruling council, someone quite high up came to Jesus at night and said, Rabbi, we know that you are a teacher who has come from God, for no one could perform the signs you are doing if God were not with him. This is a nice overture on the part of Nicodemus. Now the question is, is this personal? Is this religious? Is this political? Is Nicodemus trying to recruit Jesus? Well, Jesus doesn't really give him the response that we might imagine Jesus should. We might imagine that Jesus would be flattered that someone of such high status would come to him and perhaps hopefully recruit him and maybe their goals could align and one hand could wash the other. But Jesus says to him, and this is the first time, they'll use it three times, in the old translations it would say, verily, verily I say unto you, very truly I tell you, this is for emphasis, no one can see the kingdom of God unless they are born. Now the Greek is ambiguous. It can be understood as again, meaning again, or from above. And that ambiguity is a common feature in the Gospel of John in places like this because in other places in the Gospel of John you'll see that there's disagreement in understanding. So it seems quite clear that Jesus' intent was to say, no one can see the kingdom of God unless they are born from above. Now Nicodemus, I would imagine, probably has a justice motivation here. He comes at night, I think I might move this slide actually. I'm not going to pause this. I'm using different software on a different computer. He comes at night, perhaps to guard his reputation. This also has very important symbolic function within the story. What are his goals? Are they religious? Are they political? Is Jesus being nice? Now one of the things you'll find that Jesus often is not nice. Now this rubs Americans the wrong way. Jesus, and especially in this story as we play this out, Jesus' intent is not to be nice. He wants something else out of this conversation and he's going to pursue it. And Nicodemus will quite likely not have the kind of conversation that Nicodemus intended. Does Jesus not wish to be wooed? Does Jesus not recognize a good political opportunity? Now bear in mind, last week we looked at the temptations and the devil was offering even bigger deals. Nicodemus' answer goes like this. How can someone be born when they are old? Nicodemus asked. Surely they cannot enter a second time into their mother's womb to be born. Is his answer dismissive? But it's quite clear Nicodemus has no clue about what Jesus is talking about. So now the second one. Jesus answered, very truly I tell you, no one can enter the kingdom of God. Now what's really interesting is that kingdom of God is used quite often in the synoptic gospels, Matthew, Mark and Luke. It's used very seldom in the gospel of John. But the meaning is the same. That well Nicodemus was hoping for the restoration of Israel's kingdom. Now he might have understood this to be the kingdom of God. But if you listen to Jesus, Jesus is using these terms in ways that should stretch and expand the imagination of his audience. Now the first time you cannot even see the kingdom of God unless you are born from above. Now Jesus will double down. Very truly I tell you, no one can enter the kingdom of God unless they are born of water and the spirit. Now if you go back and look at my adult Sunday school lessons on my church channel, you know we spent a fair amount of time on that question. Should the NIV have capitalized it there? Now there's so much in this chapter that we certainly don't have time to go into. But let's for the moment at least assume that Jesus' intent is the same as it was originally. Commentators will note that water and spirit, spirit being wind, both come from above. And Jesus is very clearly saying that you must be born from above. We would assume from heaven. You must be reborn. And again Nicodemus is wondering about this, scratching his head. You need to become a new person to see the kingdom of God or to enter the kingdom of God unless they are born of water and the spirit. Flesh gives birth to flesh, but the spirit gives birth to spirit. You should not be surprised at my saying you must be born from above. The wind blows wherever it pleases. You hear its sound, but you cannot tell where it comes from or where it is going. So it is with everyone born of the spirit. Jesus is clearly moving Nicodemus, but what will Nicodemus understand? Is this anything like the conversation Nicodemus was looking for? How can this be Nicodemus asked? How can this be Nicodemus asked? You are Israel's teacher said Jesus and you do not understand these things? Very truly I tell you, the third one in the chapter, we speak of what we know. It's not entirely clear who Jesus means by we here. Is he Jesus and the Father? Is he Jesus simply mirroring the we that Nicodemus came to him with? And we testify to what we have seen, but still you people do not accept our testimony. In other words, Jesus is in a sense putting Nicodemus on the other side of a dividing line. Jesus is Nicodemus cozies up to Jesus like you and me Jesus, we understand. Not like all those other political factions. Not like all those other people that don't get it. No, Jesus puts Nicodemus on the other side of the line and says we on our side of the line speak of what we know and we testify to what we've seen. But still you people, Ross Perot, you people do not accept our testimony. Nicodemus, I can't be wooed. Nicodemus, I'm not here to make a deal with you. Nicodemus, I don't make deals. Didn't make a deal with the devil. I'm certainly not going to make a deal with you. I have spoken to you of earthly things and you do not believe. How then will you believe if I speak of heavenly things? Remember Jesus is from above. Nicodemus had said Jesus came from God and Jesus is not challenging that. He's saying yes I did and you're on the other side of the line Nicodemus. No one has ever gone into heaven except the one who came from heaven, the son of man. Jesus triggers this Daniel 7 character, the son of man who if you look it up in Daniel 7 receives a kingdom. So sort of in alignment with this idea of Israel inheriting the world and Israel inheriting supremacy over all the nations of the world and Jesus acting as the one who will receive that. But no Nicodemus you can't come and cut a deal with me. And then Jesus says this and almost every time I see this verse preached and often when I've preached it we've sort of glided over verse 14 and I think actually in many ways verse 14 is the key to understanding the rather dramatic things that will come in verse 15, 16 and following. Remember Jesus is speaking to Nicodemus and so Jesus will refer to an Old Testament story that Nicodemus surely knows. Most children in Sunday school if they've paid attention in fact know this story and I think the story is in fact the interpretive key to John chapter 3 in this conversation with Nicodemus. Just as Moses lifted up the snake in the wilderness so the son of man must be lifted up that everyone who believes may have eternal life in him. Now we'll get to that eternal life saying in a little bit. Now let's zip over to Numbers 21 where this story is found and if we begin with this question why doesn't God fix our problem? Well this story is all about a problem and how God responds to their request of fixing it or moreover their demand and complaint. They traveled from Mount Hor along the route to the Red Sea to go around Edom. That's important to remember. Now this is the answer to the complaints about the water. How is this an answer? I've got my screen covered up here. I'm not using my regular computer. How is this the answer to the complaints about the water and the food? Then the Lord sent venomous snakes among them and they bit the people and many Israelites died. Now again people say oh Jesus is so nice but the Lord in the Old Testament is such a jerk. Well pay attention to why Jesus brings up this story in this passage. So they complain the water and the food are bad and God says you don't like the water and the food? Let's try some snakes. And so this question why doesn't God just fix things? Well God seems to be making things worse. Now the Chastides people make a reasonable request. God sent the serpents. He can take them away. Maybe after he fixes the snakes maybe then he'll fix the food and water. But now pay attention here. We assume Moses prayed to have the snakes taken away. Moses prayed for the people and now again notice the Lord's response. Now this is a very strange story because this brazen image. I thought this was prohibited in the Ten Commandments. You shall not make a brazen image. And so Moses makes one. He makes the snakes and puts it up on a pole and anyone who is bitten can look up at it and live. Why don't you take away the snakes? Why don't you fix it? What he does is he offers this and it's no protection. It's no protection about getting sick from the snake bite. He's offering a remedy for when they're sick from the snake bite. So Moses made a bronze snake and put it up on a pole. Then when anyone was bitten by a snake and looked on the bronze pole they lived. It doesn't say it doesn't hurt anymore. It doesn't say they didn't have a wound anymore. It says they survived. This is an answer and remember this is a very strange thing. This is an answer and remember we started with a complaint about food and water which are not insignificant complaints if you are having trouble with your food and water. And God's answer to that was snakes. And then the answer to the snakes are a problem is look at this pole and you will live. So it won't be terminal. The snakes didn't go away. The people still got bit. The people still got sick. They forgot about the food and water and those who looked at the bronze snake wins. And this is the story Jesus decides to point to in reference to himself. Just as Moses lifted up the snake in the wilderness so the son of man must be lifted up. Now that is strange because the son of man comes with power. The son of man comes like Neo flying in the sky and inherits the kingdom and reigns over it. Sons of men don't get crucified on poles. The son of man must be lifted up that everyone who believes may have eternal life. Now eternal life is this English phrase we use to try to approximate this very strange Greek phrase that most people wouldn't sort of figure out the life of the age. What do you mean the life of the age? Well there is the present age and the age to come. And so anyone who believes may have the life of the age to come. Well what is that? Well you'll have to pay attention. That's not only, that's not, see when we hear eternal life we just think long life. No it's not merely length of life. It's a certain quality, a certain kind of life that is different from the life we have right here. Now pay attention, we started out talking about Israelites in the desert. Well isn't Israel in the desert of the Roman captivity? Isn't Israel in a sense continuing in this wilderness journey where they are right here right now? Aren't all of these factions arguing about food and water and in some sense complaining to the Lord? For God so loved the world, now again the world in the Gospel of John is not a positive thing. We're not talking that God so loved this world that was against him that he gave his one and only son that whoever believes in him, and we're going to talk about that, shall not perish. Now shall not perish, isn't that exactly what happened with the snakes? It doesn't mean you're not bit. It doesn't mean the food and water problem go away. You're not killed by it. Wow. So shall not perish but have the life of the age to come. For God did not send his son into the world to condemn the world, but to save the world through him. But this is going to be a strange salvation, isn't it? Whoever believes in him is not condemned, but whoever does not believe in him stands condemned already because they have not believed in the name of God's one and only son. Now again, pay attention to the parallels with the numbers story. Those who don't look at the snake, what? They perish. So they stand to perish unless they look at the snake. Now there's some strange connections in here because in a sense Jesus is like the serpent sent to the people complaining about food and water. In a sense, that's what's happening here. Nicodemus comes at night and Jesus is not at all what Nicodemus is looking for. Nicodemus is looking for the answer to food and water problems, which are Greek and Roman problems. Israel's heart continues to be unchanged from the desert wandering. They haven't changed. Israel's leader, Nicodemus, needs new eyes and a new way to see and enter the kingdom because the way he is trying to see and enter it isn't right. You cannot recruit Jesus onto your team to win your little political battles, to fix the world in the way you want it to be fixed. Israel's leader lives in darkness. Now this believing, again we hear this so often in John 3.16, will make its appearances at football games, but again pay attention to verse 14. How much belief did it require to look at the bronze serpents and avoid perishing? So you're an Israelite, you're out in the desert, you complain about the food and water, you get bit by a snake and you're deathly ill and someone comes up and says, hey they got that bronze serpent, go look at it. No I'm not going to look at it. I'm angry with God because when we had problems with food and water he sent snakes, I'm not going to look at it. No, okay. Someone would probably say, come on you're being stupid. Go look at the serpent. What do you need to do in order to look at the serpent? Have just the tiniest little modicum of hope, chance, belief that that in fact is what you need. Notice the seeing and looking and light and darkness. You can't see the serpent in the dark. Notice that the desert life and death, they're living in a desert. Jesus is inviting them into life outside of the desert. Present evil age, sort of like the desert. Life of the age, new life, not just longer life, but life in a completely different way, a completely different mode, a completely different place. You already stand condemned like snake victims in the desert that say, I'm not going to go look at that bronze because I'm still angry about the food and water. And then he sends snakes and then Moses prays and the snakes don't even go away. Nicodemus hopes to recruit Jesus to achieve his food and water upgrades. Jesus' obstinance to resist recruitment is akin to the snake threat. Why doesn't God just resolve our problems like we ask? Maybe what we think are our problems aren't really what most needs addressing. Maybe there's something even worse than the food or the water or the Greeks or the Romans. Because the truth is, many of us today have plenty of food and water and no biting snakes. And are we any more satisfied or obedient? And aren't we playing all of our little religious games to try to get what we want? Just as Moses lifted up the snake in the wilderness, so the Son of Man must be lifted up. The hero, the hero will die the death of a rebel. That everyone who believes, everyone who looks, everyone who even just goes to look on the off chance that it might rescue them may have a totally different kind of life. For God so loved the world that he gave his one and only son to not only be the snake, but be the serpent on the pole. That whoever believes in him shall not perish but have everlasting life. But wait a minute, God was the jerk. God was the one who sent the snakes. God was the one who sent the snakes because he realized it wasn't about food and water. It was about their heart and they had a deeper problem that needed addressing. That even if they had all the food and water according to what their desires were, their hearts would remain the same and they would still be the same miserable people who do what all of us with plenty of good food and water and no snakes do every day. We need a heart change. For God did not send his son into the world to condemn it, but to save the world through him in a sense as the snake and then as the scapegoat snake on the pole. Jesus is the serpent that distracts the people from what they thought was their problem. The son of man, the rescue hero emperor, is raised up on a pole as our victim to be seen. That they may see that they are perishing not because of what they think is their problem and that they may not perish. What is your food and water distraction? What is your real problem? Do you have any clue? Most of us don't. In fact, maybe all of us don't. The things come at us and we begin to recognize and see ourselves as complaining about the food and water. And then actually when the snake comes, we begin to realize that our problems go way deeper than all of the things we think they are. Is the real Jesus not a nice paper doll Jesus? The real Jesus, a serpent to you, and his refusal to fix what you believe you need and want fixed. Will you bother even to look at him raised up just for the chance that you might not perish? That's your question.