https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=xnpfI34DpYg

 Hi, this is Paul and this is Rough Draft for Sunday where I run through the current version of my Sunday sermon. Mark 13 is sometimes called the Little Apocalypse. Why Apocalypse? Well, it's because it's sort of like the Apocalypse of John, which is a book otherwise known as the Book of Revelation. Revelation singular, not Revelation plural. It feels the same. And we've been sort of reading through the Gospel of John. We will get back to Palm Sunday when Palm Sunday comes. As Jesus was leaving the temple, one of his disciples said to him, Look teacher, what massive stones, what magnificent buildings. Do you see all these great buildings? replied Jesus. Not one here will be left. Not one stone here will be left on another. Every one will be thrown down. As Jesus was sitting on the Mount of Olives opposite the temple, Peter, James, John and Andrew asked him privately, tell us when will these things happen and what will be the sign that they are about to be fulfilled? Sort of feels similar to the Book of Revelation and people have noticed that. That's why they often call this the Little Apocalypse. And here it is right on the lips of Jesus and it sort of impacts people the same way. Now, it was quite a few years ago now and all of these people were still alive and around. And the gentleman not sitting at the head but the one just who was left, the African American gentleman, his name was H.J. And we were going through books of the Bible in our Sunday School class and we were finishing up one book and I said, well what should we do next? And H.J. said, well anything but the Book of Revelation, which was exactly the wrong thing to say because I thought, no, that's probably exactly the book we should do if it's a book that you're afraid of. And so we proceeded to spend 75 weeks, that's 52 weeks a year, I know, 75 weeks in the Book of Revelation. So be careful of what you don't want. And because we did Revelation, that's where we picked up Joanne and some of you know Joanne. But I love this picture. I see three of these five friends are no longer with us in this picture and those who are with us have aged considerably since this picture. And oh, what lovely good friends. And I know many people at Living Stones will see this picture and just sort of sigh. Part of what we do in life is we're always looking for an optimal grip. We're always sort of reasserting, trying to re-figure out how to navigate this world because this world is a very strange mixture of glory and pain. This world can have just astounding beauty and then be a place of such overwhelming suffering and it can swing back and forth. And in order to make sense of this world, we sort of need a map. We don't just live in this world with blanks. We map the world in order to move around this world and to try to get through life. And this first draft that we sort of receive, we receive from our parents. We don't do it consciously, just implicitly. We absorb the map that they have and then the map of the kids we go to school with and the map of our culture and the map of our teachers and the map of our movies and newspapers and all of these maps we just sort of absorb. And we're always updating it. We're always just trying to figure out the world better. So we try something on and we try another thing on and off and off we go. And obviously in the Gospel of Mark, the disciples have found Jesus and they are looking for a map. Because on one hand they see the stones and they see the temple. Look teacher, what massive stones, what beautiful buildings. Civilizations are designed to persuade us of their map by impressing us with glory. Now the artifice that they were pointing to was the second temple as it's often called. It was built after the Babylonian captivity, rebuilt by the Persians, but Herod the Great upgraded it and did it in such a skillful way so as not to interrupt the sacrifices, but to make it a really the pinnacle of his career. He wanted to be seen as a Messiah, as the savior of God's people. But he couldn't hide the fact that he had been basically put in charge of them by the Romans and he himself wasn't a Jew. He married into the Jewish line, but he didn't really fool a lot of people. A lot of people considered him to be a bloodthirsty tyrant who had a knack for making impressive buildings. Now he was a believer of sorts. He didn't eat pork, but again as one person once quipped, it'd be better to be his pig than his son. And while we might look at that as a degree of scrupulosity and observance, it should also be noted that he was at the same time a great believer in sort of the first century sense of religious freedom. Because of course the other cities that he built were full of temples and full of shrines and so he was trying to bring religion to everyone according to their tastes. His crowning achievement was the rebuilding of the temple and it was indeed most impressive as the disciples had noted. Karen Armstrong has a book out, a biography of the city of Jerusalem, and she borrows a lot from Josephus. From a distance the Temple Mount was a brilliant spectacle. The gold on the sanctuary reflected so fierce a blaze of fire that those who tried to look at it were forced to turn away. Recall Josephus, no sunglasses back in the day. It seemed in the distance like a mountain covered in snow, for any part not covered in gold was dazzling white. It is not surprising that long after it had been destroyed, the rabbis would claim, whoever has not seen the Temple of Herod has never seen a beautiful building in his life. Look at this temple, isn't it glorious? Jesus reigns on their parade. See the temple wasn't just beautiful, it was the center of the world. When they finally climbed up to the temple platform with the animal that they were taking for sacrifice in the altar court, pilgrims felt that they had stepped into a more intense mode of existence. The whole reality was somehow condensed into this segregated space. By this time the symbolism of the temple appeared to have changed. It was now experienced as a microcosm of the entire universe. I'm not sure Karen Armstrong is right that it's changed. I think this had always been what the tabernacle and then the temple were supposed to be. The court of the Gentiles was still associated with the Am, the primal sea, which stood over and against the ordered world of the sacred, a perpetual challenge to be born in mind and overcome. The Hekal, the holy place, on the contrary represented the whole of the created world. Its curtains symbolize the four elements and the whole vista of the heavens. The lamps on the great candlestick stood for the seven planets. There you go, Grim Grizz. You want to know what these light stands are for? They're for the seven planets. You can find them at the beginning of the book of Revelation, the seven lamp stands for the seven churches, the seven stars, the seven planets, all these sevens. And the twelve loaves of showbread recalled the signs of the zodiac and the twelve months of the year. The incense altar with its thirteen spices from the sea and land, inhabited and uninhabited, signified that all things came from God and for God. Armstrong gets this right from Josephus, but she writes it a little bit more elegantly for us. Philo of Alexandria, who came once to Jerusalem as a pilgrim, was also familiar with the symbolism. A Platonist, he also pointed out that the furniture of the holy place represented the heavenly archetypes and made those ideals which lay beyond our experience intelligible and visible. The layout and the design of the temple mount thus trace the path to God. You passed from the ordinary mundane world into the marginal realm of chaos, the primal sea and the goyim, the people of the ordered world that God had created. But you saw it in a different way. The world was now revealed as leading inexorably to God. One journeyed through life on earth to the divine just as the high priest walked through the holy place to the ultimate reality, which lay beyond and gave meaning to the whole. This of course was symbolized by the Holy of Holies, separated from the holy place in the visible world by yet another veil. The Holy of Holies was empty because it stood for something that transcended our senses and concept. Nothing at all was kept in it, Josephus tells us. It was unapproachable, inviolable and invisible to all. The temple was the place where heaven and earth met, where you would go to see God if God could be seen. You would go to visit God, you would travel, it would be, it was in that sense a space capsule, a time machine. Everything changed by the temple. It was the center of the world. And so the disciples pause and say, look, look at it, Jesus, isn't it amazing? Not one stone will be left on another, every one will be thrown down. The temple stood at the center of their symbolic world. You mapped, managed, navigated the most important things of your life from this central place. When the war came, Zealots believed, as is written in the book of Jeremiah, and it didn't happen then either, the temple of the Lord, the temple of the Lord, God won't let this be taken or hurt or destroyed. God would never let that happen. But it did. Tell us, when will these things happen and what will be the sign that they are about to be fulfilled? This is always the question we have. Well, why do we want to know? Well, we want to game the system. We want to live sort of normal life until the end and then we'll sneak out so we can be in control of keeping whatever map we have and managing our world so that we will cut our losses. Hmm. Do you really want to know? Do you really want to know? Well, Jesus will tell you. Jesus said to them, Watch out that no one deceives you. Many will come in my name, claiming I am he and he will deceive many. When you hear of wars and rumors of wars, do not be alarmed. Such things must happen. But the end is still to come. Nation will rise against nation and kingdom against kingdom. There will be earthquakes in various places and famines. These are the beginning of the birth pangs. You must be on your guard. You will be handed over to the local councils and flogged in the synagogues. On account of me, you will stand before governors and kings as witnesses to them. And the gospel must first be preached to all nations. Whenever you are arrested and brought to trial, do not worry beforehand about what to say. Just say whatever is given to you at the time, for it is not you speaking but the Holy Spirit. Brother will betray brother to death and father his child. Children will rebel against their parents and have them put to death. Everyone will hate you because of me, but the one who stands firm to the end will be saved. Wow. Well, there it is. But right away you begin to say, well, earthquakes, persecutions, betrayal. Well, hasn't that already happened? Doesn't that always happen? Hence we come to the difficulty of the interpretive difficulty of apocalypse. Did this happen? Yes. Is this a pattern? Yes. Will it happen again? Yes. Now, there's fancy words for this. Preterist means, well, as many read it before, Jesus prophesied the future. Not one stone would be left on another. Disciples would be hauled in. Paul would go before governors and kings and represent the gospel. And many would hold firm. And those who held firm in the end, maybe after their lives themselves, would be vindicated. The books are there written. But it also keeps happening because what is raised up gets pulled down. That's the difficulty of the preterist reading. The other is sort of the idealist symbolic perennial reading. It's a pattern. It has happened. It will happen again. Which then puts the whole gaming question a little bit on pause. When you see the abomination that causes desolation standing where it does not belong, let the reader understand. Then let those who are on Judea flee to the mountains. Let no one come on the hilltop, go down or enter the house to take anything out. Let no one in the field go back to get their cloak. How dreadful it will be in those days for pregnant women and nursing mothers. Pray that this will not take place in winter because those will be days of distress unequaled from the beginning when God created the world until now and never to be equaled again. Now that when God created the world thing, again, remember what the temple was. How the temple symbolically was the center of their world. It was all there. The temple was a microcosm of heaven and earth. And you'll notice in the NIV the abomination that causes desolation is in quotation marks. Of course, no quotation marks in Greek. But the editors know you're quoting out of the book of Maccabees. Because when Antiochus IV, the Epiphanes, desecrated the temple and ordered sacrifices to Zeus from the temple and put up a statue, this is the abomination that causes desolation, Israel arose and you had the Maccabean revolt and well there it is. That's how to stop it, right? But that just sort of brought a twilight and the Romans would come. Of course, Jesus lives somewhere between 27 and 33 in there. 39 AD to 41, Caligula is emperor, not Tiberius, and he wants to put an image of himself in the temple. Well, how would that go? Well, fortunately, Aharid sort of kind of puts him off and then Caligula is dead. So everybody believed, well, that was his judgment from God. And then the big revolt in 67 to 70, Christians flee Jerusalem as the Zealots are attempting to take back the land from Rome. Many including Josephus eventually switch sides and go over to Rome and Christians run up into the hills. They go to Pella, not Pella, Iowa, after which that biblical Pella is named. Was this what Jesus was talking about? Is it preterist or symbolic? Is it perennial? How can we figure it out? Why do we want to figure it out? What exactly are we looking for from this information? If the Lord had not cut short those days, no one would survive. But for the sake of the elect whom he has chosen, he has shortened them. At that time, if anyone says to you, look, here is the Messiah or look, there he is, do not believe it. For false Messiahs and false prophets will appear and perform signs and wonders to deceive, if possible even the elect. So be on your guard. I have told you everything ahead of time. But in those days, following that distress, the sun will be darkened and the moon will not give its light. The stars will fall from the sky and the heavenly bodies will be shaken. Of course, the Bar Kokhba rebellion put down by Hadrian. Well, that was a hope. They were organized that time. It was probably the most successful of the uprisings. Afterwards Hadrian would take the destroyed city and say, we're going to exile and keep the Jews out of here and we will build a Roman city and put a temple to Zeus in instead of the temple to your God. Darkened sun, these are all Old Testament images of the day of the Lord. Didn't the sky get dark in Jesus' crucifixion? All this apocalyptic imagery, the day of the Lord, its scales, its fractals, symbolic connection between the temple and the cosmos. During the Cold War, people were writing books about, well, the stars will come from the sky. They'll be ICBMs and they'll explode on the earth and will be covered in a nuclear winter. Remember that? Environmental collapse, we just keep destroying the earth around us and or maybe AI, the rise of the machines. Maybe it's the matrix. Maybe it's Terminator. We don't know who blackened the sky. Well, we know we blackened the sky so that the machines couldn't live without us. At that time, people will see the Son of Man coming in clouds with great power and glory and he will set his angels and gather his elect from the four winds, from the ends of the earth to the ends of the heavens. Now learn this lesson from the fig tree. As soon as its figs get tender and its leaves come out, you know that summer is near. Even so, when you see these things happening, you know that it is near right at the door. Truly I tell you, this generation will certainly not pass away until all these things have happened. Heaven and earth will not pass away, but my words will never pass away. The Daniel 7 imagery of the Son of Man, validation and rescue of the elect, the day of the Lord's scales and fractals. This generation, what does he mean by generation? People living in that slice of time or this character of people because Jesus will usually say it both ways. Who will come again to judge the living and the dead? Every generation in the church anticipates his coming and sees the signs around them. The day of the Lord's scales and fractals. It comes to individuals with the knock on the door. The notification of cancer or accident or bankruptcy or war or flood or earthquake or fire. This is the way things are in the world. But about that day, an hour or so, no one knows, not even the angels in heaven nor the Son, but only the Father. Be on your guard, be alert. You do not know when that time will come. It is like a man going away. He leaves his house and puts his servants in charge. Each one of them with assigned tasks and tells the one at the door to keep watch. Therefore, keep watch because you do not know when the owner of the house will come back, whether in the evening or at midnight or when the rooster crows or at dawn. If he comes suddenly, do not let him find you sleeping. What I say to you, I say to everyone, watch. Does that mean we shouldn't sleep? Go ahead and try it. Is that the point Jesuses make? This really sets up an interesting dynamic. A lot of people say, well the first disciples were wrong about the anticipated Christ's return so we can't believe them. Oh, okay. Every generation has been looking for Christ to return. This is exactly what this sets up here. The big debate about what they thought. Modernist interprets say, well they were wrong and they navigated accordingly. Others say, no, that isn't at all what they expected a long time. But how long and the point is, the point is the teaching is be ready. You don't know long or short, but always be ready. So live leaning forward in anticipation, expecting it will come. What this does is cause every generation to pursue faithfulness with a psychological slight of hand. My wife used to have this trick to make a decision. She would say, well if you can't make up your mind, flip a coin and decide to go with the coin flip and then after the coin flip, see how you feel about it. Every generation will indeed face the question of faithfulness because, well the day of the Lord comes to us all and has been coming to us all from the very start. The day of the Lord fractals and scales. Anything but the book of Revelation, H.J. said. The apocalyptic makes what we tend to push back and procrastinate very real. I baptized H.J. when he was 72. There's a reason old people go to church. They get a sense of the coming of the day of the Lord and they might have doubts and they might not be sure, but they're going to be ready just in case. They believe enough to say, hmm, maybe. We live in the age of decay. We can look at a picture like this and remember good friends and remember how they went, when they went, why they went. The old saying of course is tomorrow isn't promised. In the age of decay, everything that you build will be taken apart. You yourself are decaying and the age of decay will win over your body. But Jesus says his word will never pass away. And in fact, his church and his word and his people are still here. But what will happen to me, Jordan Peterson asks? It's a question we all ask. What are the signs? How bad will it get? Well, to me, the question is asked, well, what is your only comfort in life and in death? Because you know it's coming. And some of you know the answer to this question. Jesus gave them the map and he didn't step aside. The day of the Lord came straight at him in a matter of days. And he didn't flee to the mountains. He didn't go to the side. He hung on a cross and they mocked him. He saved others. He can't save himself without realizing he was saving others by not saving himself. You see, the everyday apocalypse is all around us. There are larger and smaller events. The map still holds, but it doesn't necessarily tell you what to do. Well, you might minimize your suffering here and there by doing what is right or sometimes doing what is right gets you more suffering. This element of everyday apocalypse is an integral part of this world. This is all about this world and how it ends for us individually and communally. And then the question is, how will you face it? Jesus says, take on my sufferings and I will make them like mine. What is your only comfort in life and in death? Well, Neil, the guy at the head of the table, loved teaching catechism to the youth. And he had it memorized and he had a plaque of it like many Christian Reformed families do, although Neil came to the Christian Reformed family pretty late in the journey. I have so many good memories. Neil was one of the most interesting people I met when I interviewed for this church. People warned me that I was sitting at lunch and had successive church members come to meet me at lunch. And they all said, well, you're going to have to meet Neil. He's got his A's and B's. A's were people raised Christian Reformed. B's were people who joined the church. And he noted differences between A's and B's. He was an anthropologist by training. He was a music lover. He was a music buyer for Tower Records. He sold insurance. He did just about everything, but he never let any of that get in front of what he loved the most, which was people and his friends. And I remember him bounding into that restaurant, his arms full of his notebooks and all of his studies. So much eager anticipation on his face just to meet me to sit down and have lunch and tell me about the A's and the B's. He just knew we would become great friends and we were. And I got to be at his bedside when he passed. In fact, all things must work together for my salvation. Because I belong to him, Christ, by his Holy Spirit, assures me of eternal life and makes me wholeheartedly willing and ready from now on to live for him.