https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=e0lD0OMnyUc

 Hi, this is Paul and this is Rough Draft for Sunday where I run through the current version of my Sunday sermon. We have some pretty significant divisions in church and state and in many ways the divisions in the church are mirroring the divisions in the country. You can find churches on one side and churches on another side. I'm going to categorize these two groups, hopefully in a fair way, under some virtues that they seem to express. One group likes to express kindness and generosity. Church and government should be open, inclusive, and scaled for generosity. Sexuality is an expression and should follow norms of authenticity. The best thinking is new thinking. If someone's thinking contributes to a structure of historical pathology, then some sort of remediation is called for in the person's thinking from a coercive authority in church or state. The other side tends to emphasize strength and discipline. Church and government should be minimal except for policing property and physical security. Sexuality should be traditional, private, and disciplined. Faith should be guided by what worked in the past. They should be freedom to believe what you will and voluntary persuasion should be the order of the day. Now again, couching this in fairly positive, virtuous terms doesn't seem to produce much conflict, but there is a lot of conflict and most of us know that already. Over the last number of weeks, I've been talking about the Judean culture war and a lot of what followed in the Judean culture war was how to stand with respect to the Roman occupation. Some of course collaborated with it. Roman thinking was new thinking and was governing the world and therefore, well, if it's on top, maybe God or the gods were blessing it. Priests in there were herded in the aristocracy and tax collectors, soldiers, and prostitutes in some ways participated in the system. Others believe that this was terrible corruption and so they should stay pure from it. So they went outside of the cities and towns and lived in caves. This is summarized in John the Baptist's Flee from the Coming Judgment. Others believe that the only proper response to this was violence and bloodshed. The land would be cleansed by the blood of Romans and those who sympathized with Romans. They were the zealots and they were violent. And then there were pragmatists who were trying to resist the Roman way of life but do so within culture and within the country and the Pharisees were one of those parties. It was a religious cultural existence. You live in the world but not of it and you use social and political pressure to police the behavior of your group. And of course Jesus comes into this culture war and seems to, well, was difficult to make sense of, at least from the people of the various positions. He's difficult to categorize and we saw kindness and generosity with Jesus healing the slave of the centurion of the Roman occupying force but of course Jesus didn't say anything about slavery. He eats with sinners and tax collectors but doesn't seem to be calling out the Roman sex trade industry. Jesus also exhibited strength and discipline. He claims to the religious authorities, if you knew Moses you would know me. Jesus wears the mantle of, in some ways, the authentic historical position of Moses, at least according to Jesus. And Jesus raises the bar on righteousness. Jesus' dramatic strength and discipline. If you read his Sermon on the Mount that many would look at and say, well that is unrealistic or impossible. Now we're going to read quite a bit of the story today and I do so not only because I want to get this story into you but because so many of these stories illustrate how Jesus just doesn't fit into our categories or theirs. As the time approached for him to be taken up to heaven, Jesus resolutely set out for Jerusalem and as we saw in the transfiguration, Jesus understands where this is going and very much has his plan in mind and is pursuing it even if seemingly no one around him understands his plan. As he sent messengers on ahead who went into a Samaritan village to get things ready for him but people there did not welcome him because he was heading for Jerusalem. When the disciples, James and John, saw this they asked, Lord, do you want us to call down fire from heaven to destroy them? That's interesting. Why would they think that? What's on their mind? What struggle is on their mind? What do they imagine Jesus' mission is? He just set his face resolutely to go to Jerusalem and now his disciples basically want to use heavenly firepower to destroy their religious and political enemies. Jesus turned and rebuked them. No, James and John, this is not the game we're playing. He and his disciples went to another village. As they were walking along the road a man said to them, I will follow you wherever you go. Jesus replied, foxes have dens and birds have nests but the son of man has no place to lay his head. In other words, this guy, I will be a soldier for you. What's the pay? What's the food? What's the accommodations? Jesus says, this is the pay, this is the food, these are the accommodations. To another man he said, follow me. But he replied, Lord, first let me go and bury my father. And he's not saying his father had just died and just give me a few minutes and I'll bury him and follow him. His father is likely elderly and he has to care for him. And shouldn't Jesus be pro-caring for your elderly parents? In fact on the cross didn't Jesus tell John to care for his mother? What does Jesus say? This doesn't seem very kind. Let the dead bury their own dead but you go and proclaim the kingdom of God. Still another said, I will follow you Lord but first let me go back and say goodbye to my family. Well that seems at least shorter. Jesus replied, no one who puts a hand to the plow and looks back is fit for service in the kingdom of heaven. It doesn't seem very kind. Certainly strong, disciplined, pointed to what Jesus is looking to do. After this the Lord appointed 72 others and sent them two by two ahead of him to every town and place where he was about to go. Now given what James and John had threatened to do to the Samaritans, one might think, I don't know Jesus should you really let these people out of your sight? He told them, the harvest is plentiful but the workers are few. Ask the Lord of the harvest therefore to send out workers into his harvest field. Go I am sending you out like lambs among wolves. Does that seem responsible? Do not take a purse or bag or sandals and do not greet anyone on the road. That doesn't seem friendly and it doesn't seem responsible. When you enter a town and are welcomed, eat what is offered to you. In other words don't look around for the best food and choose them. Heal the sick and heal the sick who are there and tell them the kingdom of God has come near to you. So Jesus has been healing the sick and now he sends his disciples out to heal the sick. Well that seems kind and generous. So when you enter a town and are not welcome, like what just happened in Samaria, go into the streets and say even the dust of your town we wipe from our feet as a warning to you. Yet be sure of this, the kingdom of God has come near. Jesus didn't seem to do that to the Samaritans. I tell you it will be more bearable on that day than for Sodom than for that town. But Jesus isn't sending them to Samaritan towns. He's sending them to Jewish communities. Woe to you Chorazin, woe to you Bethsaida, for if the miracles that were performed in you had been performed in Tyre and Sidon, those are famous pagan cities on the periphery of the Jewish communities, they would have repented long ago sitting in sackcloth and ashes. That doesn't sound very kind. It doesn't sound very generous. He's talking about his own people. But it would be more bearable for Tyre and Sidon at the judgment than for you. Wait, wait, those pagans? It's more bearable for them? Well, that sounds kind and generous. And you Capernaum, will you be lifted up to heavens? Capernaum has been the center of his ministry. Capernaum has been the place that we've been reading about. All these good things have happened. No, you will go down to Hades. Wow. Whoever listens to you listens to me, he's saying to his disciples. Whoever rejects you rejects me. These are the same people that wanted to call down fire from heaven to smoke a Samaritan town and you're giving him this much authority? 72 returned with joy. Apparently they didn't smoke any towns. That was good. And said, Lord, even the demons submit to us in your name. This is real power. This is dramatic. The 72 are thrilled at their first foray into public ministry. He replied, I saw Satan falling like lightning from heaven. I have given you authority to trample on snakes and scorpions and to overcome all the power of the enemy. Nothing will harm you. Now Jesus is resolutely setting his face down to Jerusalem and he has already told them he will be turned over into the hands of Gentiles and killed. Yet he says to his disciples, nothing will harm you. What could Jesus be talking about? What does this life of discipleship look like? However, do not rejoice that the spirit submitted to you. That kind of gamesmanship is not what you should be about. This should not be about flexing your power, flexing your might, but rejoice that your names are written in heaven. They are doing all this to please an audience of one. At that time, Jesus, full of joy in the Holy Spirit said, I praise you, Father, Lord of heaven and earth. Now we get to hear him pray because you have hidden these things from the wise and the learned. So the wise and the learned, who are those? Those would be the elite, the teachers of the law, those with credentials and high position and status, and they don't understand what Jesus is doing. But these people that Jesus is working with, this motley crew that he called to himself, we talked about his choice of disciples a few weeks ago. You have hidden these things from the wise and learned and revealed them to little children. These aren't little children, not literally children. What does he mean? These are people of low status in the community. Yes, Father, for this is what you were pleased to do. What is God doing in this world? He seems to be turning it over. He seems to be changing it from all of the assumed status of what everyone is around. And he is using these people who hardly seem qualified. Again, given what James and John wanted to do to that Samaritan village. Jesus seems to be revealing a lot and those around him don't seem to understand much. But they had a successful mission. Then he turned to his disciples and said privately, Blessed are the eyes that see what you see. For I tell you that many prophets and kings wanted to see what you see, but do not see it and want to hear what you hear, but did not hear it. Jesus is talking about prophets and kings in the past. And Jesus is again sort of going back to the whole mosaic thing that this is what they were looking for and never saw. You get to see it. Value what you're seeing. And behold, now I emphasize that because if you read some different translations, not all the translations quite know where to place this. But I do think that this is an onlooker. This is a lawyer. This is one of the people that has heard what Jesus has just said about the wise and the learned. And this person is supposed to be wise and learned. And this person is likely offended at exactly what Jesus has done and said, because, hey, wait a minute, Jesus, aren't these people supposed to follow the authorities about what should happen? You're letting these people run amok and you're giving them authority. And it seems your own inner circle is a little problematic. But behold, an expert of the law stood up to test Jesus. Now this I get from Kenneth Bailey's Jesus Through Middle Eastern Eyes. In Middle Eastern traditional culture, the teacher sits and the student shows respect for the teacher by standing to recite. Now recite means to say back to the teacher what the teacher has said to the student. But in this instance, the lawyer stands in order to test Jesus. This isn't an act of submission. The lawyer imagines he could trap Jesus by means of his answer and then even take some trivial word and shape it into evidence that Jesus' enemies could fashion into a denial of the validity of the law of Moses. In other words, they've all got their cell phones out and they've got their Twitter and Instagram videos ready to go and they want to get Jesus on camera saying something that they can then put on social media to basically discredit Jesus. That's their game. It's in the middle of the culture war and Jesus seems to not be siding with anyone who is important and in fact sending out these people to do these alarmingly powerful things when these people don't seem to have a clue of what's going on. Jesus, he asked, teacher, he asked, what must I do to inherit eternal life? Now as Kenneth Bailey notes, there's something of a trap here because the lawyer's original question is flawed and this is what you do if you want to trap someone. What can anyone do to inherit anything? Inheritance by its very virtue is a gift from one family member or friend to another. If you are born into a family or perhaps adopted into it, then you can inherit. Inheritance is not payment for services rendered. You cannot do anything in order to inherit. So right away the lawyer has laid a very subtle trap for Jesus. Now the questioner in this story is a religious lawyer who is fully aware of such things. He's careful with his words. He knows how to use language. Jesus asked, what is written in the law? How do you read it? And the lawyer answers, love the Lord your God with all your heart and your soul and with all your strength and with all your mind and love your neighbor as yourself. You have answered correctly, Jesus said. He's a lawyer. This is all about right and wrong, getting things right. Jesus said, you answered correctly. Do this and you will live. Notice Jesus didn't say, do this and you will earn something. Well what are we talking about? Well we're talking about eternal life. Well what does that mean? Now we're not in the Gospel of John. We're in the Gospel of Luke. Normally we're talking about the kingdom of God or in Matthew the kingdom of heaven. And we're trying to figure out, well what exactly is this life that Jesus is leading us into? Now eternal life is basically life of the age to come. This is the life of God. This is the life of heaven. This is thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven. This is life that extends from now into eternity. This is a timeless life. And Jesus says, okay well this is not a matter of information. You know the correct answer. Do it. Okay but he wanted to justify himself. So he asked Jesus, and who is my neighbor? Oh we are playing a game about who is worthy of kindness and generosity and who has sufficient discipline and strength to qualify for status in God's eyes. Joel Green makes this comment on this verse. If the level of concordance between Jesus and the lawyer was masked, those official indications marking this as at least potentially antagonistic exchange, Luke's second reference to the lawyer's motive provides a pointed reminder. Refusing the standard of God's purpose, this legal expert is bent on self-justification. In other words, the social media is rolling, he's going to make a video, he wants to be seen as taking down Jesus. That gives him status in his community. That is, the assertion of his status based on the wrong-headed but widely held canons of the day. And to use his knowledge and position to invoke for himself the respect of others status. His question grants the importance of Leviticus 19, 18 as a summary of the law, but it also exploits its ambiguity, at least the ambiguity that came to be attached to it in Second Temple Judaism. In its co-text in Leviticus 19, love for the neighbor is love for a fellow Israelite. Though love for the others extended to resident aliens who embraced the covenant with the Lord. As a consequence of Hellenistic imperialism and Roman occupation, it could not be generally assumed on the first century of the common era that those dwellings among the people of Israel qualified as neighbors. Different attitudes towards those foreign intrusions developed into a fractured social In which boundaries distinguish not only between Jew and Gentile, but also between Jewish factions. How far should love reach? In reply Jesus said, A man was going down from Jerusalem to Jericho, when he was attacked by robbers. Then stripped of his clothes, beat him and went down, leaving him half dead. The stripping of his clothes is important here because you recognized where someone stood in their culture wear or based on the clothing they were wearing. So stripped of his clothes meant he's just a guy. You don't know his background. You don't know his status. A priest happened to be going down the road and when he saw the man, he passed on the other side. Well, why? Well a priest is supposed to be exemplary, but a priest also has skin in the game in that if the man is dead, well, it could be ceremonially unclean or there could be other problems attached. So better not take the chance. Keep moving. A Levite, when he came to the place, saw him and passed on to the other side. Levites were in many ways, they were the tribe of the priests and helpers of the priest. And if you see the priest walk by, well, he's your superior, so take the hint and follow and do what the priest does. So what does this say about Jesus? What norms is he following? But a Samaritan, as he traveled, came where the man was and when he saw him, he took pity on him. Now the Samaritan is a political and religious rival. The Samaritan, well, what did we just read earlier? They were in a town and Jesus wanted to pass through and the Samaritans did not offer Jesus lodging. They did not extend hospitality to Jesus. And the disciples, well, let's call down fire from heaven on them, shall we? And Jesus rebukes his disciples and goes to another town that would extend hospitality. And Jesus uses this Samaritan in the message. He went to him and bandaged his wounds, pouring oil and wine. Then he put the man on his own donkey and brought him to an inn and took care of him. Now it's quite likely this inn was a Jewish community and it's quite likely the Samaritan would find the same kind of chilly reaction that Jesus had just received in the community. And well, how do the people of the town know that the Samaritan didn't beat up this Jew? The next day he took out two denarii and gave them to the innkeeper. Look after him, he said, and when I return, I will reimburse you for any extra expense you may have. Lawyer, which of these two men do you think was a neighbor to the man who fell into the hands of the robbers? Everybody got your video cameras working? The expert in the law replied, the one who had mercy on him. Jesus told him, go and do likewise. So what do we think of Jesus? Which game is he playing in their culture war? Which game is he playing in our culture war? Is sacrificial love based on the worthiness of the recipient? Now don't forget what the expert in the law interrupted. Jesus was praising his disciples for going out and declaring the kingdom of God and being received into towns. And Jesus was praising them for, well, and talking about how these towns would find judgment. Is this kindness and generosity? Is this strength and discipline? How can you be both religiously principled to the point of threatening normal towns with woe and condemnation and admonish such unbounded generosity beyond what was imagined religiously responsible or required? There is Jesus. Now we struggle to hold these two things together. Recently there was an article, an LA Times columnist who lives in Brooklyn Heights but escaped somewhere into a rural area from COVID. Recently had a dilemma. She usually lives in blue state America, one of the coasts, but she fled fearing COVID for herself into red state America and it snowed and her neighbor, her Trump loving neighbor plowed her driveway for her and did an excellent job. And the woman didn't know what to do because she should hate him because he voted for the wrong kind. He's the kind of American that drives a pickup truck after all. But then he did her this kindness. How should he think? It's the snow plow test. Do we want to justify ourselves? Yes, we do. Your rivals might be better than you think, maybe even better than you. At generosity, at kindness, your own standard. You might not be able to rescue the world like you think you need to. You might not be strong enough or disciplined enough. Where does Jesus stand in this story? He had just been through a Samaritan town and so Jesus fully understood what relations between Jews and Samaritans were like. Jesus fully understood thieves and brigands and wild revolutionaries looking to draw blood. That's the culture war he lived in the middle of. He in fact will hang between two brigands. No one will bind Jesus wounds while he's alive. The Jews and Levites will watch and scoff, not merely pass by. His friends will hide. A centurion watching him will find it remarkable and say, surely this man was the son of God. But he will die. And we will not help our neighbor. The lawyer may have quoted Jesus' summary of the law in order to hear what Jesus would say. Notice however, this from Kenneth Bailey, that the summary contains two parts, love God and love your neighbor. The two parts come from the Old Testament. The commandment to love your neighbor occurs in Leviticus 19 while the injunction to love God appears in Deuteronomy 6.5. One would expect such scripture quotations to follow the canonical order. They had rules about this. Instead, Jesus plays us, as does the lawyer, love God before the commandments to love your neighbor because of course, God is primary and above all, status. The order is important. Experience dictates however, that it is very hard to love the unlovely neighbor, even if the neighbor does a kindness, especially if the neighbor won't extend hospitality until the disciple's heart is filled with the love of God. Does God love this way? Remember, Jesus hangs on a cross. And my God, my God, why have you forsaken me? And forgive them for they know not what they do. It is very hard to love the unlovely neighbor until the disciple's heart is filled with the love of God, which provides the energy and motivation necessary for the arduous task of loving the neighbor. Often the motives of one who serves are misunderstood by the recipients of that love, who then responds with hostility rather than generosity. I suppose the woman with her driveway plowed could have knocked next door and say, keep your Trump loving bumper sticker Trump out of my driveway. No or no snow. She had at least kindness and generosity not to do that, I suppose, and probably didn't want to pay for the shovel, the plowing, and didn't want to get a shovel out herself, being an LA or New York resident. If the one who serves is hoping to be sustained by the response received, and if the expected responses are not forthcoming, that person may yet give up in frustration and disappointment. A lot of people say, I'm going to be generous in order to, in order to what? Impress them with your generosity, soften their cold hard hearts. Well, let me tell you, Jesus, that isn't Jesus game, because isn't it Jesus that says, do your kindnesses in secret so that no one knows what you're doing? But if costly acts of love are extended to others out of gratitude for the love of God, then the believer is sustained by the unwavering love of God towards him or her.