https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=v4jTD07jgJs

 Hi, this is Paul and this is Rough Draft for Sunday where I run through the current version of my sermon. Over the last number of weeks we've been going through the Gospel of Mark and we've been reading these stories about Jesus. A few weeks ago Jesus sent out his rather hapless disciples with authority to cast out unclean spirits. That was followed up by Herod, seemingly confusing Jesus for John the Baptist, whom he beheaded. We talked about why Herod would get confused in that way given who Herod was. Then last week we looked at Jesus feeding the 5,000, a very famous story. 5,000 men plus women and children, quite likely. And then I see right away why I do a rough draft. And then he sends, oh through, ok now I remember what I was thinking, there we go. Through his disciples on the other side of the sea. See that's why I do rough drafts, why I practice. Now Jesus, as we continue the story, is fully in charge. Immediately this picks up this straight way as the old King James used to say. All these little signal in Mark that in a sense these apocalyptic eschatological moments are coming. Immediately he made his disciples get into the boat. That's strange because the story before his disciples wanted him to do a lot of ordering and he balks and he says you feed the people and so the disciples feed the people after Jesus breaks the bread and multiplies the loaves and fishes and everyone eats and there's 12 baskets left over. So he made the disciples get into the boat and go ahead to the other side, which is back to the home side of the sea, which is what we've talked about many times in the Gospel of Mark, to Bethsaida. While he dismissed the crowd, so now he sends them away after they have been fed. After saying farewell to them he went up on the mountain to pray. Remember they were going over here to get a bit of a retreat from the crowds and they didn't get that but now Jesus goes up on the mountain to pray. Now timing here is important and the timing isn't just giving us little details. It's actually symbolic if we've been following the symbolism as we go through the Gospel of Mark. When evening came, the assumption is that it's getting close to evening that Jesus sends the disciples to the other side of the lake and then Jesus goes up, sends the crowd away and goes up to the mountain to pray. When evening came, which is darkness, the boat was out on the sea and he, meaning Jesus, was alone on the land. Now this just sounds like a few little details but again seeing it through a symbolic lens, the disciples are going out now into darkness, which is chaos, into the sea, which is chaos and the boat that many church fathers often associated with the church. And Jesus, however, is in prayer, in communion with his Father in heaven, united by prayer with the Father and safely on land, which is very much order. And so already you can see in this story we're setting up an order chaos typology and you can almost sense foreboding that something bad is going to happen. And sure enough it does. When he saw that they were straining at the oars, now remember he's on land on a mountain side and they're going to be traveling over the sea in the dark and leads many commentators to speculate what kind of seeing is this? Well remember he's on a mountain so in a sense this is seeing from heaven that they're straining at the oars in their boat against the wind. I can't read because my little thing is blocked off here. He came towards them early in the morning walking on the sea. Now he saw from land or heaven while praying that they were straining in darkness and chaos against the wind and this you'll notice this is a repetition of the stilling of the storm episode that wasn't long, that wasn't too many, too much before in the Gospel of Mark. Also notice the timing. They go into the night and in a sense, Mark isn't trying to give us necessarily a chronology here but when he comes to them in a sense he brings the morning with him. He brings the light with him as he walks on the water. He comes in the morning. Morning comes when the sun appears. He brings the morning and darkness is dispelled. He intended to pass by them. Now this has caused much ink to be used in commentaries throughout history but it's quite clear this isn't a geography note. This is a theophany note. This is a God appearance. You can find this quite clearly in Exodus 33 when Moses asks to see God's face and the Lord said to Moses, I will do the very thing that you have asked because I am pleased with you and I know you by name. Then Moses said, now show me your glory and the Lord said, I will cause all my goodness to pass in front of you. So this passing by is very much a God appearance, a theophonic, that's the technical word for it, a theophonic event of God passing by and that's exactly what's happening in this story with Jesus. And the Lord said, I will cause my goodness and this is where we see this pattern sometimes in scripture where an attribute of God is almost personified for its coming into time space with us. I will cause my goodness to pass in front of you and I will proclaim my name, the Lord, in your presence and I will have mercy on whom I will have mercy and I will have compassion on whom I will have compassion but he said, you cannot see my face for no one can see my face and live. A little note to my video watchers, watch my conversation with John Verbeke when I get into this with him. Then the Lord said, there is a place near me where you may stand on the rock and when my glory passes by I will put you in the cleft of the rock and cover you with my hand until I have passed by. You see all this passing by? This is what's happening in this story with Jesus on the storm. Then I will remove my hand and you will see my back but my face must not be seen. You also find this is echoing Job 9. This is of the Lord, the maker creator. He shakes the earth from its place and makes its pillars tremble. He speaks to the sun and it does not shine. He seals off the light of the stars. This is the God, the master, the maker and you can see Jesus is identified with all this power. Sometimes it's said that Jesus really isn't God only in the synoptic gospels or really only in the gospel of John and I do not believe that when I read passages like this. We're about to have an I am pretty quickly. He alone stretches out the heavens and treads on the waves of the sea. There it is. That's what's happening here. He is the maker of the bear and Orion, the Pleiades and the constellations of the south. He performs wonders that cannot be fathomed, miracles that cannot be counted. Isn't this talking about Jesus? When he passes by, I cannot see him. But when he goes by, I cannot perceive him. If he snatches away, who can stop him? Who can say to him, what are you doing? This is the image of God who decides the God whose our destiny is in his hands and no one can stand against him. But when they saw him passing on the sea, walking on the sea, they thought it was a ghost and cried out for they saw him and were terrified. But immediately again straightway, he spoke to them and said, take heart, take courage. It is I or I am really. Do not be terrified. Now what you'll notice is if you're following along in the gospel of Mark, this string of fear that has been that has been stalking these stories. The Jesus disciples are afraid of him when he stills the storm. The townspeople where Jesus casts out legion into the pigs and the pigs drown themselves. They're afraid of Jesus when he healed the demoniac. The woman healed of the issue of blood is afraid when confronted by Jesus and he says, who touched me? Jairus is amazed at Jesus raising his daughter. Herod is the interesting exception to this rule, which I think is noteworthy and important. He's not afraid or amazed at the reports of Jesus, but he is in a strange way. And so the noting that he isn't here, I think is telling us something about God showing up and us recognizing the one true God. Herod can't see Jesus because of his guilty conscience about John. And I talked about that when I preached on that text. The disciples are troubled and disturbed at the sight of Jesus here in this numinous revelation. And Jesus says, I am, which is the Exodus burning bush theophany. The story is very clear about who Jesus is and the role that he's playing. And he got into the boat with them. Again, the boat is sort of like the church and the wind ceased and they were utterly astonished for they did not understand about the loaves, but their hearts were hardened. This is really interesting because did they learn nothing from the stilling of the storm when Jesus was absent by sleep and now he's absent and present, but he's in a sense in a heavenly abode on the mountain in prayer with the father. They didn't understand about the loaves. They didn't remember the stilling of the storm. They didn't understand what the loaves meant. We went through that last week that Jesus is master of the story verse and master of the matter verse and their hearts were hardened like Pharaoh. Now bear in mind this telling is dependent upon them. The disciples are not trying to flatter themselves in the telling of this story. This is not flattering at all. They simply don't understand what Jesus is doing. This blocking of the letters is kind of difficult in this piece of software. When they had crossed over they came to the land of Genesaret and got out of the boat. I'm making this stuff up. When they got out of the boat people at once, basically they came to him and rushed about the whole region. I know what I can do actually in order to read this. When they had crossed over they came to the land of Genesaret and moored the boat. When they got out of the boat people at once recognized him. That's interesting. What did they recognize? What did they think of him? Recognized him and rushed about that whole region and began to bring the sick on mats to wherever he was and wherever he went into villages or cities or farms they laid the sick in the market places and begged him that they might touch even the fringe of his cloak and all who touched him were healed. Now what this is is this is a compilation and a completion of this whole section. It sums it all up and gives us an important thematic summary of Jesus' mission in that area. And this if you reach all the way back to earlier in the year where we had Jesus kind of like a superhero at night. But this is just a summary where he's healing all their sins and healing their unclean spirits. He's casting out the unclean spirit that has taken root on God's people. He comes in as master of the sea of chaos and bringing wholeness and order to God's lost sheep. And the hard-hearted disciples are mere onlookers at this point. Now what's interesting about preaching a sermon on something like this is that there are a lot of frames that we use to interpret a story like this through. And what tends to happen is I'll read this to a group of people like a congregation and they'll derive their points based on the frame through which they're reading the story. And that then becomes the interpretive frame by which they read the story. So someone who has an anti-scientism frame will see, well, Jesus is breaking the laws of physics and he's walking on water. And others will be skeptical about this verse for that reason, about the story for that reason. There's the religious tribal frame. Well, Jesus is greater than Moses or Muhammad because here the myth has become fact. There's the individual rescue frame where we derive personal comfort from this because Jesus will come and save me when I'm in trouble. There's the church frame in this where Jesus will come and rescue his church when it's in trouble. And you can read many of these frames as you read the interpretation, the history of interpretation of this passage. Jesus as trainer frame. Jesus brings trouble into our lives to test our faith and make us strong. That's a very easy application of this sermon. The disciples go out in the boat. Jesus commands them to go and sets them up into a test that will scare them and test their faith, which they fail again. Jesus as apocalyptic savior frame. Jesus will come and heal the world of its trouble. And now there are some different ways that we know Jesus in these different ways of knowing. And again, those of you familiar with my videos will recognize how we've been working through these kinds of things. There's the propositional way. Jesus is the Lord. Jesus is the master and maker of creation. That's very clear in this passage. There's a perspectival participatory way of knowing we should trust Jesus to save us. I think in the frame we'll determine what kind of thing we imagine will be saved by and who us is. And there's the procedure. People welcome him into the boat and into the town and into the village. Now skeptics will jump in very quickly and rightfully so. And they'll say, well, Jesus' disciples, to the best of our knowledge, died prematurely because of their association with Jesus. And the church suffered greatly and the church has gotten many things wrong. And every day people cry out to Jesus and die nevertheless. Isn't this story giving them false hope? The disciples have lived longer or had more enjoyable lives. If they had never met Jesus, maybe they just would have been common fishermen and made their living plying their trade and died of old age, surrounded by their family. Isn't that the best we can imagine and the best life that most of us aspire to? Wouldn't they have been better off? In fact, the novel and movie Last Temptation of Christ asks that question even about Jesus. Did someone force them into their transformed vocation from fishermen, however? So that complicates the picture. But did those Jesus rescued and healed go on to realize all of their dreams and live happily ever after? Or did they one by one succumb of cancer or heart disease or violence or heartbreak or betrayal or all the things that have stalked humanity forever, it seems. And the disciples couldn't hold one storm stilling in mind when facing the next. They just got finished watching the miracle of the loaves and fissions and their hearts are hardened. What point does even if you can swallow the miracles and believe in them, they don't seem to have that effect on us that we want them to have that suddenly will believe and be bulletproof and everything will be wonderful and Jesus will be a miracle worker and it'll all be dandy. What this story shows is that there's something deeply wrong with us that even the maker of the universe, when he waves in and rescues us from the things that we have framed to be the fundamental problem with us, it doesn't fix it. So Jesus is going to go on to something that to us doesn't look anything like fixing. It was nine o'clock in the morning when they crucified him. The inscription of the charge against him read, the king of the Jews and with him they crucified two bandits. They weren't really just bandits, they were insurgents. The Romans didn't crucify people for petty crimes. The Romans crucified people for defying the will of Rome. And with him they crucified two insurgents, one on his right and one on his left. Those who passed by derided him, shaking their heads and saying, aha, you would destroy the temple and build it in three days. Jesus, you're so full of pretense. Save yourself. Show us a little bit of that power. Walking on water, stilling storms, healing diseases. How hard would it be to come down from a cross? Really? Have those pegs pop out, have the cross disintegrate, heal your own body, show yourself to be master, decimate the Roman army, sort of like Sauron in the beginning of the Lord of the Rings movie. In the same way the chief priests among the scribes were also mocking him amongst themselves saying he saved others, he cannot save himself. Let the Messiah, this one who would be Maccabee, the king of Israel, come down from the cross now so that we may see and believe. Those who were crucified with him also taunted him. What does Jesus reveal in this story? He's revealed before to be the master of the world, the king of the universe. If he wanted to make himself happy or make us happy, maybe he'd just keep doing tricks and miracles and bailing us out. But we've seen that doesn't change us and in fact we know that from each other. Jesus becomes our victim, not by some seemingly chaotic force, but by our intentional direct violence. And what has he done to deserve this? All it seems he really did was resist us and in fact resisted everyone. He resisted the Pharisees, he resisted the aristocracy, he resisted the Romans, he resisted Herod. He even resisted Peter who had a script for him too. And don't each of us have a script for Jesus? To have Jesus fill in our frame, the frame that we think is most important. Jesus, fill in our frame, fulfill our script, give us what we want again and again and again. Jesus is killed because of us, by us, and if we imagine back then we would have made a different choice, don't kid yourself. Because all of these frames center around me or us. These are all my petty agendas for Jesus. And some of them are not petty at all, but they are all my frame. And what Jesus does when he dies on the cross is reframe this whole situation to expose who I really am. What's really at the center of my heart. And the reason maybe I don't go on the mountain to pray because I think I am God and I would like to replace the God in heaven and have all of the universe surround me. Isn't that Sauron? Isn't that me? Is that you? But Jesus doesn't do this. Jesus stays on the cross. Jesus allows this to happen. And in this moment does a miracle which is not really the kind of miracle we are looking for, but is just as much a miracle of revelation. It's a miracle of revelation where we are exposed and our hearts are revealed and we see who we really are. And we see if we are given the power of the universe that we will kill God and try to take his place. Who though he was in the form of God did not regard equality with God as something to be exploited, but emptied himself, taking the form of a slave, being born in human likeness and being found in human form, he humbled himself and became obedient to the point of death, even death on a cross. For God also highly exalted him and gave him the name that is above every name, so that at the name of Jesus every knee should bow in heaven and on earth and under the earth and every tongue should confess that Jesus Christ is Lord to the glory of God the Father. Now what should you do with this? You should be like him. If there's any encouragement in Christ, any consolation from love, any sharing in the Spirit, what Spirit? Christ's Spirit, the Father's Spirit, the Spirit of God. Any compassion and sympathy, make my joy complete, be of the same mind, having the same love, being in full accord with one another. Do nothing from selfish ambition or conceit, but in humility regard others better than yourself. Let each of you look not to his own interests, but to the interests of others. Let the same mind be in you, that is in Christ Jesus. How do you do that? Well, I've just given you some propositional things. With this bread and this wine, we do something very perspectival, very participatory, and very procedural.