https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=8DyqEArv1Q4

 Hi, this is Paul and this is Rough Draft for Sunday where I go through the current version of my Sunday sermon as as true every week. The sermon might change dramatically between now and Sunday. I usually post these on Saturday morning, California time, and I do try to read the comments before my sermon and it's not unusual to have your comments impact what actually comes out Sunday morning. Now that might not seem like much because you know, maybe over a thousand people will listen to this and only a hundred people will listen to the Sunday sermon, but that's the weirdness of my life. What really happened on January 6th, and I want to emphasize the word really. Trump losing the election tried to overthrow the results via this mob. Trump winning the election tried to start a coup supported by his own vice president. Tried to stop a coup supported by his own vice president. In other words, Mike Pence was colluding with the Dems to keep Trump out of office even though he won the election. What do we mean by really in this sentence? What really happened on January 6th? Pretty much we're asking, we're trying to tell a story that makes sense of the events and usually whichever version of the story we believe is because it fits into a bigger story that we have about this world and the people of the world. Did Jesus really die for our sins? And again, I focus on the word really. Now, how does that word really function? Is that word about a story? Did Jesus really turn water into wine? How does really in that sentence function? Did Jesus really rise from the dead? And I think what people are asking is not so much about the story, but about the physicality of the resurrection and about maybe what a video camera would capture or whether Thomas had real nerve endings at the end of his fingers that he could touch the scar in Jesus hands. That's what we mean by really in that story. Did Jesus really ascend into heaven to reign over world events? Now there you kind of have two reallys sort of mixed all in together. You really have to watch this really word. Now I want to just give a super fast lesson in what I've learned about cognitive science over the last three years. I'm gonna go very quickly. The world is too big for us to comprehend and are fully to comprehend fully in our short little lives with our limited capacities to bring in knowledge. And so when we look at the stories of Jesus or we look at what really happened in Washington DC, even though what happened in Washington DC is only a month or so away, we struggle with what really happened. And well, we still struggle with what really happened 2,000 years ago. We can press things into stories, images, impressions, commitments, biases, actions, and we manage them as communities. We tend to believe stories in communities, whichever side of really the story comes on. Now new information when that comes to us like what happened on January 6, it hits us and we don't quite know how to process things. A great example of this is if you are at home and one of your loved ones is away on a trip or even just went out to run errands and suddenly you see a police officer and maybe a police chaplain come and knock at your door and you open the door hello, and then they say the name of your loved one. Well, a lot of therapists will say you don't hear anything after that. Well, why not? Because the story that you have been living in has now collapsed even before you have any information about what really happened. That is how we are and and that judgment about how we are is difficult for us to manage when we think about the importance of these reallys that we look into. So we are flooded with certain kinds of information and here I have two pictures in front of you all these people raising fists. Well, what does that mean? Does that mean the same thing in both pictures? How does this crowd relate to that man? Now part of what we're at in our country is that we sort of have two sides of the of the political aisle the extremes of two sides sort of saying the system is corrupt we need to tear it down and some fresh new system will will sprout out of the ground like daisies and it will be better than the one that we destroy. And to that I say really? But this is where we're at. We don't know quite how to make sense of the information that is flooding after us. In February 3 the Banner editor called what happened on January 6 a Christian insurrection and that sort of surprised me. He tried to walk it back in some ways, but I wondered because I wondered what he meant by Christian in that sentence. Now he makes the point that a lot of the people at the Trump rally had Christian signs and Christian symbols but I've seen a lot of people at a lot of rallies with raised fists and bent knees and bowing and asking forgiveness and how are we to figure out this Christian label in the midst of all of this information coming at us? What does Christian mean in that sentence? This storming of the capital is this what Jesus would do? Will he overturn the money changers? Is that sort of the same thing? I don't think so. In fact, if you've been listening to the rest of my sermons, you probably understand I don't think that. Some of the people doing it certainly identify as Christians but we're all pretty accustomed to knowing that not everyone who identifies as a Christian or thinks of themselves as a Christian or really tries to be a Christian doesn't always behave in a Christian way and if you want an example of that you can look at me because that certainly is true of me. You know there is a bunch of political stuff going on in a prominent Jesus 2020 banner but the organization that seemed to attack wasn't First Reformed Church or First Baptist Church or First Presbyterian or First Methodist or First Nondenominational didn't seem to be the youth group that was storming. So how do we make sense of these words? Now what's been interesting is following the story because with time more and more information comes out and now a lot of focus is not so much on the religious beliefs of the people but more on the military backgrounds and I hear about groups like Oath Keepers, I'm gonna hear Oath Keepers, I think Promise Keepers. Did Promise Keepers? No, it's Oath Keepers. Are they the same thing? And then Proud Boys and I don't know what Proud Boys are. In fact most of what I learn about these groups I learn from the media that are denouncing them and maybe they're right and maybe they're wrong and I don't really know. So I do a little bit of clicking and seems well that seems to be the way the investigation is going and I hope the investigation comes down to questions of why and I'm just a little suspicious that it wasn't take the capital for Jesus Day, although I'm certainly sure some of the people thought that but how did their politics and their Christianity relate? You know, hopefully someone might slow down and do some careful study so that we can know what really happened. But will that really answer the question for us? Because again depending on which major outlet does it or which government agency does it or which party is in control of the subcommittee that is doing it? Are we really going to understand and trust what they have to say? We're living in a time like that and it's it's for that reason that I've been emphasizing as we've been going through the Gospels the nature of the culture war that Jesus was working within because well what's beneficial to us is that we can understand some of the dynamics of a culture war without actually being emotionally connected to their culture war. Last I checked we weren't terribly anxious about Roman occupation. Last week we looked at Luke as the time approached for him to be taken up to heaven Jesus resolutely set out for Jerusalem and it seemed like somehow Jesus ascension was tied to his going to Jerusalem and everyone understood what Jesus going to Jerusalem seemed to mean it meant a confrontation, but people weren't at all sure about what Jesus would do. They had their hopes about what he would do and so as Jesus is heading to Jerusalem crowds are increasing because they want to be there when something happens. They have all of their smartphones and they're up taping it and they're they're they're messaging it on on first century Twitter and Instagram and Facebook and YouTube and as the crowds increased Jesus said this is a wicked generation. It asks for a sign, but none will be given except the sign of Jonah for as Jonah was assigned to the Ninevites, so also will the Son of Man be assigned to this generation. And we hear that and we think is he calling his people Ninevites? The sign of Jonah was that three days in the belly of a fish and well who are the Ninevites in this and who are the crowds are the crowds like the Ninevites? The Ninevites in hearing Jonah knelt down and repented of their sins and God stopped the calamity and last week we saw that Jesus was saying to the towns that he had been ministering in if that if Tyre and Sidon had had the same kind of revelation that that that Capernaum had had well everything would be different sort of like the story of Nineveh. When Jesus was speaking a Pharisee invited him to eat with him so we went in and reclined at the table now Jesus has had some some some difficult dealings with some of the Pharisees but it seems that the Pharisees are split or or is this a trap or they inviting Jesus in because they want to trap him in his words and we saw that last week with the with the the legal expert. But the Pharisee was surprised when he noticed that Jesus did not first wash before the meal. That's customary. That's fulfilling the law. Why isn't Jesus washing? Then the Lord said to him now then you Pharisees clear the outside of the cup and dish but inside you are full of greed and wickedness. That isn't very nice. Why would Jesus say something like that? One of the experts of the law we saw Jesus wrangling with that group last week teacher when you say these things you insult us too. Jesus okay Jesus would say I'm sorry I didn't mean to insult you he says and you experts of the law woe to you because you load people down with burdens they cannot they can hardly carry and you yourselves will lift not one finger to help them. Meanwhile a crowd of many thousands that Jesus talks to the crowd this way and they just keep growing had gathered so that they were trampling on one another. Jesus began to speak first to his disciples and Luke pays attention to this. Be on your guard against the yeast of the Pharisee which is which is hypocrisy. There is nothing conceivable that Jesus is a hypocrite. Be on your guard against the yeast of the Pharisee which is which is hypocrisy. There is nothing concealed that will not be disclosed or hidden that will not be made known. Well that's certainly true in a culture war because any little dirt we can find on someone we just we blast it right away so that they can be reputationally destroyed. Well you've said in the dark will be whispered in the daylight secrets won't be kept. Well you have whispered in the ears and the inner rooms will be proclaimed in the rooftop it'll be in all the social media. I have come to bring fire on the earth and how I wish it were already kindled. Jesus. But I have a baptism to undergo. I thought he was already baptized when we talked about baptism we talked about baptism as an ordeal. Jesus has a trial to undergo. He's using baptism symbolically and it seems pretty clear he's talking about his crucifixion. And I am and what constraint I am under until it is completed. Do you think I came to bring peace to the earth. No I tell you but division from now on there will be five in one family divided against each other three against two and two against three. Do you know something of that. Then he turned and said to the crowd when you see a cloud rising in the west immediately you say it's going to rain and it does. And when the south wind blows you say it's going to be hot and it is hypocrites. You know how to interpret the appearance of the earth in the sky. How is it you don't know how to interpret this present time. I feel some sympathy with the crowd. I don't think the crowd however understands that they don't know how to interpret the time. Jesus looks at them and says they don't. You have no idea what's coming or what is coming. Well we're probably around maybe twenty six twenty seven A.D. Sixty seven A.D. Thirty years later their land is going to be engulfed in a terrible war. And not one stone will be left on the earth. And not one stone will be left on another as Jesus has told them. Why don't you judge yourselves. What is right. As you are going with your adversary to the magistrate try hard to be reconciled on the way and your adversary may drag you or your adversary may drag you off to the judge and the judge turn you over to the officer and the officer throw you into prison. I tell you you will not get out until you have paid the last penny. This is Jesus who just got finished insulting the Pharisees and the lawyers. He scrambles us. And again we usually read over this stuff with sort of a religious veneer so as not to get tripped up and to and to stop and to ask ourselves what is going on. And to reflect and to wonder how we fit into the story where we where we were part we are playing. Now this context that Jesus was talking it is not a state church service. We get the sense that thousands are around him and it's so bad there that people are are being are at least under threat of being trampled and dying by the push of the crowd. It's much more like you might see in terms of a mob scene but it's a or a rally or there's no police presence there's no one marking out lines it's chaotic and. You get the sense that Jesus crowd keeps building as he makes his way to Jerusalem. Jerusalem is the capital. It's something like a political march a rally and people are ready for something to happen and some of them want something to happen. Are they ready for Jesus to give the word. Is Jesus going to tell them. Mark the word. Are they ready for Jesus to give the word. Is Jesus going to tell them march on Jerusalem kill the Romans unseat Herod and his minions. Is that what Jesus is going to do you get the sense that they're they're sort of waiting for that to happen. And some came at that very time who told him the Galileans whose blood pilot had mingled in their sacrifices. What what another thing that the Romans have done. Jesus say the word will swarm them that that little thing that they're going to do. Jesus is going to give them the word. Jesus is going to give them the word. Jesus is going to give them the word. Another thing that the Romans have done. Jesus say the word will swarm them that that little garrison of Roman soldiers won't have the chance. We'll do it. We'll take it. Please just unleash the crowd. Unleash the mob. Jesus answered. Do you think that these Galileans were worse sinners than all of the other Galileans because they suffered in this way. I tell you no but unless you repent you too will all perish. The crowd must have just been stunned. What they expected to hear was let's go. I'm with you. I'll conjure a storm. He who can bring people to life with a word can make them dead with the word. We'll go and we'll make Jerusalem great again. We'll make the scene right again. We'll cleanse the temple. We'll take it over and God's reign will begin today. Jesus says this. He doesn't take the side of the Galileans who have been butchered by that petty tyrant pilot. What's wrong with you Jesus. Kenneth Bailey part of the reason I like him in this case is he was a scholar in Lebanon during the Lebanese Civil War. And when he when he interprets these passages he feels the tension of a culture war that has gone hot. The present writer has recently completed 18 months of agonizing with the Lebanese people in their civil war of 1975 to 1976. The war was sparked by a massacre of 28 in a bus on the outskirts of Beirut. From that time on endless stories of massacres some facts some fiction were rampant across the land. Such stories serve as a function in a community of war. Jesus is right there in the middle of a community of war and it's simmering and simmering and in 67 it's all going to break. And Jesus knows it. He said it. And he says to the crowd can't you see where this is going. The teller and the listener together are emotionally stirred to a point of rage that they can be motivated that they can then be motivated to heroism and retaliation. Command us and we'll do it. But woe to the listener who dares ask have you checked your sources. Or says do not forget our hands are not clean either. All such talk is considered disloyal and the one who dares express such sentiments can expect a verbal if not physical attack. The brief report in the text has all the characteristics of such violence inspired rumor. Pilot soldiers could have been so pilot said soldiers could have been so insensitive to attack Jewish religious practices. As to attack worshipers in the very act of offering a sacrifice but such an incident could hardly have escaped Josephus who was not slow to criticize pilot. And so this big did this actually happen. Even today they're asking the question. We don't know. It's 2000 years ago. Some minor attack on zealots in the city of Jerusalem could easily have blown up into the report we've heard in the text. The expected response is how long oh Lord destroy the house of the evil Romans hear the cries of thy people. A modernization of such incident would be to go to a Christian village in the Lebanese mountains and announced they came into the church with their machine guns and gunned down the faithful in the very act of participating in holy Eucharist. The blood of the worshipers is mingled with the holy wine on the altar. Now what do you think of that. Are we living in what do you think of that. Outrage is our food and drink. The listener must ask with sympathy and denunciation in the case of Jesus if this commitment to nationalistic goals is suspect as Dodd suggests and Dodd is right. Then the report may well be intended to measure his loyalty to the national cause. Another trap. Jesus the crowd is here. We are willing. Command us. Be our king. We're heading towards Palm Sunday. Or those 18 who died in the Tower of Siloam fell on them. Do you think they were more guilty than the others living in Jerusalem. I tell you no but unless you repent you too will perish. Bailey notes Edershine another biblical commentator makes the intriguing suggestion that the 18 killed by the falling tower may have been working on Pilate's aqueduct. Pilate had taken money from the temple treasury for the building of the aqueduct much to the horror of the local population. It's an atrocity. It's theft. It's corruption. Pilate. That's who Pilate was. You just read about him and he washes his hands but this is who Pilate was and everyone knew. Thus if some masonry had fallen on the workmen the entire countryside would naturally have assumed that this was a judgment from God for collaborating on such a project. The suggestion is all the more intriguing because they're both related to Pilate. In studying Luke 13 one through five with Middle Eastern classes the present writer has often had students marvel that Jesus was not physically attacked on the spot. You either get in front of us and lead us or you're dead. Isn't that the way it works. Isn't that the way gangs work. Isn't that the way coups work. Isn't that the way. Isn't that the way coups work. Isn't that the way. Thank God we're not at the point of doing that yet with each other. But that's what we do with each other in terms of our reputation in terms of assassination. This call for repentance is thrown in the face of nationalistic enthusiasts who stand in opposition to Roman oppression. How could Jesus be so insensitive. He was to the Pharisee who asked him into the home. He was to the lawyers. Jesus apparently is not a very sensitive guy. He offends those who fight for a just cause often assume that the struggle for the cause makes them righteous. It does not. What Jesus says the more intense the struggle for justice the more oppressed the more the oppressed tend to assume their own righteousness. I'm oppressed therefore I'm the good guy. Well in this situation you might be but that doesn't mean you're good. Being a victim doesn't mean you're good. More intense the struggle for justice the more oppressed tend to assume their own righteousness. The assumption of righteousness at times expresses itself as an arrogance that refuses any criticism. The subconscious rationale seems to be our cause is righteous thus we are righteous. Furthermore after all that we've suffered how dare you inflict any more wounds on us by our criticism. Bailey wrote this in the 70s. In the synagogue in Nazareth there was a similar refuse on the part of Jesus to identify with the nationalism of his day. When he chose two foreigners one a woman as illustrations of the kinds of people who through faith will receive the benefits of the now present kingdom of God. They're the listening audience so upset they tried to kill him. That was a few weeks ago remember. Here in Luke 13 we have no record of the audience reaction but we can assume similar hostility. Anyone who would recast Jesus as a political revolutionary must not fail to take seriously the confrontations here in Luke 13. Did Jesus really die for our sins. What sin of our cause what sin of ours caused his death. What sin were all the people of the land blind to to the degree that it would spark a civil war in 67 A.D. plunging the land into blood. At that time Jesus some Pharisees came to see Jesus there the Pharisees again as I said are sort of closest to Jesus and and they're likely split over the Jesus question remember Nicodemus one at one on the Sanhedrin comes to Jesus at night in John 3. The Gospels are full of this. We don't often realize it because we're sort of reading it spiritually but this is the context in which Jesus is operating and what is Jesus trying to do. Say leave this place and go somewhere else Herod wants to kill you. Jesus should have said him too. What about you. Maybe some of these Pharisees thought themselves allies with Jesus but maybe not maybe couldn't say anything publicly they listened to him but. They were too afraid to to speak the mind their spine and speak the truth. Jesus it seems. Is brave and in Acts we find that the disciples are known for that too. He replied Go tell that Fox. You see here Jesus talking about foxes. Who is the Fox. Herod is the Fox. Go tell that Fox. I will keep driving out demons. Go tell that Fox. I will keep driving out demons and healing people today and tomorrow and on the third day I will reach my goal. What does Jesus mean. Will Herod be responsible for his death. When Jesus is arrested Herod wants to see Jesus do tricks. What's that generation. They want signs they want tricks they want bread. They want Jesus to agree with them. They want Jesus to to to to look for popularity from them and. In any case I must press on today and tomorrow and the next day for surely no prophet can die outside of Jerusalem. Jesus knows exactly what's going to happen and Jesus will be the victim of his culture war. It's all there in the text. It's plain. Jerusalem Jerusalem Jesus laments you who kill the prophets and stone those who sent you. How often I have longed to gather your children together as a hen gathers her chicks under her wings and you are not willing. No they want to fight their fight. They want to they want to draw the line. They want to believe what their political nemesis is. They want to believe what their political narrative tells them to believe. They want to take sides. They want to believe that the only solution to this country is the blood of the other. And Jesus will say blood will be shed. It will be mine for you. Did Jesus really die for our sins. Look at your house has left you desolate. I tell you you will not see me again until you say blessed is he who comes in the name of the Lord. Oh Jesus what do you mean you can be so cryptic. We want money. We want power. We think if we maybe if we control the media maybe if my side control the media well well well maybe the good guys have half the media if we can only silence the other side of the media. If we can if we can only have enough money and enough enough messaging and enough well then if we can only retrain or reeducate the other side if if we can only. The son of man comes. And longs to gather them and they will not be gathered. And he says. I will die for you. We'll see if we once again repeat what the world so reliably does because I say it in this way and some of you might be watching the news and saying it's all playing out. Fortunately not like in 74 and 75 in Lebanon not yet not like it did in 67 to 70 A.D. not yet. Can't we see what we're doing. Can't we see what we're doing. We never seem to see what we're doing unless we stop and look at the one who walked through the crowd. We have no power or money to buffer ourselves none of us have this this level of money. I think we stick with Jesus. I think we love as he loved. I think we examine ourselves. I think we probably die like he died maybe hopefully not most of us haven't seemed to be there I think that's a blessing. But if we live as he lived we will die like he died and we will be and we will be raised as he was raised. That is the way that is the path. And hopefully it will not come to any of this for us. Hopefully we will learn to come back from edges and learn to love our enemies and learn to bless those who persecute us and learn to walk as Jesus walked. Because the walking as he has walked has in fact changed the world. But maybe we have not been changed sufficiently. May we grow in him.