https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=uDBEixr4_Sc

 Hi, this is Paul and this is Rough Draft for Sunday where I run through the status of my sermon this week. Some weeks are rougher than others. Last week we looked at the secret of Jesus' success and we looked at, sort of compared Jesus to some other leaders and noted some of the distinctive ways that Jesus led as opposed to some of these other leaders. Well, this week we get a story from a contemporary leader of Jesus' time, namely Herod Antipas. King Herod heard about this, meaning the disciples going out and healing those with unclean spirits in Jesus' names and preaching repentance. King Herod heard about this, for Jesus' name had become well known. Some were saying, John the Baptist has been raised from the dead, and that is why miraculous powers are at work in him. Others say he is Elijah. And still others claimed he is a prophet, like one of the prophets from long ago. But when Herod heard this, he said, John, whom I am beheaded, has been raised from the dead. Now, this all came on fast. Jesus was doing work of amazing power, telling people to be quiet about it. Jesus sent his less than competent disciples out to do his work, and so many more people knew about him. And now King Herod, not actually being a king, was watching. Now this is Herod Antipas. He is the son of Herod the Great, and we will look at his family tree in a minute. He is not really a king, he is a tetrarch. So a lot of people wonder, well, why does Mark call him a king? Is this setting up a contrast with the real king? Jesus made some sideways comments. Foxes have holes and birds have nests. That's likely referring to the Herods and the Romans. But the son of man, who is a figure of a divine kingdom, one who would inherit the rulership of the entire planet Earth from Daniel 7, has no place to lay his head. Now the Herod family tree is the kind of story that would make pretty much any reality TV on Bravo look pretty tame. There was of course Herod the Great, who had a whole series of wives and a whole series of sons, some of which he killed. Herod the Great actually was a descendant from Edom, but he tried to become and posture himself as a Jewish Messiah. So he was scrupulous about not eating pork, and then historians made the comment that it would be better to be his pig than a member of his family, because he seemed to not have killed pigs, but he very much killed his family. So he has this complicated family tree, and you can notice Herod Antipas right there in the family tree with a number 6 by it. The son of Malthes, the Samaritan, the brother of Herod Archelaus, the stepbrother of Herod Philip, and the stepbrother of Philip the Tetrarch. Now Herod of course is a Tetrarch. Now often in the Bible they're just simply called Herod, which is part of the family name. Then we have these other names to distinguish them. But now Herod Antipas, which is who we're talking about here, is going to be known because he basically got rid of his first wife, who was a wife of an allegiance to another king in the region, and this will become important later because that woman, she sort of slipped away when she heard that Herod had taken Herodias, his stepbrother's wife, and his niece as his wife when he was away. And so she basically got leave to slip out and to escape to her brother, brother or father, I don't remember offhand. I think it's her father who was the king of Arabia just nearby because she didn't want to find the fate of the other wives of Herod the Great. It's often convenient to kill one wife to make way for a new wife. So Herod Antipas came back to Judea and with Herodias, his brother's wife and his niece, and they were then married. This was something that John the Baptist did not appreciate. So right away we have the question, why when Herod heard about this, did he think that John who he had beheaded had now come back and that was Jesus? Now what the Gospel of Mark is going to do here is fill in for us the story. For Herod himself had given orders to have John arrested and he had him bound and put in prison. He did this because of Herodias, his brother Philip's wife whom he had married. For John had been saying to Herod, it is not lawful for you to have your brother's wife. So Herodias nursed a grudge against John and wanted to kill him. But he was not able to because Herod feared John and protected him, knowing him to be a righteous and a holy man. When Herod heard John, he was greatly puzzled and he liked to listen to him. Finally the opportune time came. On his birthday, Herod gave a banquet for his high officials and military commanders and the leading men of Galilee. When the daughter of Herodias came in and danced, she pleased Herod and his dinner guests. The king said to the girl, Ask me for anything you want and I'll give it to you. And he promised her with an oath, whatever you ask I'll give you up to half my kingdom. Now there's some echoes here of some of the stuff in the Book of Esther. Now do you think it's icky for a stepdaughter to dance for her stepfather and friends in a way that would so move them? You might think about what kind of dance this might have been to really get these men's attention and to just fill these men with all kinds of enthusiasm because this girl's mother is both Herod's wife and his niece making this stepdaughter dancing for her great uncle who is also now her stepfather and a bunch of his friends. You think this is icky? Well, she went out and said to her mother, What shall I ask for? The head of John the Baptist, Herodias answered. At once the girl hurried into the king with a request, I want you to give me right now the head of John the Baptist on a platter. The king was greatly distressed, but because of his oaths and his dinner guests he did not want to refuse her, so he immediately sent an executioner with orders to bring John's head. The man went, beheaded John in the prison, and brought back his head on a platter. He presented it to the girl and she gave it to her mother. On hearing of this, John's disciples came and took his body and laid it in a tomb. Now why is this story in the Gospel of Mark and why does this story appear now? Pretty much if you're doing exegesis or biblical studies, this is almost always a good question to ask. Why this text, this story, right here, right now? How does this contribute to the message and the theme that has been built by the book and the narrative? Just before this, Jesus sends out the twelve with authority over unclean spirits. Herod hears about Jesus and thinks it's John the Baptist raised from the dead. What would give him that idea? Others think it's Elijah and the prophets. And then in the next story, Jesus feeds the five thousand. These stories aren't by any means chronological necessarily and in fact to tell this story you sort of have to go back in time. We have no real sense of when this story happened. Why this story at this point in Mark? And really, what does this story have to say about Jesus? Jesus doesn't seem to be at all involved. In fact, this rather this very interesting and memorable story seems in fact to just grab our attention and we forget why is this story in this book here and now? Now one of the interesting things that you might note is why is Jesus not prophetic? The emphasis in this story is on John the Baptist, Elijah and the prophets. And what John the Baptist did is very much considered to be prophetic even in today's language. Today many Christians over on the left will protest and complain about the president's moral behavior. A generation ago Christians did the same thing on the right and both sides called it prophetic because the leaders of the country should be held to a certain moral standard. Now those who call this prophetic very much are doing so in keeping with the Hebrew prophets of the Old Testament. Mainly Elijah and others who would go to the king and complain about their moral behavior such as Elijah complaining against King Herod and Queen Jezebel about the confiscation of the vineyard of Nabath. So well, kings don't like this sort of thing and in those days without anything like courts and due process and freedom of speech the expected thing would often happen. John is arrested for criticizing Herod's betrayal of behavior with women and children. He marries his brother's wife and this isn't legal while his brother is alive. So John is trying to hold him to the Mosaic code. But Jesus says nothing. Now we might note that well there's nothing recorded here, maybe Jesus said something. But what's interesting is that if Jesus had said something this would have been an amazing time to note it that both Jesus and John criticized Herod but Jesus seems silent. Why? Now this will irritate people very much dependent on where they stand right now in the church in terms of the way the political winds are blowing because when Bill Clinton is mixing it up with Monica Lewinsky, the right rose up in their prophetic voice to denounce him and now that we have Donald Trump in the White House, the left rises up with their prophetic voice to denounce him. Jesus doesn't seem to have this voice. Does this mean that Jesus has no moral code or Jesus is soft on people? Because quite frankly the behaviors of Trump and Clinton are nothing compared to the Roman empires. I mean Tiberius Caesar is a bona fide pedophile and in fact the way that the Romans practiced politics well it could be something more like Donald Trump raping Chuck Schumer on the steps of the Capitol to make a political point. Now Donald Trump has not done this and one would hope that if Donald Trump did do this and when I say rape I don't mean that figuratively. Read about the kinds of things that Nero did. Yeah, should pastors call out behaviors like this from the pulpit? Is that being prophetic? What about the Herod's? That's what John was doing. That's what John was arrested. Jesus isn't arrested. What's going on? Now again Elijah who is mentioned in this text is the prototypical prophet and he denounces Ahab and Jezebel. Now God spares his life by taking him to heaven in a chariot of fire. John denounces Herod. God does not spare his life and presumably most other prophets and John is beheaded and people believe that Herod's loss of a battle against the father of Herod's first wife was a sign of God's judgment for killing John the Baptist. You can read about that in Josephus. Now Jesus does not directly denounce here although Jesus will be executed by the Romans at the behest of the religious authorities and but he is vindicated in resurrection. Exactly what Herod fears. It's interesting how all these lines come together. Now politics and religion are really dicey things to talk about and as a pastor one of the things we learn is well you better tread these waters carefully. Right now in America many churches on the left and churches on the right are sort of beholden to their political fortunes and usually what happens is a generation later there's a bill to pay for their partisan behavior. It's always difficult to assess the relationship between politics and religion and really these things only get separated when it comes to the American experiment which comes in the 17th and 18th centuries. Before that it was just simply assumed politics and religion are one throughout most of the history of the world and certainly in the ancient world and even today we can see that politics is downstream from religion. So in order to think about this I'm going to propose a conceptual framework that politics is of the now and religion is of the always. Now is always a product of the always and you can't touch the always apart from the now and if you think about this a little bit you might notice why it's so difficult to figure out these waters of the political and the religious and why pastors often have to be so careful about how they delineate them. Now one interesting thing we can see in the passage is that Herod can't see Jesus and what I mean by that is that the interpretive filter that Herod uses with which to try to understand Jesus is very much through John. People are debating where Jesus might be getting this power is he a prophet of old who has come back to life. Now in those latter days Herod sees John. Now C.S. Lewis in the first chapter of his book The Problem of Pain talks about two other senses that we possess. He says we have a sense of the numinous that we sort of talk about when we imagine we are seeing a ghost people who believe they are very sensitive spiritually might be said to have a sense for the numinous and then also a moral sense. Now these aren't our five senses that we're used to talking about but our moral senses would be something akin to a conscience that can be hard or soft and it appears that Herod is not without a conscience nor a sense of the numinous. He's fascinated by the miracles and this will show up later when Jesus is trotted before Herod and Herod would like to see Jesus a different Herod if my memory serves me. No I'll have to think about that I'll have to look at that. It's often difficult to keep the Herod's straight. Herod is not without a conscience he's fascinated by the numinous as we all are really and by the miraculous and he fears the moral. He doesn't kill John because John is a righteous man but Herod is also weak. He's surmounted by his own lust, lust for his sister-in-law or his niece and his stepdaughter and his grand niece. He's also afraid of looking weak in front of his cronies and so what little morality he has caves in and he gives into both his lust and his smallness. Now I think very clearly within this text there is a contrast that is being played between Jesus and the kingdoms of this world. Jesus it appears does not negotiate with these people. He barely even mentions them. Now this might make some of us frustrated when we want Jesus to wade in clearly in certain elements of the politics of now but Jesus seems to hold his powder. We see this often most directly when Jesus is talking to Pilate. Are you the king of the Jews asked Pilate? You have said so Jesus replied. The chief priest accused him of many things so again Pilate asked him. Are you aren't you going to answer? Pilate expects Jesus to speak in his own defense. Now in the Gospel of John they'll have a longer conversation but it's very clear that Jesus is not dealing with Pilate as Pilate imagines he should be dealt with even in a way that would be reasonable in Pilate's imagination for Jesus to deal with him. Jesus before such leaders remains mostly silent as noted by none other than Napoleon who made the comment never interfere with an enemy while he's in the process of destroying himself which is very much what Herod and Pilate and the Caesars and many leaders usually wind up doing. It could be that perhaps Herod can't arrest this process of self-destruction as seen in the whole affair with his wife and the revenge against the neighboring king because he simply can't see beyond mere John and John's way of dealing with this to see the far greater Jesus. His conversation with Pilate seems to have a familiar dynamic. Jesus mostly silent except when Jesus pulls back the curtain to clarify that in Jesus' mind not shared by Pilate or Herod Jesus is in fact holding all the cards. Now this seems strange to Pilate because Pilate is holding the cards of life and death as Pilate asserts. Jesus is holding all the cards and his situation is completely within his control. Pilate thinks Jesus is desperate and in a position to help himself by kneeling to Pilate which sounds a whole lot like the temptations but Jesus reminds Pilate that he stands before a far greater ruler. A frame Pilate should be able to understand given the fact that Pilate is beneath an emperor himself and that Jesus would remain in that frame and not Pilate's or Herod's. Jesus comments to Pilate I can call legions of angels my kingdom is not ek from this world. Now the following story will of course be the feeding of the 5,000 and Jesus shows a level of power and authority not simply over the minds and hearts of the people that's the mind space but also over the matter loaves and fishes and this is of course at the heart of Jesus miracles the heart of the fascination that Herod and many others have with Jesus and the heart of their attempt to understand Jesus. Herod and those around him mostly govern over minds by way of threatening life living by the sword as Jesus will call it while Jesus shows his complete mastery over the entire domain doing so with love gentleness and generosity while still challenging his disciples to believe more deeply and in fact to believe at his level. Now the temptation of the now is always to forget the reality of the always and to as the little children do in Willy Wonka's chocolate factory where they don't realize that they'll soon inherit the factory keep selling out short for a little sip of the chocolate river or some special gum that will blow the little girl up figuratively well with gas okay she doesn't actually explode. Now usually so we sell out short let me say that sentence again the temptation of the now is always to forget the reality of the always and to sell always on the cheap for the sake of the now usually because of our appetites for fleshy desires as Paul will call them and self-righteous demands that's usually what we do and we very much see this exacted inherited. Jesus will show himself and of course this is what we ought to follow Jesus will show himself not only in episodes of miraculous power but also of miraculous forbearance of power in the crucifixion to master it all and for that reason as seen in Philippians 2 to be given the highest place the sort of place Herod always lusted after but would always fail to attain by ironically stumbling in the lusts of the flesh.