https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=qml65oC9b7E

 Hi, this is Paul and this is Rough Draft for Sunday and we're looking at Daniel 3, a famous story. It's a very famous story and it usually makes all the children's Bible story books. Do you recognize anybody in this picture? It's, you know, you might, if you know anything about the Bible, you might say, why is Jesus in the book of Daniel? I thought Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego got thrown into the fiery furnace. Why is Jesus standing in there with them? And you can see this is out of a box set of Bible stories and we've got Jesus standing around little children from all over the world by the looks of their garb and this is sort of how Bible storybooks sometimes go. There's a whole lot of interpretation in children's Bible storybooks and not all of it good. Now Jesus didn't always make the picture up, it appears, and this one over from an old Sunday school material, it seems to be kind of a 18 year old Greek in there with Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego and here in the fiery furnace Bible lesson, if you put, you can put some Shadrach, Meshach on tongue depressors and then put them in the flames and then it appears to be an angel complete with wings and halo and and white gown goes into the fiery furnace and then in this other picture again, it's just sort of an angel in there. So what's what's going on with this? Well, let's read the story. King Nebuchadnezzar made an image of gold 60 cubits high and 6 cubits wide. So about 10 to 1 could be as high as 90 feet tall. While it's set up on the plains of Dura and the province of Babylon, he then summoned the satraps, prefects, governors, advisors, treasurers, judges, magistrates, and all the other provincial officers to come to the dedication of the image he had set up. So the satraps, prefects, governors, advisors, treasurers, judges, magistrates, and all other provincial officers assembled for the dedication of the image that King Nebuchadnezzar had set up and they stood before it. Now if you read Jonathan Haidt, you'll know that Nebuchadnezzar by calling in all of his advisors is looking to consolidate his power to emotionally bind them all together and the the elephants, this is how you train the elephant beneath and he's going to try to create one very large tribe and to have, you know, by way of the image have everyone be bonded together in submission to the image and submission to him. And he's going to back this up. This is not, this is not an optional meeting. Then the herald loudly proclaimed, nations and people of every language. This is an empire. This is what you are commanded to do as soon as you hear the sound of the horn, flute, zither, lyre, harp, pipe, and all kinds of music, you must fall down and worship the image of gold that King Nebuchadnezzar has set up. Whoever does not fall down and worship will immediately be thrown into a blazing furnace. So Nebuchadnezzar is a pretty shrewd dude. He understands how to bind people together with religion, with politics, with power, and he understands that both incentive and avoiding threats, this is kind of like again Jordan Peterson's self-authoring program. You write out what you want and you write out what you're afraid of. Nebuchadnezzar has him on both sides. He's engaging all of this to consolidate his kingdom and make his people loyal to him and make them dedicated to him. Therefore, as soon as they heard the sound of the horn, flute, zither, lyre, harp, and all kinds of music, all the nations and people of every language fell down and worshiped the image that the king, that King Nebuchadnezzar had set up. Now music is a very important part of this. I was just listening to a course on Nietzsche right now because I'm trying to improve my knowledge of Nietzsche. And one of the things that Nietzsche notes that in the ancient Greek civilization, music was a big part of the theater, of the tragedies, because music is a way that kind of takes us over and brings us in the mood. There's no movie that we see today without music to set the tone. There's a soundtrack. And so Nebuchadnezzar is pulling out all the stops to make his kingdom great and to make his people loyal to him. Now, if you ever wanted to know how to be a dictator, and we've had a number of them recently and some of them still persist, well, this is the trick that you have. How to get people to die for you rather than to supplant you and take the reins of power. Now, part of the difficulty that many of these dictators have are they are secularists. And what that sort of leaves is, well, you've got to be loyal to Saddam or Joseph Stalin or the dear leader. And if you're not loyal to them, well, that leaves them vulnerable because these dear leaders are only men. And if the man goes down, well, it's open season and everybody's going to be scrambling up that hierarchy. Now, smarter kings, which the ancient kings were, they knew how to use religion. And they locate something above you. They are there and submissive to the god because, well, you might take a shot at bumping off the king. But if he's backed by a god, well, maybe you're going to think twice about it. Or maybe the god can transcend the life of the individual king. The upside of this is if you cross the king, you cross the god. And so Nebuchadnezzar wants to put this in everybody's mind. The downside is the king now has to submit to the god. And his character is supposed to measure up to that of the god. The other downside is that if the character doesn't measure up, or if the god's character doesn't measure up, or if the god is just kind of a projection of a petty dictator up another level, well, then you're going to have questions about other gods and how that can go. So King Nebuchadnezzar is working this. And sure, don't you know it, there's going to be hierarchy games underneath him. At this time, some astrologers came forward and denounced the Jews. They said to King Nebuchadnezzar, may the king live forever. Always good to kiss up. Your majesty has issued a decree that everyone who has heard the sound of the horn, the flute, the zither, the lyre, the harp, the pipe, it's almost like ding ding ding ding ding ding ding. And all kinds of music must fall down and worship the image of gold. And that whoever does not fall down and worship will be thrown into a blazing furnace. But there are some Jews whom you have set over the affairs of the province of Babylon. Well, tear these guys down the hierarchy and supplant them. That's what the game is, right? Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego who pay no attention to you, your majesty, they neither serve your gods. They're not down with the god game. Nor worship the image of gold you have set up. Because that image of gold, remember gold doesn't corrupt, gold doesn't tarnish, gold blazes like the sun. This is all very archetypal. It's all very hierarchical. And these Jews are not playing the game. And if they don't play the game out of the hierarchy, they must go and they ought to be crushed because such dissent cannot be tolerated. But pay attention that these are the astrologers, these are the people that are in competition with Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego. We don't know where Daniel is for this story. But they're in competition with them and so they want to pull them down and supplant them. Now, last week we talked about the fact that as Augustine is processing all of this in the ancient world, he says that Christians should be the best citizens. And they should be the best citizens because by virtue of their special way of allegiance, they should both not be freaking out nor sucking up. And not be prone to the melodramatic anathemas or unctuous neediness of the empire. Now, I was catching up on my walking dead and towards the end of season eight, the struggle is all against Negan. And there comes a point when Negan gets weakened and Simon wants to get Dwight down for taking Negan out. And this is what every dictator fears. And in fact, Negan's been pretty smart because Negan has both by carrots and sticks, by circuses and threats, created a culture in the whole community when asked, who are you? I am Negan. He's taken his identity and he's pushed it out through the community. And everybody understands how the game is played. But here's the thing, if your highest value is individual ambition, security or comfort, well, do you really have any allegiance to Negan? Are you really Negan? Or do you want to become the new Negan by killing the old? Or is there a system that actually has other values that are not located in a person? Because here's the thing about values, they can't be killed. But what happens when your values of loyalty, and I'm talking of course about the good guys in the walking dead, Rick and his tribe, but the values come into competition with survival, especially when there's a tyrant. What do you do? Well, furious with rage, Nebuchadnezzar summoned Shadrach, Meshach and Abednego. So these men were brought before the king. And Nebuchadnezzar said to them, is it true Shadrach, Meshach and Abednego that you do not serve my gods or worship the image of gold I have set up? Are you not within my hierarchy? Are you not playing the game with me? Now when you, I'll give you a second chance. Now when you hear the sound of the horn, flute, zither, lyre, harp, pipe and all kinds of music, if you are ready to fall down and worship the image I have made, very good. But if you do not worship it, you will be thrown immediately into a blazing furnace. Then what, then what God will be able to rescue you from my hand. Nebuchadnezzar plays the game very well. Shadrach, Meshach and Abednego replied to him, King Nebuchadnezzar, now notice again the emotional labels. Nebuchadnezzar is furious, out of control, and you might ask, why is he so furious? Why is he so angry? Why is he so threatened? So why is Nebuchadnezzar so angry and why is he threatened? Because he seems to be in the driver's seat here. Well, he understands something about his game, that his game is in many ways so fragile that just these three individuals can, by simply not bowing down, seem to upend his entire game, seem to threaten his entire empire. He is in a no-win situation. He seems to like these three. He doesn't want to kill them because they're valuable to him. As Ne'en keeps saying, people are resources. These guys can be useful. These guys can be used. In some ways they're his best citizen, but this he cannot tolerate. And his anger shows his vulnerability. Now these three, why are they so calm? Isn't it their life on the line? Shadrach, Meshach and Abednego replied to the king, King Nebuchadnezzar, we do not need to defend ourselves before you in this matter. Huh? Why? Shouldn't they be arguing for their life? This sounds like a certain man before Pilate a few centuries later, who will be refusing to argue for his life before someone who has the power to take it, he imagines. If we are thrown into the blazing furnace, the God we serve is able to deliver us from it. And he will deliver us from your majesty's hand. King, you are not at the top of the hierarchy. But even if he does not, and that is a real possibility, we want you to know, your majesty, we still speak to you with respect, that we will not serve your gods or worship the image of gold you have set up. How could it be that simply the words of these three men challenge the power of Babylon? Then Nebuchadnezzar was furious with Shadrach, Meshach and Abednego, and his attitude towards them changed. He ordered the furnace heated seven times hotter than usual, and commanded some of the strongest soldiers in his army to tie up Shadrach, Meshach and Abednego and throw them into the blazing furnace. So these men, wearing their robes, trousers, turbans and other clothes, were bound and thrown into the blazing furnace, and the king's command was so urgent and the furnace so hot that the flames of the fire killed the soldiers who took up Shadrach, Meshach and Abednego. And these three men, firmly tied, fell into the blazing furnace. Now how do you orient yourself or make your choice? Do you save your skin? Do you kiss up? Do you kick down? Is there something above the king? Something the king isn't putting there to play the god card with? How would you know it? How would you know who might be above the king? Someone who was older than the king? Someone that was there before the king? Someone not popped up, propped up and promoted by the king? Someone that even the king himself should fear? And then what does the king's character indicate in this story? And how much are you willing to risk? Then King Nebuchadnezzar leapt to his feet in amazement and asked his advisors, weren't there three men we tied up and went into the fire? They replied, certainly, your majesty. He said, look, I see four men walking around in the fire, unbound and unharmed, and the fourth looks like a son of the gods. Nebuchadnezzar then approached the opening of the blazing furnace and shouted, Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, servants of the most high god, come out, come out here. So Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego came out of the fire. You would have thought they'd say, huh, you throw us in here, we'll stay a while. And the sage, and this, I'm trying to think of a, there was a movie where, oh, it was a Gene Wilder movie where, it was a Gene Wilder movie when he was sent to prison. And he kept getting tortured by the warden and every time the guards would come, he would act like the torturing was the best thing, you know, he was on the rack and it helped his back. You can look up that movie, it's a hilarious movie. But that's kind of the thought here. So Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego came out of the fire and the satraps, prefects, governors, and royal advisors crowded around them. They saw that the fire had not harmed their bodies, nor as a hair on their head singed. The robes were not scorched and there was no smell of fire on them. Now, here we get the guy who's the son of the gods, and actually this is kind of my problem with the putting Jesus in the fiery furnace because, of course, they're not going to recognize Jesus. And part of the issue about Jesus' incarnation was that he didn't come down all looking like the son of the gods. That would have been a very different story. So why do some people put Jesus in there and other people clearly put an angel in there? Now, the angel is revealed, and this is from a Tim Keller book and he actually quotes it from Alec Moitner. The angel is revealed as, this is talking about the angel of the Lord in the Old Testament, The angel is revealed as a merciful accommodation or condescension of God whereby the Lord can be present among a sinful people when, were he to go with them himself, his presence would consume them. He is that mode of deity whereby the Holy God can keep company with sinners. There is only one other in the Bible who is both identical with and yet distinct from the Lord, one who, without abandoning the full essence and prerogatives of deity, is able to accommodate himself to the company of sinners. And that's Jesus. And so there's something going on here that in one hand this is an ordeal, this is a trial, and the point of the trial is not lost on anyone there. That in an ordeal what you do is you test the validity of the situation. So really the challenge is whose God is right? Is it the God of Israel or is it the God of Nebuchadnezzar? And so they're working through that issue and here the God of Shadrach, Meshach and Abednego is vindicated and we're about to see Nebuchadnezzar do a 180 and change sides immediately. But that's exactly what you'd expect a corrupt pagan emperor to do because why on earth is he changing sides? He is just going where the power is going because what he's really been looking out for all along is himself. Then Nebuchadnezzar said, Praise be to the God of Shadrach, Meshach and Abednego who has sent his angels and rescued his servants. They trusted in him and defied the king's commands, yeah, your commands, and were willing to give up their lives rather than serve or worship any god except their own god. That's why they're the best servants, king. That's why they're honest. That's why they're trustworthy. That's why they're incorruptible because they have a god that is above you and even if the king is corrupt, they will defy him. And this is why they can actually have community and not set up a puppet state. This is why they can actually build a civilization. This is why they can actually live together. Therefore I decree that people of any nation or language who say anything against the god of Shadrach, Meshach and Abednego will be cut into pieces and their houses be turned into piles of rubble for no other god can save in this way. So Nebuchadnezzar wants in. What are we to think of his confession? What are we to think of his turning? Well, we'll see in the books. He wavers. He goes back and forth. Then the king promoted Shadrach, Meshach and Abednego in the province of Babylon. So the scheme of the rival astrologers was thwarted. But the point of this story is not so much what the Sunday School books portray. The point is that God goes in the furnace for you. And that's why I think a little ham-fisted, a little clunky, these Sunday School books throw Jesus in there, which ought to be just completely confusing. The point they're trying to make is the Christian story. God goes in the furnace and like what happens most of the time, the fires of the furnace consume. Moses meets a burning bush and the bush is not consumed. And that is Israel. But Israel can't give up her sin. And so Jesus goes into the fire of God like every other sacrifice and is consumed. He becomes the sacrifice. Because what a sacrifice actually is, is the fire of God and the substitute going into the fire and being consumed. And that's what the story points to. Now, this makes our Sunday School stories because it's got a happy ending and we don't want to traumatize our children. But as we grow up, we begin to learn, no, more often than not, there isn't a last minute reprieve. But then the question is, what God can you trust? Is it the God that demands you to sacrifice for him? Or is it the God that sacrifices himself for you? Then what shall we say in response to these things? If God is for us, who can be against us? He who did not spare his own son, but gave him up for us all. How will he also, not also, along with him graciously give us all things? Who will bring any charge against those whom the Lord has chosen? It is God who justifies. Who then is the one who condemns? No one. Christ Jesus who died more than that, who was raised to life, is at the right hand of God and is also interceding for us. Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? Shall trouble or hardship or persecution or famine or nakedness or danger or sword? It is written, for your sake we face death all day long. We are considered as sheep to be slaughtered. No, in all these things we are more than conquerors through him who loved us. For I am convinced that neither death nor life, neither angels nor demons, neither the present nor the future, nor any powers, neither height nor depth, nor anything else in all creation, will be able to separate us from the love of God that is in Christ Jesus our Lord. The one in the sacrifice, the one on the altar.