https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=8UOOtUANlB8

 Hi, this is Paul and this is Rough Draft for Sunday where I run through the current status of my Sunday sermon. What is the good life? How does it relate to being a good person? Over the last few weeks, I've been working through The Good Place. Three seasons are on Netflix, the fourth season just finale last night or so on NBC American TV. And these questions are all around that sitcom. Now the sitcom, the main character of the sitcom is an Eleanor Shellstrop and she dies in a tragic accident and it's a situation comedy so it's all taken fairly lightly and she is brought into The Good Place. She's a being named Michael explains to her how there's a good place and a bad place and she was moral enough and awarded and earned enough points to be let into The Good Place. But the thing is Eleanor was not a good person, she was a rather terrible person and so she's actually in The Good Place accidentally. Now The Good Place sort of looks like Main Street Disneyland with lots of frozen yogurt and she very quickly realizes that everyone around her are these super good people who have been international philanthropists and doctors working in Africa to save people from AIDS and malaria and all of these things. All really exceptionally good people and she knows she isn't so this puts her in a panic. How can she avoid getting kicked out of The Good Place? Now conveniently her soulmate is a PhD in ethics and so well how will she learn how to be a good person? Well she'll have to sit there and he'll give her lessons on the history of ethical philosophy and so that's how she'll learn to be a good person. But is this how people become good? Now over the next few weeks we're going to be looking at the Sermon on the Mount and the Sermon on the Mount is all about being a good person but it's all about the question who is a good person and how are good people made? Now before I say this I want to contextualize Jesus in a way that Dallas Willard did in his book The Divine Conspiracy. The Divine Conspiracy is Dallas Willard's main book on the Sermon on the Mount and I'll have quite a few quotations from it in this message. At the literary mundane level Jesus knew how to transform the molecular structure of water to make it to wine. Now most of you have heard about the miracle at Cana and Jesus turning water to wine but you never thought about it in terms of molecules. Now I know a good many people out there don't believe it happened at all and other people say it did happen so well if it did happen he must have known something about the molecular structure of water and wine and how to transform one to the other with seemingly just a command given to the servants. That knowledge also allowed him to make a few pieces of bread and some little fish and feed thousands of people. He could create matter from the energy he knew how to access from the heavens right there where he was. Now if you've ever read a little book called the Alchemy of Air in the early 20th century some German engineers figured out how to bring how to create nitrogen from the air. Seems like magic right? Well that pretty much allowed Germany to have enough fertilizer to feed its people and to create enough weapons to fight World War I and II and we've been living off that technology ever since. We pull nitrogen from the air. Well Jesus seemed to pull fish and bread from seemingly nothing or energy or how we don't know. It cannot be surprising. It cannot be surprising that the feeding of thousands led to the crowds led to crowds to try to force him to be their king. Surely one could play on the energy matter equation like that could do anything turn gravel into gold and pay off the national debt. Do you think Alchemy? Do you think he can get elected president or prime minister today? That's a really interesting question. Dallas Willard I think wrote this in the 90s. Dallas Willard was a professor of philosophy at USC just in case some of you out there think that he's just some dimwit who writes silly religious things. Now maybe he was that too. I'll leave it up to you to decide but he was a man who knew quite a bit about philosophy and his skills were appreciated in this world in the secular sphere. You know how to transform the tissues of the human body from sickness to health and from death to life. You knew how to suspend gravity interrupt weather patterns and eliminate unfruitful trees without saw or axe. He only needed a word. Surely he must be amused at our Nobel prizes what our Nobel prizes are awarded for today. In the ethical domain he brought an understanding of life that has influenced the world more than any other and that is in a sense what Tom Holland argues in his book Dominion that I've talked about quite a bit in my videos. We shall see what this means in chapters to follow where he talks about the Sermon on the Mount. And one of the greatest testimonies to his intelligence is surely that he knew how to enter physical death actually to die and then to live on beyond death. I should add there with a bodily transformation. He sees death by the throat and defeated it. Forget cryonics. Death was not something others imposed on him. He explained his followers in the moment of crisis that he could call any at any time for 72,000 angels being a little literalistic about that number to do whatever he wanted. Surely a midsize angel or two could have been enough to take care of those who thought they were captured. They were capturing and killing him. Just two angels seems to take out the city of Sodom and blind them all in the Old Testament story. He plainly said, Nobody takes my life. I give it up by choice. I am in a position to lay it down and I am in a position to resume it. My father and I have worked all this out. That's not quite sure what translation he's using, but John 10, 18. All these things show Jesus cognitive and practical mastery of every phase of reality, physical, moral and spiritual. He is master only because he is maestro. Jesus is Lord can mean a little in practice, can mean little in practice for anyone who has to hesitate before saying Jesus is smart. Now smart is usually one of the highest praises we give to someone. Oh, they're smart. He is not just nice. He is brilliant. He is the smartest man who ever lived. He is now supervising the entire course of world history, Revelation 1, 5, while simultaneously preparing the rest of the universe for our future role in it, John 14, 2. He always has the best information on everything and certainly also on the things that matter most in human life. Let us now hear his teachings on what the good life is, and supposedly what a good place would be and who is among the truly blessed. What we have come to call the Sermon on the Mount is a concise statement of Jesus teaching on how to actually live in the reality of God's present kingdom available to us from the very space surrounding our bodies. It concludes with a statement that all who hear and do what he says will have a life that can stand up to everything. I love how Dallas Willard phrases that. That is a life for eternity because it is already in eternity. Matthew 7, 24 to 25. As an outstanding thinkers before and after him have done, Jesus deals with the two major questions humanity always faces. First there is the question of which life is the good life? What is genuinely in my interest and how can I enter true well-being? That word isn't original to Sam Harris. Of course we already know that life and the life of God will be the good life and Jesus continued reassertion of the direct availability of the kingdom always kept that basic truth before his students and his hearers. But exactly who is and who is not assured of such a life was a subject of much confusion in his day as it is today and much debate. What came to be called the Beatitudes was given by him to help clarify this matter and just about the Beatitudes, not just the Beatitudes but the Sermon on the Mount has been central to Jesus' ethical teaching pretty much right from the start. They and the final epilogue that accompanies them occupy Matthew 5, 3 to 20. The second question Jesus deals with in the sermon concerns who is truly a good person? Who has the kind of goodness found in God himself constituting the family likeness between God and his children? This is dealt with in the remainder of the sermon from 520 to 722 which we will get to. Now we might imagine that well as Dallas will or the Sermon on the Mount is this super important thing that everyone agrees with. Well in the 1980s, Virginia Stem Owens who taught at Texas A&M decided to pass the copy out to her English class and see what they thought. Most of the students at my university come from middle class conservative Republican families remember this is in the 80s, the 1980s. The vices here like the values are traditional. Weakened drunkenness and sexual promiscuity. Things a parent can understand. Therefore when I assigned my freshman English class the Sermon on the Mount, a section in their rhetoric textbook taken from the King James Version, I had expected them to have at least a nodding acquaintance with the reading and to express a modicum of piety in their written responses. After all, Texas has always been considered at least marginally part of the Bible Belt. The first paper I picked up began with, in my opinion, religion is one big hoax. It's 1987. I was mildly surprised since this came from a student who had never expressed a single iconoclastic notion the entire semester. I glanced at the opening sentence of the next paper. There is an old saying that, you shouldn't believe everything you read, and it applies in this case. Seems like the Sermon on the Mount. Not necessarily easily embraced if you actually read it. Alright, I thought, maybe this is just a fluke. I reached the third paper. It is hard to believe something that was written down thousands of years ago. Hmm. It began. In the Bible, Adam and Eve were the first two people. And if they were, and if it were then, and if they were then, where did black people come from? Also, the Bible says nothing about dinosaurs, and I think God would have mentioned them. And on it goes. Basically, her class hated the Sermon on the Mount. Now, her class, even in 1987, in the middle of Texas, in the middle of Bible Belt, lived in many ways decidedly secular lives. And one of the interesting things about The Good Place is that it's a fairly secular peop—show. Every now and then someone will talk about God, but it seems that we all sort of know what good and bad is. The YouTube algorithm pointed me to a very interesting video this week. What Japanese think of religions, which is a very interesting thing, because you would imagine while they're on the other side of the world, they'll have different ideas about religion. And if you ever read Shusako Endo's great book Silence, you'll know that, well, Christianity, ever since it was stamped out early on, really hasn't grown much in Japan. Well, the video was fascinating because we also sort of found both what Tom Holland and Christian Smith have asserted that, well, kind of the same religion has gone all the way around the world of pretty much secular people in the developed world, especially the young. One young man says, I want to be able to eat whatever I want and date whoever I want. That's morality. That's what it means to live a good life and good people won't stand in your way. As Christian Smith called moralistic therapeutic deism, these two young women noted that I do end up praying for help when I'm in a bind. Now, they don't go to a Shinto shrine, and the maker of the video was pretty clear with them that you do the Shinto thing when you're trying to get help in this world. That's a shrine. You do the Buddhist thing when you're trying to basically escape reincarnation. That's so you do the Buddhist thing at funerals and do the Shinto thing to make life work. But when it comes to finding yourself in a little bit of a bind, well, good old-fashioned Western prayer. I think it's okay for God to exist. I'm sure he appreciates your permission. And it's something important. I'm sure he appreciates that too. Very, very interesting that all of these assumptions about what is a good person. Well, do they come from the Bible? Do we get them from the Sermon on the Mount? Well, in the 1980s, the students in Texas don't think so. And today, pretty much millennials all over the place would say, well, we all kind of know what religion is. There's a God out there that pretty much leaves us alone, wants us to have what we want, to feel meaning in life and to feel fulfilled in life, but won't get in the way of us having a good time. Now, the Sermon on the Mount begins with the Beatitudes. And one thing I've noticed is that the Beatitudes are sort of like the Beatles. Everybody loves to say they're great, but not a lot of people still listen to them. Because if anybody really read the Beatitudes and really thought about each line, sort of like these English freshmen getting a fresh take on it, they might stop and say, who wrote this stuff? Certainly not that Jesus who's supposed to be tolerant and nice and loving that great moral teacher, because the stuff that he wrote here? Now, when Jesus saw the crowds, he went up on a mountainside. Now, notice they're not just saying geography. There's a lot going on there in terms of, you know, Jonathan Pigeot type stuff. I can't mention that in the Sermon, because nobody in my church knows who Jonathan is, but out there on YouTube land, he's going up onto a mountain. Is he like Moses? Is he going to give the law? A new law? And he sat down. Well, sitting is about teaching. His disciples came to him and he began to teach them. So he sits on the mountain, sort of as a king, sort of as an authority, sort of as Moses, sort of as the intermediary between God and the earth below. And he sits down to teach and his disciples gather around him. Very symbolic, very Jewish. And this is what he has to say. Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. Blessed are those who mourn, for they will be comforted. Blessed are the meek, for they will inherit the earth. Blessed are those who hunger and thirst for righteousness, for they will be filled. Blessed are the merciful, for they shall be shown mercy. Blessed are the poor, the pure in heart, for they will see God. I thought nobody's supposed to see God. Blessed are the peacemakers, for they will be called children of God. Blessed are those who are persecuted because of righteousness, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. Sort of frames it, see verse 3 and verse 10. Blessed are you when people insult you, persecute you, and falsely say all kinds of evil things against you. Even on Twitter? Because of me. Oh. Rejoice and be glad, because great is your reward in heaven. For in the same way they persecuted the prophets who were before you. Now again, I've seen many people pull this out and everyone lives in reverent silence and says, but that's again sort of like listening to the Beatles. Were the Beatles really that good? Or does just everybody love them because everybody loves them? Now, Jesus didn't invent beatitudes. You can find them all over the Old Testament in one way. If you have some really flashy Bible software is you can search the Greek. And there's the Old Testament translated into the Greek sometime in the first century BC and Alexandria. And so you can look at the McElroy's, which are the Beatitudes. And the Psalms are full of them. They're some of the best places to find Beatitudes. One of the things you'll notice right away is that different Bible translations don't quite know how to handle them. So the new revised standard version would say, happier those who do not follow the advice of the wicked. Whereas the NIV would say, blessed is the one who does not walk in the step with the wicked or stand in the way that sinners take or sit in the company of mockers. So what you'll find as I read through some of these Beatitudes is that they sound very religious. And religious in terms of like churchy stuff. And kiss the son or he will be angry on your weight. And your way will lead to your destruction. But his wrath will flare up in a moment. Blessed are all those who take refuge in him. Decidedly on the side of power. Blessed is the one whose transgressions are forgiven, whose sins are covered. Blessed is the one whose sin the Lord does not count against them. And in whose spirit is no deceit. Blessed is the nation whose God is the Lord, the people he chose for his inheritance. Blessed is the one who trusts in the Lord, who does not look to the proud, to those who turn away to false gods. Blessed are those who have regard for the weak. The Lord delivers them in times of trouble. Is that sort of like what we saw in the Beatitudes? Well, blessed are those who have regard for the weak. It's again, do the right thing and you will be rewarded with the right thing. Blessed are those who dwell in your house. They are praised you together. In other words, blessed are you if you're loyal and obedient to God. Blessed are you if you do the right thing because God will reward you. Blessed are you if you use your strength on behalf of the poor and in moral ways. And then God will reward you. Beatitudes are pronouncements of future blessings here below. If you do the right thing, God will bless you. Now, this is just common religious knowledge. I've been talking about Tom Holland's book Dominion quite a bit. I'm reading up on a bunch of his other books and also finding a lot of very interesting things in them. In his book about Islam, The Shadow of the Sword, talks about winners were the favorites of heaven. Even Christians whose God had died as a convicted criminal nailed to a wooden cross might succumb to this presumption. Eusebius certainly took it for granted. How could he not have done so? When he had the spectacle before him of a Roman state that for centuries had been gore, streaked with Christian blood, miraculously transformed into the bulwark of the church. Confident in his formula that faith in Christ would lead to earthly glory, would take a number of knocks over the course of succeeding generations. Awkwardly, the more Christian the Romans became, the more their empire's frontiers seemed to contract. Theologians divide various explanations for this puzzling phenomena. Explanations which Christians who had only to study the gospels would learn Jesus' view on the earthly and the overweening might well find perfectly persuasive. Nevertheless, the core equation so lovingly dwelt upon by Eusebius that worldly greatness was bestowed upon by God upon those who pleased him, appeared to be altogether too plausible simply to be dismissed out of hand. The Beatitudes from the Psalms certainly seem to tell us this. Now even the NIV gets nervous when it comes to Psalm 137, a very sad Psalm about the exile. By the rivers of Babylon we sat and wept when we remembered Zion. There on the poplars we hung our harps, for there our captors asked us for songs, our tormentors demanded songs of joy. How can we sing the songs of the Lord while in a foreign land? If I forget you Jerusalem, may my right hand forget its skill, may my tongue cling to the roof of my mouth, if I do not remember you, if I do not consider Jerusalem my highest joy. Remember, Lord, that the Edomites took on what the Edomites did on the day Jerusalem failed. Tear it down, they cried, tear it down to its foundation. Daughter Babylon doomed to destruction. Here's a Beatitude. The NIV doesn't want to use blessed. Happy is the one who repays you according to what you have done. Blessed is that one. Blessed? Blessed is the one who seizes your infants and dashes them against the rocks. Even the NIV gets nervous about calling them blessed. Now for a while on Instagram it was hashtag blessed. This is how blessed I am. Look at my car, look at my looks, look at my jewelry, look at my life. I am blessed. Is this group very blessed? The poor in spirit, those who mourn, the meek, those who hunger and thirst for righteousness, they go hungry and thirsty a lot. The merciful, the pure in heart, the peacemakers, those who are persecuted because of righteousness, you're not going to find a lot of hashtag blessed in this group. Are you blessed when people insult you or persecute you or misrepresent you, maybe even in real life not on social media, because of Jesus? And do you really want these things? You might think about that. The kingdom of heaven to be comforted, to inherit the earth. Well that sounds good. Your hunger for righteousness to be filled. Mercy to see God, to be called children of God, rewarded in heaven. That's certainly a nicer list. Are the Beatitudes qualifications? And if so, well, I don't know how much we want this list, but this list, well maybe more. So what on earth is Jesus doing? You see now Eleanor seems to get morally better in terms of their little point system, but they can't really figure out why. Because just telling people to be moral or giving them lessons in moral philosophy, well they actually chose no evidence that that actually makes people better moral performers. Well is Jesus announcing and trying to make people moral? Is he trying to say these are the good people and these are the bad people because the people on this list don't, well they're kind of good maybe, but that's not our definition. Here in the Sermon on the Mount, almost everyone believes it's central to Jesus' ethical teaching, but there's very little consensus as to do this and then that will happen. Well what do you mean? Well do good and good will be done to you. Really? A lot of good people, only the good die young, says Billy Joel. Or even that there is purpose in this. Well what is the purpose of the Sermon on the Mount? What are the purpose of these Beatitudes? They don't look like the Beatitudes of the Psalms, but Jesus clearly has the Psalms in mind and this Beatitude formula when he gives it and the kinds of things he says don't seem to line up. Jesus has radically reshaped humanity's assumptions about morality and it seems to start here. Does winning in this world reveal God's favor? That's a really complicated question. Winners were favorites in heaven, even the Christians, and in fact in Tom Holland's The Shadow of the Sword, this becomes a real issue when in the East, with the rise of the Muhammad and all his victorious victories by the sword, Christians lost and they lost big in the East. Well does that reveal God's favor? Well the Muslims thought so. Suddenly the Christians had to think again. Now listen to this list again and ask yourself, does this describe Jesus? Even that's not interesting, not easy. You might ask when? The poor in spirit now. Now poor in spirit, this is hotly debated, but it seems to again to be connected to the Old Testament and these are people who have no other options, who have been victims in the world, who have gotten the short end of the stick in life. Jesus says these people receive the kingdom of heaven and those who mourn, well they'll be comforted. And the meek, people who don't even stand up for themselves, they'll inherit the earth. Steve Martin's leap of faith, all the meek did is the short end of the stick. Yeah if you look around that's true. Those who hunger and thirst for righteousness, they'll be filled, Jesus says. Those who are merciful, well you know usually if you're merciful you just get taken in this world. They'll be shown mercy. When? Where? The pure in heart, those without guile, those who are simple and good to one another, they'll see God. There's a relationship between purity of heart and seeing God. It probably has something to do with having absolutely no pretense about your moral superiority or your moral superiority based on your achievements. They simply receive from God. The peacemakers whose work is never done, they'll be called children of God or sons of God. Well what do I mean sons? Am I making a comment about sex or gender? No because in that culture sons were heirs, they were representatives of the father king. He's a peacemaker. Those who are persecuted because of righteousness for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. And when people do it to you because that's what they did to the prophets who said awkward things to the mob, things mobs didn't like to hear and therefore became the victims of the mob. But where in this world do we see this happen? Well we see it in Jesus and we see it on the cross. And Jesus doesn't necessarily say, you know the old system of seeing winners that you can't really say that God hasn't blessed the winners with winning. But it's not that simple and it's not that easy and you'd better not draw that conclusion too quickly and you can simply know this from the book of Job. That was around a very long time. So what then is Jesus saying about who is good? And who is blessed? And what does blessedness look like in this upside down world? Well actually it looks like this. Because on the night he was betrayed by one of his hand-picked chosen few who were going to represent him, he broke that bread and said this is my body given for you. And then he poured out a cup and he said this is my blood given for you. This is what blessedness looks like in my kingdom. And you might say, yeah but this doesn't look anything like hashtag blessed. This doesn't look anything like anyone around me wants to be blessed with. Well who do you believe? Do you believe Jesus? Do you believe him?