https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=WJs0HbwiuqM

 Hi, this is Paul and this is Rough Draft for Sunday where I run through the current status of my Sunday sermon. Last week we looked at the Great Commission, which is sometimes known as Jesus' marching orders and we talked about the structure of that Greek sentence. Disciple, discipling we go. Disciple is the main verb. It's making disciples as people talk about, but disciple, this was what Jesus told his disciples to do and it's in some ways built into discipling or apostles, going, baptizing in the name of the Father, Son and Holy Spirit, it was Trinity Sunday last week, and teaching to observe and it's a very interesting word, observe, keep, preserve and in many ways, well, what does that get into? It in some ways gets into the message of two weeks ago when the disciples at the beginning of the book of Acts, at the end of everything that Jesus had done, the disciples say, now will you restore the kingdom to Israel? As they sort of assume that's the point of everything he was doing and he doesn't get mad at them, he does that in other places, but he says, you will receive power when the Holy Spirit comes upon you and you will be my witnesses in Jerusalem and in all Judea and Samaria and to the ends of the earth. Now what we're going to do in this sermon is usually when you preach a sermon, you take a text and you take that text apart. Now over the next number of weeks, we're going to look at the Sermon on the Mount and before we look at the Sermon on the Mount and all of its little parts sequentially, which is usually the way we go through these things, I want to take a glimpse at the whole thing because in the Great Commission, Jesus says, discipling, going, baptizing, teaching them to observe, to keep, to preserve, to bear witness to me. And so what Jesus is doing in these things is saying, I am going away, I am ascending to the Father to rule over heaven and earth at the right hand of God the Father and my Spirit will come upon you and you will embody me. That work is done by the Holy Spirit and that work is done by the Holy Spirit with the teachings of Jesus from the testimony of the Apostles. Jesus is intended to be embodied, multiplied millions of times over throughout the world and well, keeping them to observe that everything that I have commanded you. And so what we have here in the Sermon on the Mount are sort of a greatest hits of his commandments. Now a lot of people have questions when they start exploring Christianity or wondering about it. Is being a Christian about following a list of rules or doing a list of things? Well, you might think that when Jesus says, teaching them to observe or keep everything that I have commanded them. So well there is a list of commands, right? Well that is true, but does that exhaust it? Is being a Christian about professing a set of beliefs? For many Christians, well, who proclaim with their lips and believe with their hearts, who say Jesus is Lord. So there is a lot of belief talking and believing and proclaiming, but is being a Christian able to be reduced to professing a set of beliefs? Jesus wanted the impact of his presence felt on a global scale in personal ways to the ends of the earth and the ends of the age. And so if you take a bunch of these very famous pieces of New Testament Christianity, the Great Commission, Ascension Day, Pentecost, what we have just been going through the last few weeks, we can pretty clearly see Jesus' mission and method. And now of course this culminates in the gift of the Holy Spirit. And there is a lot of questions about, well what is a spirit? What do you mean by the Holy Spirit? We talked about this in the Pentecost sermon, that the gift spirit is behind or beneath the material world in which we live. And it is sort of like wind, as Owen Barfield noted, that we see the trees moving and something is moving the trees, but we can't see what is moving the trees. And it is a much stronger sense of what we understand by school spirit. It is not something we control. Well, school spirit is influenced by us. It is something we participate in, but it moves behavior and it shapes and it molds and it is deeply consequential. Now the difficulty that we have is that the reason we take Bible passages sequentially is because that is sort of how our consciousness works. And we have to take things one thing at a time because we can kind of work on our consciousness that way. But we have very large things like a human being. It is hard to sort of summarize that. And Twitter is an excellent place to recognize that dynamic. Just recently Ravi Zacharias passed away. And he was an apologist and an evangelist, authored over 30 books. And I noted this one person on Twitter that I follow. She is a journalist who tends to work the beat of Christian scandals. And I noted that the summary of this man's life, here is a picture and a link to Christianity today's obituary, which is a little longer format, but here she places the scandals that emerged at the end of his life in it. And that caused a lot of discussion. Were those scandals valid? Yes or no? And I really don't know. But how can you sum up a person's life? Can you do it in words? Can you do it in facts? Can you do it in accomplishments? David Brooks in his book The Road to Character talks about eulogy virtues and resume virtues. But a human being is so much more powerful and dynamic and three-dimensional than sentences or words that we can put on paper. But then we have the question, how can a human being be known or represented? And even the disciples struggle with this at Jesus' resurrection. And Jesus says, touch my hands. He's connecting the man they see standing in front of them in the closed upper room with all of their experiences of him in the three years of being his disciple. And last week we looked at the Colossians passage where Jesus is the image of the invisible God. And that is interesting because it's played against Exodus 20 where we're commanded, you may not make a graven image of God. Well, why? Well, because you cannot reduce God into anything that is in the world, yet here Jesus comes and he is the image of God. So right away we're struggling with these ideas because, well, we ourselves are image bearers. And so in many ways here in Jesus we find the, well, we find, and Jesus says it himself, the way to God. Jesus' witness must be people because nothing is as complex as people in this world. So last week, the Great Commission, you will be my witnesses even to the end of the age. The week before, you will be my witnesses. You will receive power from the Holy Spirit. This all comes together in us. Now the world is full of a lot of aspiring world changers and in my YouTube beat just this week a very interesting video on Game B where a group of very smart people were having meetings where they were trying to figure out what's wrong with the world and what kind of thing can we do that will save humanity from the kinds of impending doom that we see coming upon it. They had a series of meetings and then they stopped having meetings. Why? Because the group fell apart. Well, why did the group fell apart? Because there were factions. Well, one of the key lines of factions were between the group that said, first we must change ourself and then we can change institutions. And the other said, no, individuals are molded by institutions. So first let's change institutions and then we will change ourself. Look what Jesus did. Jesus changed the world more than any other person in all of human history. He did not do this with an army. He did not do this with a government. He did not do this by writing a book. He poured three years of his life into 12 disciples and another ring that might have been 75 or 120. He was hated enough. This man who the biggest violence we see from him is not turning over some tables in the temple. He didn't kill anyone. He didn't knife anyone. He didn't imagine a violent overthrow that justified bloodshed. None of that. But he was hated enough by both sides of a vicious culture war that he was brutally executed because of what he did and what he said. Now if you read Tom Holland's book, and I've had this light up in a variety of sermons, he makes the point that someone who dies the death of a slave cast as the maker and master of the world. Imagine you've got to write a story in which for the first time somebody who suffers the excruciating death of a slave is going to be cast as being in some way part of the creator god who's fashioned everything and he's got to be convincing not just to people now but for 2,000 years and across the span of the world. It's really an astonishing thing to have pulled off as a literary feat and four people did it in a very short span of time. And what holds those four people together? They're all writing the testimony of Jesus. Okay, now it's your turn. You. Well, we haven't had people sitting in these chairs and they're all nicely spaced apart and the Sunday after this one, Lord willing, I'll be giving the sermon from on stage and not hear from my chair in my office. Now it's your turn. Where do you begin? Now for some of you, that's a very new thing because you've just been exploring this thing. For others of you, you might have been living this thing your whole life for decades and you wonder what does this have to do with me? Well, the Apostles started right away and their disciples recognized the need for something written down, a testament, and they got the idea from, well, what God's people had done before, what Jesus had preached from before. So you have an Old Testament and a New Testament and they called it the Law and the Prophets. Then they looked at Jesus. Jesus went through the Galilee teaching in their synagogues, proclaiming the good news of the kingdom and healing every disease and sickness among the people. News about him spread all over Syria and people brought to him all who were ill with various diseases, those suffering severe pain, the demon possessed, those having seizures and the paralyzed and he healed them. Large crowds from Galilee, the Decapolis, Jerusalem, Judea, and the region across the Jordan followed him. Now when Jesus saw the crowds, he went up on a mountainside and sat down. His disciples came to him and he began to teach them and he said, blessed are the poor in spirit for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. Blessed are those who mourn for they will be comforted. Blessed are the meek for they will inherit the earth. Blessed are those who hunger and thirst for righteousness for they will be filled. Blessed are the merciful for they will be shown mercy. Blessed are the pure in heart for they will see God. Blessed are the peacemakers for they will be called children of God. Blessed are those who are persecuted because of righteousness for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. Blessed are you when people insult you, persecute you and falsely say all kinds of evil against you because of me. Rejoice and be glad because great is your reward in heaven for in the same way they persecuted the prophets who were before him. Now I talked about this back in February so we won't go into it much more deeply but right away there in the Beatitudes you have a sense of Jesus' power and authority and how people didn't quite know what to make of him but then when we listen to this we think well how am I supposed to do that? When I pray for people they don't suddenly become well. When I talk to people they don't pause and say wow, wow that changed me. When I do, how can I be his witness when I don't have the same effect on people that Jesus had? Well here we have the Sermon on the Mount. It's really his greatest hits album. We have the Beatitudes which I just read. Blessed are the poor in spirit and then he goes on, you are the light of the world. You're upping the stakes on me Jesus. Then he goes into the law on the Moses, the Old Testament and the New Testament and on one hand he says the law on the prophets won't pass away until they're all fulfilled and then he goes on to say you have heard it said of old but I say to you do not murder, I say watch your anger and then these three forms of righteousness, almsgiving, using your money to bless others and give to the poor and the Lord's Prayer and fasting and he says don't lay up treasures on earth where moth and rust go away, lay up treasures in heaven and then he says don't be anxious, don't worry about your body. You'll eat or sleep for the Gentiles do this. Eat first the kingdom of heaven and all these things will be added to you. That's what he says and then he says don't judge others, let you yourself be judged. Don't try to get that speck out of someone else's eye when you have a log in your own eye and he says ask and it will be given, seek and you will find, knock and the door will be opened and then he lays down the golden rule, treat others the way you want to be treated and then he says the good tree bears good fruit and the bad tree bad fruit. And then he says depart from me, I never knew you. If you say Lord, Lord, didn't we not see, didn't we not heal the sick and raise the dead, depart from me, I never knew you. But right away you see the problem. These two verses in the Gospel of Matthew are so rich, so jam packed, so powerful, so illuminating that even if I reduce them to bullet points, well I hit one and then as old, it wasn't Butter Bear, it was Butter Bur in the Tavern and in Bree in Lord of the Rings, one thing drives out another. My consciousness can't hold it and so, well can't we go through the sermon sequentially? We will, but here's the problem, it's one thing. And as you've known, sometimes if you look at one thing in particular, one tiny thing, it distorts your whole world because you see the whole world through that one thing. But then when you add other things, it comes together and our lives themselves are, we learn this, we learn that, we learn this, we learn that. Our lives themselves are these accumulations of things and we say, oh yeah, my father had an influence on me and my mother had an influence on me, but I'm not my father and I'm not my mother and my teachers had an influence on me, but I'm not my teachers. All of these things come together into one thing, into a person. Craig Bloomberg makes the observation, perhaps no other religious discourse in the history of humanity has attracted the attention which has been devoted to the Sermon on the Mount. Philosophers and activists from many non-Christian perspectives have refused to worship Jesus, nevertheless have admired his ethic. In the 20th century, Mahatma Gandhi was the sermon's most famous non-Christian devotee. The literature on the sermon is vast. The recent survey has itemized 36 different, really, schools of interpretation. Only eight of the most influential approaches can be listed here. Number one, in the medieval times, and I won't read the whole thing, but basically the Sermon on Mount said that's what monks and super Christians should do, but regular Christians can't do it. Have you ever heard that interpretation? I bet you have. Turn the other cheek. That's for super Christians, not regular Christians. Jesus doesn't say that. Luther says what the Sermon on the Mount does is intensifies the ways that we can't fulfill the law. Have you ever heard that approach to it? You've probably heard me say it. It's true. Do not murder. Don't even watch your anger. Do not commit adultery. Watch your lust. Well, now I can't even meet that standard. Many Anabaptists, that's like Mennonites, Amish, that group over there, applied the sermon's ethic to an extremely literal fashion, to their civil sphere and endorsed full-fledged pacifism. You can find them around. Protestant liberals, the mainline church, have seen the sermon as a paradigm for the social gospel and call the church to usher in the kingdom of God in this world, a view often adopted in secular forms by Karl Marx, except of course that road proved very, very violent. But you'll find liberal churches, churches that might not believe in the Trinity or the Resurrection, they'll say those things don't matter. It's what really matters are the glorious teaching. They appeal to it. Anabaptists have rejected any taking of the sermon's ethic as absolute, but view rather as a profound challenge to personal decisions, to live in the consciousness of human finitude and divine encounter. Albert Schweitzer said, well, all of them thought Jesus was coming back soon, so this can all be laid aside because it's impractical. Dispensation, listen, now it's going to really hit home for some of you because a lot of times Bible believing, which is the moniker for OK churches, many of those churches are dispensational. And if you actually sit down with someone who's been schooled in dispensationalism, they'll say, you know, all this stuff in the gospels, including the Sermon on the Mount, that's for a different dispensation. The only part of the New Testament that really has grip on us is the Pauline epistles because that was written to the church dispensation. And all the Reformed and Lutheran and Anabaptists and Catholics and Orthodox say, where did you get that idea? But you'll find it in some of your very evangelical Christian friends have this idea of it. And Bloomberg will go on to say all of this, you know, he synthesizes all of this, that's what he does. And he says, well, basically, all of these approaches contain elements of truth, but none of them seem fully satisfactory. Nothing in the sermon suggests that Jesus' commands are limited to only a certain group of followers. They're given to all the disciples. Questions of pacifism and just war, they're not really talked about there. Nothing nor does the sermon, nor does anything in the sermon suggest Jesus' commands are here, here are more or less absolute than any of the rest of his ethic, or that his teaching can be restricted to present norms or future possibilities. The types of society requiring commands against murder, adultery, divorce, and so on can hardly be described as millennial. But does that, but that does not mean that Jesus' vision is fully realize, realizable in this age. Finally, it is impossible to separate Jesus' ethics from allegiance to his person, as Marx and Gandhi tried, or to find any consistent form of application if one follows pure existentialism. In other words, we've been working this book, we've been working this sermon for 2,000 years, and it's the most famous sermon in all of human history. And we can't seem to capture it, or exhaust it, or reduce it to any body or school of belief that we know. It has to find its home in a person. Jesus didn't say, Jesus didn't say, this book will be my witness. You will be my witness, disciple, discipling you go, baptizing in the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, and teaching them to observe, to keep, to remember, to embody everything that I've commanded. Sermon on the Mount so often seems to make it worse. Fear, our panic, how can I be a Christian? Yet at the same time, many scholars have noted that the sermon is a clear unity with structure, focus and attention. We'll probably come back to this a number of times, this diagram, and some of you are looking at it and saying, I don't understand what this diagram means. Start at the top, go to the left, and go around the circle, you get all the way to the bottom and you're at the Lord's Prayer, and then you come up to the top and you see each is parallel around it. Well, what does that mean? That means that the very center of this sermon that has puzzled the brightest minds of all of human history is the simplest, most memorized prayer that Christians have ever known. Okay, Pastor, if there's something wrong with Paul VanderKlay as a preacher, it's that he's way too complicated. His sermons are way too disorienting. Pastor, can you just please tell me what to do? This sermon is for you. I'm going to tell you what to do. Start by asking. What? Start by asking. Asking who? Asking God. Asking it will be given to you, seeking you will find, knocking the door will be opened to you, for everyone who asks receives, and the one who seeks finds, and the one who knocks it will be opened. For which of you, if his son asks him for bread, will give him a stone? Or if he asks for a fish, will give him a serpent? If you then who are evil know how it is to give good gifts to your children, how much more will your Father who is in heaven give good gifts to those who ask him? Also start by asking. Because this is finally the work of God's Spirit. Because you are finally a tool, not for your own self-salvation plan, although God is saving you, but for God's world plan. There's no division between fixing the world first and fixing yourself first. God fixes both at the same time. That's the work that he's doing. So start by asking. And then you say, I don't know how to talk to God. I've never done it. Or maybe you've been trying to do it all your life and you say, I don't feel very powerful at prayer. Well, Jesus will tell you what to do. When you pray, you must not be like the hypocrites, the people who say one thing and do another. Although, we will do that. For they love to stand and pray in the synagogues and on the street corners that they may be seen by others. Don't use prayer as a show. Truly I say to you, they have received their reward. But when you pray, go into your room and shut the door and pray to your Father who is in secret. And your Father who sees in secret will reward you. And when you pray, do not heap up empty phrases as the Gentiles do, for they think that they will be heard for their words. In other words, there's no magic words here. There's no special Christiany language. There's no repetition. You've heard Christians do that. I know you have. But Jesus says, don't worry about it. That's not the way. Do not be like them, for your Father knows what you need before you ask it. In other words, it's not about the asking that gets you what you need. It's prayer is not magical summoning. Pray then like this. Our Father in heaven, hallowed be your name. Your kingdom come, your will be done, on earth as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread and forgive us our debts, as we have also forgiven our debtors. And lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil. And that's it. Now, we've sort of tailored it a little bit in some of our things to include some things like, well, for thine is the kingdom and the power and the glory forever. Amen. And then Jesus continues, if you forgive others their trespasses, your heavenly Father will also forgive you. But if you do not forgive others their trespasses, neither will your Father forgive your trespasses. So right away, he connects prayer to life. Don't worry about the prayers you've seen done by others. Some of those are done for show. And if you can't think of the words to say, here are words you can use. Use these words. Maybe they're the only words you know. Maybe that's the only way you know how to pray. You can do far worse than sticking to these words. They're not magic words, but start with these words and then maybe at the end of it, you'll have a little something else to say. And just leave it there. For your Father knows what you need and will give you what you need. He's your Father. Remember the ask part? You've noticed I've reversed the order. Now, well shouldn't I do something? Yeah, you should. Start with love. So whatever you wish that others would do to you, do also to them. Enter into the narrow gate, for the gate is wide and easy that leads to destruction, and those who enter it are many. For the gate is narrow and the way is hard that leads to life, and those who find it are few. Love your enemies. Love those who persecute you. This is what Jesus says. And I know you're going to say, but it's really hard and I'm really bad at it and I'll fail. Yes you will. That's okay. Because by doing it, by learning it, by trying it, you will learn it and bit by bit by bit that discipleship that Jesus was talking about, that will come to you. Right away you might say, well I need to be around others who are doing this. I need to be around others who are teaching me. Yes you do. And that's why the church is there. The church is in some ways a sandbox where you practice these things. Well you say, well the church is full of people that's hard to love. Well that's exactly what you need around you. And around you though in church there are also guides and helpers who are maybe a little further along in the journey than you are. That's the place to be. Try loving those people who are hard to love. Who they might be Christian in all the most painful ways, but they're in the church. You'll have a chance to try to love them. And I didn't include it yet in our sermon today, but always remember the logical order of your rescue. Misery. You'll keep rehearsing misery, trust me. Deliverance. It is God who saves you through Jesus Christ. That's the deliverance. You don't save yourself. And then gratitude. All of this hard effort that you'll put forward, gratitude should be the motivating parts. Gratitude should be the peace that comes forward. Now in the next few weeks there'll be more to come. In this sermon I wanted us to see the sermon as such. I wanted us to see the sermon in all of its parts, both as a greatest hits list of some of the most memorable things and important things Jesus gave to us and wanted us to embody and act out in the world, but also this unifying whole that boils down into the simplest of things in coming to God and asking and saying, I don't know how to ask. Here are the words. Would you say them with me? Our Father in heaven, hallowed be your name, your kingdom come, your will be done, on earth as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread, and forgive us our debts as we forgive our debtors. And lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil, for thine is the kingdom and the power and the glory forever and ever. Amen.