https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=v4WWw3jTi1I

 Hi, this is Paul. Eric Weinstein's back on Lex Fridman, I think, for the fourth time, and I've not quite listened to the whole thing, but I was listening to part of it today, and part of it really caught my attention. Now, there's a number of things. This is sort of classic Eric Weinstein. His portal has sort of stopped. He's been doing other interviews around. I know some of you really love Eric, and some of you are really annoyed by Eric, because you've told me so. But it's very interesting listening to him again, and especially watching the dynamics between him and Lex Fridman. I've only watched a few Lex Fridman interviews, and I haven't quite got a beat on Lex Fridman yet, because he's a good interviewer. He lets his guests speak. Very interesting, fairly early on, very interesting comments Eric made about the government. He's like, well, the government, we haven't had a government since the Second World War, because that's when the government all sort of comes together. And it's very interesting, sort of a one consciousness thing that the U.S. government would be able to see and know and manage and do something in an organized way. And this, for Eric, is something that the government has lost. But then he sort of turns around and keeps talking about him and the government, and sort of keeps talking in that way. There are a lot of different interesting aspects to that whole way of speaking for me, given a lot of the thinking we've done about distributed consciousness. So what does all this language mean? The government knows you, the government doesn't know you. In a sense, if you get a speeding ticket, the government knows you, because of course the government is distributed in many vast things, and it's distributed in terms of law and in terms of money and in terms of identity, which goes beyond law and money. And so again, pushing back on sort of this naturalistic, physicalistic imagination that the only agents that we have are human beings. To what degree is the government an agent? Is Uncle Sam real enough that you pay your taxes to him? So a lot of interesting sort of back and forth on the government and a lot of inconsistency. But I always find Eric interesting to listen to. And then he gets into cancel culture, and this too is interesting, because it's a lot of they and a lot of them, and people are talking behind the scenes, and there's gatekeeping, and a lot of this, and it's like, well, okay, is that a principality? Or is it a conspiracy? And to a certain degree, I think we tend to notice that if you read, oh, who did he have on his? He had a, I'll have to look it up, Ryan Holiday. He had Ryan Holiday on his podcast, and Ryan Holiday had written a very interesting book about Peter Thiel and the conspiracy that Peter Thiel pulled off. And if we define conspiracy in sort of those tight terms, no, cancel culture probably isn't the subject of a conspiracy or a network of conspiracies. When you're sort of limiting it according to secularist rules that we have, we identify persons and agents as discrete individuals, or maybe a conspiracy of named people, but rather instead, there is a sort of sense of a collective consciousness, collective implicit agreements. You know, you may never find Verizon and AT&T and T-Mobile getting together around a table to fix prices, because, well, that would be against antitrust laws, but they do have eyes to see, and they can look up the other person's prices, and they can say, well, let's be a little bit more or a little bit less than our competition, and, oh, let's all sort of hover around the same price in terms of what we get for our cell phone service, you know, things like that, where, you know, what's behind all this canceling and cancel culture that's going on? But the most interesting part of the video so far was sort of the session on reputational attack. And so I do want to get into some of that. You and I are meant to produce public goods. Now, I sell. And again, meant agency. Athletic Greens, and I sell Theragun, and I sell Unagi scooters. Those are the sponsors. I shouldn't laugh too hard. I don't have any, so, except you all. And Chili Pat. I gotta be honest, I love these products, but I didn't get. No FU money in those products. Into this game for the purpose of selling. I'm trying to figure out how do you have an FU lifestyle? This is just fascinating. Because, of course, if he were to have an FU lifestyle, like Kim and Kanye, who are now split up, who if we were to have an FU lifestyle, maybe like, like Bono selling Apple. See, this is where, again, I think principalities and powers talk in the New Testament sort of rings true. Because, well, do Apple and Google really collude in terms of in terms of what? There's a very interesting article on the dispatch words as weapons, how activist journalists are changing the New York Times. And it goes through this whole strange episode of the New York Times reporter. Was it John McNeil, who brought a group of Donald McNeil Jr. who, you know, you get the sense that here's a guy that's worked forever at the paper and, you know, the people who are running the paper are not heartless machines here. This guy's put in his time. He's been a faithful employee. So send him down with the kids to South America. And, well, one of the one of the 17 year olds in South America, you know, they're sort of the romance of this reporter. You know, he's a gum shoe. He's he's dismissive. Now he's in his 60s. He's a little cynical and, well, he got in trouble. Just whole ranges of ideas came off this this article for me in terms of in terms of how many cultural things. Well, here's his description of what happened. I was at I was asked at dinner by a student whether I thought a classmate of hers should have been suspended for a video she had made as a 12 year old in which she used a racial slur. So it's probably four or five years in the past. And so here's a group of high school students going to a very, very exclusive academy. So these are, you know, these are these are really elite people that these people are going on this little New York Times trip to South America to see Machu Picchu with this old gum shoe. And so they're probably, you know, a little in awe of him and yada yada yada, but not not to annoy him, not to in or not to attempt to improve his morality. So they want him to weigh in on whether a 12 year old classmate should be canceled because or a classmate should be canceled because of a video they made five years ago potentially where they used a racial slur. To understand what was in the video, I asked if she had called someone else the slur or whether she was wrapping or quoting a book title wrapping or quoting gives you an idea of probably what the slur was and asking the question I use the slur itself. Now this of course takes on monumental proportions. Well it gets reported to the Times. The Times does a little investigation. They slap his hand. Everything's okay. But then they can sign this guy to the biology desk. And of course what comes on in late 2019 and early 2020 but the pandemic. And well now on February 5 reports emerged that McNeil had left the company and Baquet Baquet sent a staff a memo that indicated if not a change then a change in policy. We do not tolerate racist language regardless of intent. Apparently no matter where it's said or no matter how it's said. Well then you have this green behind the ears reporter at a competing publication decides they're going to go through these high profile reporters other high profile reporters in the Times and look through their social media see what he can find. Sibarian, a Yale grant, so a lot of elites in this story, thought the Times was making up policy as it went along. Maybe to appease those staff who increasingly demanded that stories and colleagues be examined and evaluated through the lens of race. So he decided to fact check Baquet's statement to see whether Times writers had used the N word in print or on social media. After finding numerous instances Sibarian told his editor he thought the misalignment between what Baquet said and what staff did worth writing about and there was a double standard there because hypocrisy. What book was it by? Anyway. There's a double standard there. She encouraged him to find out. One person Sibarian sought out was Nicole Hannah Jones, the force behind the Times 1619 project, which in the words of the Times aims to reframe the country's history by placing the consequences of slavery and the contributions of black Americans at the very center of our national narrative and for which Hannah Jones had been awarded a Pulitzer Prize in 2020. It was a bit of a pointed request but I did my best to be respectful, Sibarian told me, in his email to Hannah Jones who was black asking if she could comment on the Times policy when you yourself have used the same slur McNeil did, albeit in non-derogatory context. He issued a screenshot of a 2016 tweet in which Hannah Jones used the N word as both its, er, and ah endings and sent emails asking for comment to the Times reporter Ashteed Herdan and Baquet, both of whom are also black. Sibarian included his personal cell phone number. I kind of expected they wouldn't reply to it. Then Saturday night I got this call. Before then he talks a little bit about his background. He considered himself a conservative, you know, they're holding the phone call. He had been through the Yale stuff with Nicholas Christakis and all that stuff that happened. And so then he gets a phone call. And the phone call is a threatening phone call from someone who now has his, how now has his phone number? Well, how did they get his phone number? Well, the cell phone leaves, picked up and the guy said, leave Nicole Hannah Jones the F alone. Then he used the N word. Recalled Sibarian. I was like, what's going on? And then he checked Twitter. It had been several hours since Sibarian sent Hannah Jones his request. She could have ignored it, shot back, no comment or agreed to have Sibarian's question. Instead Hannah Jones, who had more than half a million Twitter followers, posted his email, which included his phone number with the comments, is apparently trying to scour black New York Times employees' Twitter accounts to find them using the N word in response to Don McNeil's resignation, which is asinine on its face, but also, homie, I don't use the N word casualty, casually, as if McNeil did. Now, whether or not she had any understanding of what McNeil did or didn't do. So this all came up with reference to a screenshot. Keep trying though. And well, then of course you're going to have the Twitter pile on. And now suddenly the Times is in the crosshairs and well, she sort of expresses some regret in one particular interview. And then it goes on. It's a good article. It's in the Dispatch. What are we getting into? We're getting into reputational assassination. And this isn't even reputational assassination because from what I read, nobody's actually calling each other a racist there. They've just spoken the deplorable word and the whole country has sort of lost its stuff over this. And wow. Well, what's going on here? Reputational attack. This is the order of the day. And I'll put a link to this article in the notes here. Oh, back to the back to Eric Weinstein. But you know something, Lex? I don't know why you built this channel. It's kind of a mystery. I don't know why. I'll tell you why I built my channel. It's going to be a lot harder to roll me this time. When did he get rolled? I'm not saying it didn't happen. I'm just curious. And what does he mean by that? I think he means that the powers that be pushed him around, just like the powers that be. You know, talk about a power inversion. You have the Pulitzer Prize winning writer who wrote the 1619 project that changed the conversation on race for at least a year or two with a half million Twitter followers who rolled over on this 18 year old newbie reporter. And yeah, I mean, Eric has a point. People get rolled. And fortunately, we do live in a country which, okay, free speech means the government can't get you for speech. But as Eric makes the point in this, we now have other non-governmental agents that in some ways function. Why is it that the president of the United States, the one that just left office, used Twitter the way he did? Is Twitter more powerful than the presidency of the United States? I don't know how many Twitter followers Donald Trump had, but well, there's power. There's power there. And Eric Weinstein says, why did I start my channel? Why do I have the portal? Why do why am I famous? I don't want to get rolled in an alley. Yeah, I got rolled multiple times. And my point is, I didn't want to become a celebrity. I didn't want to become well known. But it's a lot harder to roll somebody who's getting, you know, I think I'm I don't know if this is mistaken, but I think I'm the math PhD with the largest number of followers on Twitter. And there was nothing you could do before. Now, that's also interesting because there's lots of people who have way more followers than him on Twitter. Donald Trump had way more followers. Jordan Peterson has more followers, but celebrities have more followers. And what what what game are we playing and what power do we have? And it's a math PhD. But if you follow his Twitter followings like I do, he doesn't tweet much about math. He's this he's about saving the world. That's that's what we're about here. I mean, again, to put a little responsibility on you. So you've created something really special for the distribution of your own ideas. I mean, but because it's not necessarily currently scalable, you also perhaps you and I have the responsibility of giving other people also a chance to spread their ideas. I mean, your morality. And what's interesting about that that dispatch article is gave me a lot of thoughts about how does morality work? Because do we really sort of have a set of rules or we just have a set of we watch each other and things are always calibrating. And then when we think we have a rule or catch someone in a rule or someone has offended us or we go after someone, all of these rules sort of come up. But they're not really held in rules. What are they held in? Where where where does this morality come from? Rogan did this very effectively for a bunch of people that that's why they're angry at him because he's a gatekeeper and he let all sorts of people through that gate from Roger from our. OK, who's angry at him? Well, they OK. Well, have all of these people sort of like Verizon and T-Mobile and ATT got in a room and did price fixing. Did they all get in a room and say Joe Rogan? No, it's not. It's not that it's it's probably more the same kind of rules that that that they're trying to. OK, well, well, this word is not to be used regardless of intent. So the huck fin has to go away. OK, and I actually had a lot of thought about this thinking about making a video about basically how to strangle a word. Because here's the thing, if you just keep saying the n word or the s word or the f word or the a word or the b word or or the c word. And I was trying to think how many letters of the alphabet can I go? Can I find a letter that I can't say the x word? Can I find a letter that doesn't have a word? And if you're a child or a language learner, you come into this and you say, oh, the n word. And now very quickly, if you're actually successful at smuggling and strangling the word so that it's the deplorable word is never to be spoken, then then the n word now becomes the n word or the x word or the a word or the f word. And and it just keeps going back. And we saw that with imbecile, with moron, with retarded that this is sort of the way the development of language goes. And and there's also sort of an infantilization of this here because and sometimes I'll have that when I was a Spanish language learner. I mean, people would be talking and be like, what what what what what what is these words? And actually, as a language as a adult, as a far as an adult language learner, you very quickly learn all the words you're not supposed to say. You don't you don't know the bad words are you just you just, you know, if you learn the language the way I did, the language the way I did, which is sort of just kind of out there in the open, you start saying these words and then the Christians around you would look at you like, oh, oh, oh, missionary, you're not supposed to say a word like that. Well, how did I know? I heard everybody else using it. I just used it too. But here we are playing these little language games. And so, you know, Eric Weinstein, he wants to figure out how to get FU money. And yeah, I don't think those sponsors are going to cut it because those sponsors don't have FU money. I don't know who any of them are. You know, you want Apple and Google and Microsoft and you want deep pockets and big money to get that FU money or, you know, and it's probably just later in life because of course Peter Thiel got his at a certain moment at a certain place in time. But you're doing this so you won't get rolled. Roger Penrose to Alex Jones, to Jordan Peterson, to, I mean, even first of all, to you, to Abby Martin, to Barry Weiss. Yeah. That's the problem. Well, but you have not successfully built up a thing that allows that to carry that forward. No, no, no, no, no. Well, I think his last one was December. We are all vulnerable to reputational attack. Oh, this is interesting because now we're back into morality. Now we're back into sort of this, this unseen world in which, well, morality in terms of whom? Well, in terms of sort of the zeitgeist in terms of, it's just so interesting because it's all a gentrified all over the place. Because what happens, you see, the problem Lex is, is that you are now an institution at some level. You walk around with all this equipment in a duffle bag. And I wondered, cause he always just shows up and like, he's looked like he's in some hotel room and he must have the little, the black curtains and he's got his equipment and Hey, Lex has done a great job in his channel. Certainly got way more subs than me. The last suit you'll ever need. And I think it's great actually. You have the reach of something like CNN to people who matter. Okay. So now the question is how do we control something that doesn't have a board, doesn't have shareholders, doesn't have to make it SEC filing the FCC. So, so, so they, is the government, they as a system, they, they, they, who's, who's this? They it's, it's, can you put names on them or is it, is it actually a whole set of implicit agreements? In fact, conflicted over agreements of people that, well, here's the Overton window and you know, all these, all these terms we have for using it, that's they, the best answer they have is, well, we just have to destroy reputations. All it takes is for us to take something that gets said or done or alleged. And I think it's incredibly important. One of the things people don't understand is, is that I'm, I'm going to fight general reputational attacks, not because some people don't deserve to have their reputation. Now what's really interesting is that I think it's in the middle of here. Yeah, it's, this is a whole section about Jeffrey Weinstein, Jeffrey Epstein. Well, Jeffrey Epstein, what is he known for? Well, him and underage girls and Bill Clinton and Donald Trump and an island and private planes. And, and you know, I've listened to enough Eric to say, Hey, fair enough. There's a lot of, I got a lot of questions about Jeffrey Epstein and what the real deal with that is. And I meant, it may never find out. And, and all of that, but reputational attack, that's the thing. That's it. That's the thing to fear. I was, I was listening to, I was listening to a little bit of, of Greg Lowry and, and James, oh gosh, she's been on my channel. James Lindsay that, that, and they were, and James Lindsay was talking about what the stuff he had in his book and, and see, I shouldn't write a book because then I can get on the big shows. James was talking about, you know, the, the, the origins of critical race theory. And I thought, you know, the, and he had a fairly short list of names. It's like, you know, these, this list of names, they changed the world quickly. A lot of these people are still alive. And their ideas just sort of whooshed through the culture. And now they had been out there in other forms before, but, you know, in the last, in the last eight years, these things just sort of whooshed through the culture as morality. And they have, they have re-bent it and they have, you know, changed presidents. And well, that gets into the question as to whether these people, mostly women, these women had ideas or did the ideas have them and where exactly are these ideas? All these ideas are living in our heads. Okay. Well, you think about something like world of warcraft or, okay, where does world of warcraft live? Well, it lives on a server. Well, does it really live on a server or is it really sort of between servers and, and, and world of warcraft is just sort of all over the world at once, isn't it? And so what are we really talking about here? Because Eric and Brad are fighting as best they can against this thing that went whoosh through the culture. And, you know, you can, whatever the names of the people that James Lindsay was talking about in his book review to, to Greg Lowry. And if I mentioned those names to me, it's, oh yeah, those are the ones, but I don't, I don't care who they are really so much. Maybe I should, I don't know. But, but there it is. Those ideas just went whoosh and they have captured, they have captured a moment. They have captured an age and we see that all the time. Ideas go through, songs go through, sentiments go through, moral systems go through, and the whole world is aligned and changed by them. And, you know, Eric wants enough money so that he can't get rolled. And, well, I don't know, that's, some would say Donald Trump got rolled. Donald Trump has billions of dollars, supposedly. He was president of the United States. He got rolled. If you read back over history, I, again, this video that I made, but didn't make or didn't release or only half made, you know, William Jennings Bryan, look him up. He was a very big deal. He was dealing with evolution and he was, of course, one of the, one of the people who was there at the Scopes trial. And, you know, what exactly was being, what exactly was being worked on in the Scopes trial? Just look that up. The world is a very strange place. And, you know, you want F you money to not be rolled, but, you know, we're all vulnerable to this, to this reputational assassination, but the reputational assassination is all just built on this morality. And, well, patients dropped, dragged through the mud, but because it's too powerful of a tool to hand it to CNN, MSNBC, Princeton, Harvard, the state department. Yes. But it's, some of it is also JP Morgan, Muhammad Ali style, being good enough at uh, doing everything you need to do without giving enough meat for the reputational attacks, not being afraid, but not giving enough meat. I don't see why the people who have good ideas have to lead lives that are that clean. If you can do it, you can be messy. Yeah. You should be able to be messy that otherwise we're, we're suppressing too many people, too many, two billion minds. Yeah. Can you believe Elon Musk smoked a blunt? I still, people tell me this. They, okay. I have discussions about Elon and people, uh, the, can you believe Jeffrey, Jeffrey Epstein had sex with underage girls? Can you believe Tiberius? Look up, look up the, the rest we are, the rest is history. Uh, Tom Holland talking about Tiberius and the reputational hit job that was done on Tiberius, the kind of power Tiberius had. And a lot of you don't even know who I'm talking about with the terms of Tiberius. He was the, he was the Roman emperor when Jesus lived. Okay. And, and Suetonius, what Suetonius wrote about Tiberius, I think it's Suetonius. You know, this is a very old game and well, maybe we should keep our noses clean. No, we're, we're not going to do that, but there's an implicit list of rules on one side or another with respect to smoke and pot acceptable, having sex with a 16 year old girl, unacceptable. Well, what about 200 years ago? What about, I mean, when I was in the Dominican Republic, check that off on your bingo thing. I once had a conversation. I told this story before, maybe I'm getting old and maybe I'm repeating myself. Told a story about the, the woman who worked in the missionary guest house. She was a full-time employee and she lived in the house and she cooked and cleaned and kept it there. And we missionaries would come and go. It was a way for the mission not to spend money on hotel rooms. When we went to the capital city and I asked her one day, just that some questions about her life. And she said, I got married when I was 10, 10. Yeah. 10 years old. She was married when she was 10 years old, probably to a much older man. So where are the lines? Where's morality or there's morality? Again, these, the critical race people just sort of this moral system just whooshed through our country, just whooshed through our consciousness. And it's dividing the church and it's dividing the government and people are rising and falling. Where is this housed? It's not, you know, it's, it's more, it's similar to something like world of warcraft than something that's in the national archive under glass. World is a very strange place and what's going on. And so, okay, reputational, reputational damage, attack someone's reputation. No. And actually Eric Weinstein will say some very Calvinist things in this video. Avi Loeb, the Harvard scientist. I love that interview. He's talking about Amoamua that it might be alien technology. He told me his, this outside the box thinker. Yeah. When speaking to me about Elon said, called him the guy who smoked, he smokes weed. Why would he do that? Well, because he's working on a slightly different moral framework than obviously Eric Weinstein. Now, if a Christian reform minister comes on the Joe Rogan and smoke some weed with Joe Rogan, if Christian foreign minister goes on Joe Rogan and well, Christian foreign minister can't have some, can't have some, can't have some whiskey. I won't. Christian foreign minister can drink. Christian foreign minister smoked some dope on Joe Rogan. Probably not. It's all these different frameworks. And now in a sense, what Friedman does right here, what Lex does right here is sort of says, well, Avi Loeb is sort of behind the barrel. So all the cool kids are down with weed, but not down with, you know, old guys sleeping with teenage girls or being uptight about weed. Those, those things are outside. The blunt in a dismissive way. Like this guy's crazy because he smoked some weed. I was looking at him. I was like, why? Wow. Wow. I don't think he expressed that in the interview. Of course not, but that's what he thought. So fine. And there's, there's interesting dynamics between Eric Weinstein and Les Friedman. It's very interesting watching the, the subtle ways that these two relate to each other. I think you should be able to have consensual drug filled orgies. Fuck perfect lives. Yeah. Consensual drug filled or Caligula, Nero. Should be allowed to be messy. Yeah, right. I take back my statement. I'm messy. I'm just saying respectability is the unique prison where all of the gates are open and the inmates begged to stay inside. It's time to end their prison of respectability because it's too effective of a means of sidelining and silencing people. And this is sort of where he's a Calvinist because now we're all centers. And so, but again, there are boundaries and what's interesting about Eric is that he, he, so he talks so cavalierly in some of these ways, but then he will very quickly. Well, there's, he's, these are these other people behind, beyond the pale and I won't talk to this person. I don't want to respect for this murder. These are my group of friends. And, and again, I'm not, I'm not criticizing this. We all have this, but in a sense, he's just saying, we're not going to have this system. Okay. Fair enough. And we can have a, okay. Pot is okay. 16 year old girls on your private Island, not okay. There's, there's that rule. Okay. Who makes the rules? How do the rules? Well, it seems like these women had these ideas and they go whoosh throughout the country. And now this one 60 some year old reporter, when some 17 year old girl comes up to him and asks his advice on a classmate who made a video four or five years ago, where they had a racial slur in it and should, should this girl be canceled? And then apparently the kids in the class are hearing the man use the word chastise him. And he kind of looked at them like, you know, but no, they were right because whoosh, they're standing in the, they're standing in the moral river. They're, they're wielding the moral fire hose. And so, you know, all fairness to Eric Weinstein, I, I agree in many ways with what he's saying here. People are going to be people, but there's always boundaries and Eric has those boundaries. And the longer he talks, the more you'll hear his boundaries. And so the question is, well, where is these boundaries and how to navigate these boundaries? And, and maybe it's just sort of a hopeless thing, including it is better that we have bad people in our system than this idea of no platforming people who are beyond the pale because it's such a simple technique. So how do we, uh, what's the, so it's better if it's a hard technique. No, it's, but again, I generally agree with them here. Or action here on the, well, for example, having Ashley Matthews on my program, by the way, she was absolutely, um, delightful as a guest. She was, I didn't know who she was until he kept talking about her. Anyway, but I thought of this partly because I was working on my, I was working on my sermon this week and my sermon is actually, well, before we get there, I want to play a little bit of Eric and Jesus because this came up in the doubt that conversation, which I thought was, was outstanding. And if I can pull up the right window live here, here it is. Jesus appeared now before us that we would memeify him within minutes, that he would be cheapened by virtue of interacting with, uh, the virtue of believing that Jesus was actually the son of God is that I think he's immune to memeification. You do. Yes. Well, wasn't he humiliated in the streets of Jerusalem by, uh, people who did not accept his being the son of God in your, in your eyes. Right there, right there, right there is it. Was any humiliated? Yeah. In fact, they killed him. Well, do you understand the resurrection as physical or symbolic? Well, actually on this score now, again, you've heard me on lots of other scores about the physical resurrection of Jesus. The physical actually validates the symbolic because, well, what about Jesus? And this is where we sort of get into Eric's whole thing that Eric and Brett are trying to save the world. And the way to save the world for Eric is to get that F you money and well, and then to have ideas about, well, you can have your, your mendacity budget and you know, all of these other, you can have a certain amount of sin in your life and you can have a budget. Okay. Well, who gets to set the budget? Obviously Jeffrey Epstein, he's outside the budget, but Elon Musk is inside the budget. And if you get F you money, if you get enough staff and you get enough power, you can get away with it. And basically when I hear that, that's the Roman empire. That's the system the world has always used. This is, as Christians say, the way of the world. And what's, I'd like to sort of turn Ross Douthat's observation around. Let me play that again. It's such a great clip. So his actual citizenship looks like, um, don't you feel like if Jesus appeared now before us, that we would memeify him within minutes, that he would be cheapened by virtue of interacting with, uh, the virtue of believing that Jesus was actually the son of God is that I think he's immune to memeification. And I want to turn that around because you sort of know he's the son of God. And if you think he's the son of God, you might suspect he's the son of God because he transcend memeification. And again, Jesus is reliably memed all over the place. Look at any kind of comic, look at how many YouTube debaters, you know, again and again and again. Now there's still in our culture, a fair number of people sort of show deference to Jesus Christ, even if they're not a theist or not a Christian or, or spiritual, but not religious. And there are other people who will just sort of laugh it off and, and dismiss it and all of that. But look at, look at Jesus did this without F you money at his execution. And it's the whole point of his execution. In fact, and again, I'd love someone to comment on this if I'm wrong. I mean, the, the point of, of Islam, not accepting Jesus death is that in their opinion, God wouldn't let such a thing happen to one of his prophets, which is exactly the point of the story. And again, Tom Holland gets this point. It's the point of the story that they, you know, they cast lots because the one had one garment that they didn't think to, didn't think to tear up, which in according, according to our would be world would be something like a tablecloth. You didn't have F you money. Well, then how in fact, did he succeed? Now my text this week is Luke chapter 13 and some of the verses out of Luke 13, but of course it follows on Luke chapter 12. In the meantime, there are so many thousands of people had gathered together. This is so Jesus can't get rolled. That's, that's the crazy thing that Jesus had gathered thousands of people. And the way that you, the way that you save your people in that day was you gather thousands of people and you start getting swords and you, you mobilize these people and you turn these people into an army and you use those people so that you can't get rolled. And of course, if you believe the statements of the gospels that Jesus has, not just F you money, but F you power, you know, if you can still a storm, you can make a storm. If you can raise the dead with the word, you can make an army dead with a word. I mean, Jesus with that kind of power. So meanwhile, when a crowd of many thousands had gathered so that many were trampling one another, Jesus began to speak first to his disciples saying, be on your guard against the yeast of the Pharisees, which is hypocrisy. Jesus is not following Eric Weinstein's script here. Eric Weinstein says, don't worry about your reputation. And Jesus sort of does that. Jesus isn't worried about his reputation, but he is conscious about his behavior. So be on your guard against the yeast of the Pharisees, which is hypocrisy. And now the church, the church will be, the church's hypocrisy will be exposed. My hypocrisies will be exposed. All of our hypocrisies will be exposed, but Jesus says, we'll be on your guard against them. There's nothing concealed that will not be disclosed or hidden that will not be made known. What you have said in the dark will be heard in the daylight. What you have whispered in the ear in the inner room will be proclaimed on the rooftops. Well, so this Donald McNeil, on this trip down to Peru, when asked about whether the little click of girls at some elite school should cancel another one of their members, because when she was 12 years old, she made a video with a racial slur. And Donald McNeil says, well, you know, exactly what word did she say? Oh, Donald, you're going to get canceled. I tell you, my friends, do not be afraid of those who kill the body. And after that, can do no more. You're going to get rolled. But I will show you who you should fear. Fear him who after your body has been killed has authority to throw you into hell. Well, we don't talk that way in a secular culture, do we? Yes, I tell you, fear him. And now again, if you listen to Eric Weinstein, there's a degree in which this makes sense in Eric's world, but another way in which it doesn't. Okay, notice how in secularity, we're just sort of on the cusp there that you don't really, you don't really get away from it. Anyway, this whole chapter 12 is full of, gosh, I could just read it. I mean, Jesus is so just so astoundingly readable, especially if you understand the culture, because Jesus is in the middle of a really vicious culture war. And when Jesus is out there teaching, everybody's watching, because thousands are watching him. And so they've all got their, they've all got their cell phones out and they're taking video of him and they're going to, you know, they're going to take memes and they're going to, of course, they're going to take you know, they're going to take memes and they're going to, of course, they don't have cell phones, they don't have anything, but this is what's going to happen. And in some ways, what are the gospels? The gospels, the synoptic gospels are the memes of Jesus captured on Twitter and Facebook and Instagram. That's, that's exactly what it is. But before you have this, are not five sparrows sold for two pennies? Yeah, not one of them is forgotten by God. Indeed, the very hairs of your head are all numbered. So don't be afraid. You're worth more than, than many sparrows. I tell you, whoever publicly acknowledges me before others, the Son of Man will acknowledge before the angels of God. Of course, the Son of Man is the, the title that Jesus appropriates himself out of Daniel 7. And then he goes on, he has the barn builder, do not worry about your life. Solomon and all his clothes and this beautiful, do not be afraid little flock for your father has been pleased to give you the kingdom, sell your possessions and give to the poor. It's not quite the F you money. Provide persons for yourselves that will not wear out a treasure in heaven that will never fail. See, here's the thing. If Eric wants F you money and Apple comes a knocking, what's he going to say? Because the conspiracy, the they and the them, it's a conspiracy of money. It's a conspiracy of power. It's a conspiracy of people who have gotten around a certain table. And so once you get around that certain table and Eric might say, if I get around that table, then I will never, okay, well, maybe not, but you might be kicked off the table, at least if you listen to your own words about they and them. I have come to bring fire to the earth and how I wish it were already kindled, Jesus says, but I have a baptism to undergo. That's his losing. That's where they're going to split up the not F you money that Jesus has. Do you think I came to bring peace on earth? No, I tell you, but division from now on, there will be five in one family divided against each other, three against two and two against three. There will be divided father against son and son against father, mother against daughter and daughter against mother, mother-in-law against daughter-in-law and daughter-in-law against mother-in-law. He said to the crowd, when you see a crowd rising in the West, immediately you say it's going to rain and it does. And when this and the south wind blows, you say it's going to be hot and it is hypocrites. You know how to interpret the appearance of the earth and the sky. How is it you don't know how to interpret the presence, the present time? So they're in the middle of this raging culture war. Now there were some present or just came there at that moment that told Jesus about Galileans whose blood pilot had mixed with their sacrifices. Now what's interesting about this is in the middle of a culture war and Jesus, well, you know, sort of like Eric Weinstein or Jordan Peterson or one of these characters, there's a little bit, they're not, they're not really, it's not Donald Trump and it's not Joe Biden and it's not McConnell and it's not Schumer and Pelosi. People, of course, well, where is Jordan Peterson? Is he on one side or another? Kind of hard to tell. Well, but you do know, you're coming and you know, so-and-so just did something and pilot. Now all of us may be a little divided amongst each other, but we're all against pilot. Okay. That's, you know, we want to see the Romans out and, and that petty puppet pilot, we want him out. And, and pilot was so horrible as to have his soldiers, you know, kill some Galileans even while they were performing their sacrifices. Now one of my favorite go-to books on the Gospels are, are a bunches of books by a scholar named Kenneth Bailey and Kenneth Bailey lived for years in Lebanon and he was lived for years in Lebanon during the Civil War. And I think in a lot of ways that, that influenced his, his reading of the Gospel. He talks here about civil and national violence spawns incredible rumors. One real massacre is enough to create stories about 10 others. The present writer has recently completed 18 months of agonizing with the Lebanese people in the Civil War of 1974 and 1975. The war was sparked by a massacre of 28 on a bus on the outskirts of Beirut. From that time on endless stories of massacres, some fact and some fiction were rampant all across the land. Such stories serve as a function as in a community of war. The teller and the listener are emotionally stirred to a point of rage that can then motivate them to, to, to heroism and retaliation. Go to that building and, and you're going to have to fight or you're not going to have a government, whichever way you want to hear that. But woe to be the listener who dares to ask, have you checked your sources? Or, or who says, do not forget our hands are not clean either. All such talk is considered disloyal and the one who dares express such sentiments can expect a verbal, if not physical attack. And this is actually exactly what Eric Weinstein is talking about. And in many ways, Eric Weinstein is asking that people kind of step back and at least have a conversation. But, but all of the dynamics are there, right? On both sides, right? Don't we see it all the time? The brief report in the text has all the characteristics of such a violence inspired rumor. Pilot soldiers could be so insensitive to Jewish religious practices as to attack worshipers and the very act of offering a sacrifice. But such an incident would hardly have escaped Josephus. He talks about one of the question of historicity again. A modernization of the same incident could go up to a Christian village in the Lebanese mountains and announce they came into the church with their machine guns and gunned down the faithful and the very act of participating in the Holy Eucharist. The blood of the worshipers was mingled with the holy wine on the altar. Now what do you think of that, Jesus? You could still a storm. You could raise the dead. You could raise the dead. You could raise the dead. You could raise the dead. You could raise the dead. Go with us down to Jerusalem and stop the evildoers from their evil things. The listener must answer with sympathy and enunciation. In the case of Jesus, if this comment, if this commitment to nationalistic goals is suspect, as Dodd suggests, and I think Dodd is right, then the report may well be intended to measure his loyalty to the national cause. Did you say the N-word? Doesn't matter how you said it. Well, when I say the N-word, don't you say it in your mind? If you say it in your mind, well, we're going to smother the word. And so when you grow up and your child listens to you and says, oh, the N-word, the N-word, daddy, what's the N-word? Just never you mind about the N-word, son. Just never say it. Okay, dad. If he does not want to voice indignation, denunciation of Roman brutality, then it's safest for them to walk away with Amos's admonition to silence as an operating principle. The voicing of such a denunciation would be problematic. And this gets then into the question, well, Jesus keeps going. Jesus answers, okay, down to Jerusalem. We're going to take out the Romans. Jesus answered, do you think these Galileans were worse sinners than all of the other Galileans because they suffered this way? I tell you no, but unless you repent, you too will all perish. Or those 18 who died when the tower of of Salome fell on them. Do you think they were more guilty than any of the others living in Jerusalem? Well, why would they be guilty? Well, Edershine is an older commentator. Edershine makes the intriguing suggestion that the 18 killed by the falling tower may have been working on Pilate's aqueduct. Pilate had taken money from the temple treasury for the building of the aqueduct, much to the horror of the local population. Thus, if some masonry had fallen on such workmen, the entire countryside would naturally have assumed that this was the judgment of God for collaboration of such a project. The suggestion is all the more intriguing because it relates to the two illustrations. It relates the two illustrations to Pilate. Such background may well have been the context for the falling stonework. Yet, speculation is pointless. The text clearly affirms that in both cases, in the opinion of Jesus, the suffering of those involved cannot be traced to their sins. Or those 18 who died when the tower of of Salome fell on them. Do you think they were more guilty than all the others living in Jerusalem? I tell you no, but unless you repent, you all perish too. See why. Jesus dies alone. No F you money. Then he told this parable. A man had a fig tree growing in his vineyard, and he went to look for fruit on it, but didn't find any. So he said to the men who took care of the vineyard, for three years now, I've been coming to look for fruit on this fig tree and haven't found any. Cut it down. Why should it use up the soil? Sir, the man replied, leave it alone for one more year and I'll dig around it and fertilize it. If it bears fruit next year, fine. If not, then cut it down. The time is short. In studying Luke 13, one through five with my Middle Eastern classes, the present writer had often had students marvel that Jesus would not physically attacked on the spot. The call for repentance is thrown in the face of nationalistic enthusiasts who stand in opposition to Roman oppression. Those who fight for a just cause often assume that the struggle for the cause makes them righteous, even if just the mental struggle. It does not. That's what Jesus says. You're righteous for the cause. It doesn't make you righteous. But I want to earn my righteous. I want to earn my inheritance. Sermon last week. What can one do to earn an inheritance? Nothing. No one can earn an inheritance. It's always a gift. It does not. The more intense the struggle for justice, the more oppressed tend to assume their own righteousness. This assumption of righteousness at times expresses itself as arrogance that refuses any criticism. The subconscious rationale seems to be, our cause is righteous. Thus, we are righteous. Furthermore, after all that we have suffered, how dare you inflict any more wounds on us by your criticism? Attitudes of this type are on occasion surfaced on both sides of the barbed wire in the Middle East in the past 30 years. Only the strong and the brave can dare to endure the wrath of such oppressed and turn the attention away from the criticism of the hated enemy to painful self-criticism in the warning. Unless you repent, you all likewise will perish. There's no F you money that can save you from this. Well, here's the thing. Do you have F you money? I don't. I suspect. Eric's got sponsors that I don't even know about. Eric's got way more Twitter followers than me. Eric's got way more subscribers on his YouTube and on his podcast than me. Eric's a couple years younger than me. Eric's got a friend who's a billionaire. Eric's far on his way to F you money than I'll ever be, and I might be further along than you. Can I be a world saver? See, I kind of think the world already has one, and that if you want to participate in his world saving, you participate in what he does. You become his disciple. What does it mean to be his disciple? Well, read the Gospels and he'll show you. And what's really amazing is that a lot of Eric's calibration about what is moral and immoral, and including those of his enemies, all come from this guy who had no F you money. Enough for now. Not my rough draft. I'll have to work on that tomorrow.