https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=mgfS2J17Tco

 Hi everybody, this is Paul and I'm back with my friend Job and we had a conversation a couple of weeks ago and Job had some follow-up he wanted to do. So what's on your mind Job? Yeah, the Paul and Job comedy hour. Two bald Dutch guys. Well, one's really Dutch and the other not. Yeah, I'm short and you're a real tall person. So you're more Dutch than I am in some ways. You know, I was talking, I'm going to post a conversation with a guy named Dennis who's also from the Netherlands and he was watching my videos and he was like, the guy is he looks Dutch, he's got a Dutch face. So I don't know, I'm not sure what a Dutch face means, but I guess I got one. I don't know, man. I mean, no, it's more about like who drowns when the dykes break. You got to be tall. That's exactly right. That's why the Dutch are so tall. Right. We lived. No, I'm I think I'm five seven in American lengths. So that the. Which is about average, actually, it's it's it's people like me that are freaks. Yeah, well, you know, that's that's just your privilege. You'll have to suffer with that. That's right. That's your life. I need to own my tall privilege. Exactly. How dare you be so happy about it. So. OK, we've had two conversations before, and I think I've I've omitted a thing, not on purpose, but I just didn't think about it. It has been kind of I think it's it's important. So in my first talk to you, I kind of explained, you know, how I got here and that I've kind of had a history of depression since I've been about 11, as far as I can tell, that manifested itself as a basically constant voice in my head. It's always like, you know, you need to just kill yourself. And and. That would go from just always kind of be there to being very loud and then you can't even read a book, you can't kind of have a conversation because it's just distracting you. And I kind of learned to deal with that. You know, well, do as far as I could, I mean, it's not been fun, but I need to kind of get to where I want to go in a conversation. I think two years ago. I went to work, as I always do, and I walked to work and. I noticed that there was nothing there, like it was just quiet. This is weird. Like, OK, so how about we think about death, you know, because they usually throws my mind into a kind of the old wagon wheel of, oh, everything is meaningless. Why not just end it? Because all it is is suffering and just. Yeah. So whenever I think about death, that's where it would go. And that would usually happen without any conscious effort on my mind. Like my brain would just go there. Oh, no, do we have to go here? Well, you know, let's let's hope that, you know, that goes away after a while, because eventually that cycle stops. But anyway, my brain was like, no, we don't need to think about that at that certain day. Wow. Yeah. Well, what is this? So I have a great day at work. Then I come home and I tell my wife, she wouldn't believe the day I had. And she's like, yeah, that's odd, because she knows how my mind works. And the next day as well. I go, oh, wow, what is this? What did I do? And then third day and then a fourth day. And then I went back to normal. I go, no. But I had four days of. Just. Existing. And I figured, hey, OK, now I'm going to go see a therapist because it's like, you know, Plato's cave and you come out of it and like, hey, there's this whole other world out here. That's possible. And I went to see a therapist and that was funny because I get. I went to see this therapist that was basically like, OK, buddy, this is how it's going to go. I'm going to tell you what I think is wrong. You're going to advise me to take meds and then I'm going to get the meds and we'll have this fixed. No, not about your youth. So like, what? How is that? How is my youth relevant? But this guy was good because he kind of digs and digs and pokes. And he's like, you know, so you're saying you're this horrible person and. But OK, so you're married, right? Like, yeah. And you have this wife. Yeah. And you have a good relationship. Yeah. Why is she with you? That's interesting. Why is that? I guess I must be very nice to her. And he's like, no, you're just a really good person, but you need to see that. And he's like, we had an hour and a half kind of. Introductory meeting to see what was going on. He's like, what you need to do. And I think there's lots more here. But what you need to do is to learn how to love yourself. Yeah, whatever. All right. Bye, doc. And well, fuck that. I was useless. And I didn't see it yet. But that guy was spot on. He was really he knew exactly where to poke. And. Then we kind of after a couple of months, we come to the first conversation I have with you, where I said, I found this Peterson and I kind of had just gotten back into stoicism and through stoicism, I kind of developed the system of all that matters is your next action. As long as I perform my next action as well as I can, as virtuous as I can. Then all I have to worry about is that maybe they'll keep all the other stuff at bay. Now, it didn't, but it helped. But if I think about it now, like, that's very Peterson ask in a way like you need to. Everything is meaningful. If if if you don't go for the nihilism thing, everything is meaningful. And that's when I ran into your videos. And now we're basically back to our first conversation where I said your first video that I saw was axiomatic God versus materialistic God. And I see now I still almost forget what I needed to discuss with you, because there's a correlation that I didn't see. And I don't think I told you this. Around that time where I. Started watching your videos. My Mallory had been experimenting with fasting. Have I told you this? No. Okay. Just to see how it would affect her blood pressure, her mood, just kind of a science experiment. And she would fast for like two weeks a week. And she would talk to me about it and she would watch me eat, which is really heck. You know, happily eating. She's just, you know. Wow. Yeah, I mean, but she would talk about how it affected her. And she says, maybe you want to try this at some point. So I tried. I mean, I tried. I tried. I tried. I tried. I tried. I tried. I tried. I tried. So I tried and it's really hard the first three days. But after that, your hunger kind of goes away. But I also noticed that everything else went away and I got a really strong focus. Like everything got very clear and focused. And that's also because you're very hungry. But so what happens is you go in a state called ketosis, right? Where your liver creates ketones and you, you know, you start burning fat instead of using glycogen and carbohydrates. Or I don't know the details of it, but I also noticed that my digestive issues went away, which I never really made any link with those. I just, well, yeah, you know, uh, that's just what I had, but that went away. And I just felt really good. Like, oh, okay. So I'm going to keep doing this. And I've been doing that for like nine months now. Wow. And it's been consistently good. I'm, I'm no longer depressed. Um, all this other stuff is great. And I just didn't make the link there, but it did kind of navigate me into thinking about things differently because I can now. So I don't know how, how relevant this is, but it could be relevant to people who struggle with similar problems. I have no idea what the science of this is. I have no idea if it works in other people. I can't vouch for anybody. I just know that whenever, because I experimented whenever I introduced carbohydrates and sugars again, I fall back. I get the symptoms again of, well, you know, uh, uh, digestive and brain. So there's, uh, there are, there are some sketchy science out there that suggests that the gut bio influences the brain. And that works with stuff I've learned from a neuroscientist who says, well, that mind body problem that we think of, that's, that's not really what we, we are, we way more one thing that we realize like Dick Hartz was kind of wrong there. That's a guy called, um, called Antonio DiMaggio, I believe neuroscientist. And he did research on people with damage in their, uh, prefrontal neuro cortex, and he found that people with damage there, their emotions were imparted and they could no longer see the consequences of their actions. Um, and they, and so that research shows that emotions are essential to acting. We can't act without thinking, but the more I read about it, like Jean Piaget said this, he says, you can't even think about mathematics without having emotions about it. But he, he found that now people like Phineas Gage, you know, the, the real worker who had a, the rod come through his head, very famous case. Are you familiar with him? A little bit. His emotions, he became this whole different person. Right. Uh, they did a gambling test with people with damage in the part of their brain. And they, they would keep, they kept making the same mistakes. I'm basically talking about, this is my disability, sociology and psychology presentation. I'm half giving to you now, but anyway, um, but yeah, we, we perceive the world as, as meaning and it's like, it all comes together at that point. Where was it going with all this? So you're fasting and you're finding fasting really helps. Well, the, the fasting led me to, to get into that state of ketosis. And I noticed as long as I stay in that state of just only eating fat and protein, basically, I'm mostly fat. I'm just life has been so incredibly amazing and great and meaningful. And, and then of all the religion stuff that comes with it, well, it only seems to help more. Yeah. Yeah. And, and, and maybe it's even partially responsible. I don't know. Uh, but yeah, I don't know the hardest part is to keep, keep to get my calories in, like I need to eat very fatty food and that's just to get full. So I've been losing weight like crazy and I got to watch that, but yeah. I'm not surprised by anything you've said. And I've, I've got, you know, family and friends and people in my church who, you know, are on all different sides of these debates and of course, Peterson with his carnivore diet, Peterson and his daughter. So I'm not, I'm not really surprised by anything you've said. Um, I know in fasting has become sort of a, a fad among some Silicon Valley. People. Um, I, obviously religious traditions have used fasting for as long as there's, there've been religions. So now I'm not surprised by anything you've said. And, you know, it's kind of, it sounds kind of, sounds like a very wonderful thing that you and your wife have stumbled onto. Literally stumbled on. Imagine if I'd never found this. I would, I would probably still be stuck in the same rut, just kind of trying to power through all the shit. And I was, this is, I was, my wife and I were at sign language and you know, that's always fun and my wife was signing and I'm kind of looking at her and I get this immense sense of just thankfulness that I have, you know, such a great wife. Cause she really is. And thinking, yeah. And you know, it's so nice to have that. And that I used to have this really shitty outlook on life and negative like, and my, my other part of my brain goes misery, deliverance, gratitude. No, we're like, Oh, wow. So that's what that is. That was just, yeah, that was really interesting to realize. That's very cool. That's, that's really what it seems to be. That's very interesting. That's like 34 years of, well, not 34, but at least, you know, a good, a good 20 years of shit. And of course it's not always bad, but it always has that undercurrent of that undercurrent of negativity. Yep. Yep. Yeah. Yeah. But yeah, that's what I meant when I said like, it's kind of personal, this sort of stuff, but maybe it can help other people. Yeah. And, and again, just the normal YouTube disclaimer, neither Job nor I are doctors and we're not advocating anyone stop eating, but no, your mileage may vary, but no, there's, there's a lot to, um, there's a lot. So I, I'll use the example of my dog. So my dog had perpetual skin problems and it would get these yeast infections and he would stink because of the yeast infections and you take them to the vet and the vet visit would cost $200 and then the pills and, you know, pouring a hundred dollars into this rescue dog and the dog's miserable and we just go through this cycle. And so my wife just, well, let me go on the internet and find something. So she came back and she said, okay, we're just going to feed the dog raw meat and some vitamins. And that's it. That's a happy dog. Well, he's, he's a much happier dog. The, the skin infections have gone away. The yeast infections have gone away. There's always some other stuff. These dogs almost blind, but, um, and he's still kind of a jerk, but it's that's his temperament. Still likes to bite people, but, um, for the most part, you know, and yeah, it was just diet and it sure is nice not having to take them to the vet all the time and give them all these drugs. And so there's, there's a lot of that. And I mean, yeah, the dog's mileage may vary and, and I got married for, I might not work for another dog, but yeah. And I didn't, I didn't do the, the purely meat thing because no, and luckily I didn't have to, luckily this, this seems to be enough. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I have a fair amount of stuff that we can talk about Paul. So right ahead. Time is okay. Episode one of Paul's bookshelf. I'm just forcing the issue. And I'm in a room where I don't have any of my books here, but I do of course have my Kindle library available on my computer. So go for it. I was thinking, I was thinking we could say, so Paul, what did you think about Paul and I mean, uh, biography by NT Wright, cause I think you read that. I read, I read about three quarters of it or two thirds of it. I really liked it. I really, I got the, see I'm ADHD. So I get distracted by another book. It's amazing. I've, you know, managed to stay married to my wife 31 years and, you know, having, you know, gone, gone off. But, um, so no, I thought, I actually thought it was in terms of NT Wright's non-technical work. One of my favorite books of his. He so, you know, you can, you can see his, you can see him, he's getting to the point now in his life and his career where he can really integrate a lot of what he's learned and done over the years. And a lot of it comes together nicely in that book. Plus he gives a lot of the, he gives a lot of the historical background, contextual detail in that book in an, in an accessible way, which is, you know, it's part of the difficulty we have when we read the New Testament in a different language from a very different time and place, there's so much that is lost. If you don't know the context and, and, and right brings some of that into the book. So I thought it was a, I really, really enjoyed it. So I've really got to finish it. I'll probably see again, but I'll probably start it all over again, because I don't want to jump in two thirds of the way through and then I'll listen to the first part again, but I don't have a problem with that because I learn when I go through things multiple times. So what did you think? Did you read it? Yeah. Yeah. Oh, I listened to it. It's an, it's an adventure story. It's the guy is basically a salad in he's basically a far, let's say he's far left and becomes far right. He goes from one side to the other. Yeah. Basically halfway on this road to do ask, he's like, boom, you're going to do this. Now you're going on an adventure. Yeah. And it's not the adventure you thought you were going to have. No. And this guy had, I would say he had power in the sense that he would just push through in some fanatical sense. Like, Oh, I got stoned. Well, it's just a scratch and moves on and preachers so long that people fall asleep and tumble out the wind, tumble out a window goes down. Did I tell you to leave? He heals them, goes back. I wasn't done preaching and very much. Endless energy, endless power person. And I wonder if that's the sort of power that that Mabel had Mabel in a wheelchair that that endless just will to move forward. The, the, you know, so, so all Christians say that their goal is to become like Christ, but that, but the form that that takes is individual to every person. So you've got the apostle Paul, you've got Mabel from, from the John Orbert book that I've, that I've read and other things. And, and so it's, it's amazing that what Christ does in us is both make us like him and also make us ourselves. Cause you would think, well, if we're all going to be like Christ, we'll all be like this one thing, but it's actually not at all like that he, and that stands to reason, if you think of the long-term story of basically, you know, creation, corruption, redemption, redemption is the undoing of corruption, which differentiates us. And at one, in some ways makes us way more extreme and in other ways makes us way more loving because we so often associate extremism with the opposite of love. And, um, um, Jonathan Edwards, who was a, who was, you know, one of the greatest American philosopher, theologians who ever lived in the, it was in the colonial period. One of the things that he noticed about Jesus is that in Jesus, you find, you find strange, uh, excellencies that we normally can't put together in one person. Cause often if someone is compliant, they'll also be sort of weak. And often if someone is willful, they'll also be uncaring and not gentle in their courage. And so what Jonathan Edwards noticed in Jesus was that he could be humble yet. Say he's the son of God. He could be strong yet as the prophet Isaiah said, the bent reed, he would not break and the smoldering wick, he would not snuff out. And, and so in Paul, you see some of that, but then when you say, look at two saints, like that story of Mabel and Paul, you say, well, how can both of these be reflecting Jesus? Well, he's re these Jesus is reflected in them, but they are also themselves. So the kind of transformation Jesus brings in us makes us makes us basically it's kind of sounds cliche, but it makes us who we were made to be. But, but also, you know, so Paul is this, like you said, he's an extremist. I mean, when he would, in the book of Acts, he would go into a, he would go into a town and he would, he would have death threats. Um, you know, he'd be stoned. He'd have to sneak out. His followers would basically almost have to kidnap them to get him out of there cause they don't want him to die. And so he's just this amazing extremist, but he's, he's not just an extremist. And so you're right in that. So then you look at someone like that Mabel in that story, in that nursing home, who's had, you know, absolutely everything taken from her, but she's brimming with joy and you'd say, how can a personal person suffer so much adversity and loss and brim with joy? And it's, it's exactly that, that Christ does. And it's, it's unexplainable. That's why we call it miraculous, but that's, that's the pattern. So, so then what's funny is, so Christianity talks about sanctification and basically sanctification means God refines you. And he does so usually through suffering, which is not the way any of us want to be refined, um, much more through suffering than through success usually, but he makes you into a purified better you. Not you, not what, not anyone else, you, and, and that stands to reason. If you think about the God's project for us in this story, which is he is, he is, he is making, he is realizing in us our, when we talk about potential with the Peterson stuff, he's realizing in us our, our potential. And see now you and I, we tend to think about our lives as, well, I want, I want things to, I want things to go the way I want them to go on, then I'll be happy. Uh, never works that way. And so God says, no, I am going to do things in your life that you are going to hate. And there are things that I'm going to do to you that you are going to, you are that are going to really make you wonder whether I love you, but, uh, this is my plan for you and I am going to complete it. You're telling this to a guy called Job. I mean, I don't know. That's exactly right. The guy named after the guy who, you know, you know, and, and so I was, you know, I was preaching Sunday, I haven't, I forgot to record the sermon at church, but, um, it's on the Facebook page, but you know, there's this, in, in John chapter nine, there's a man born blind and everybody wants to know who sinned his, his parents or him. And Jesus says, no, that's not at all. And it's that God's glory would be revealed. And it's like, wait a minute, this guy, this guy's lived his whole life blind so that your glory could be revealed. On one hand, we as human beings are terribly offended at that. So who are you, who are you God to make those kinds of decisions about us? That's reflects our sense of entitlement, but God kind of looks at that. Like Job and says, who are you? What God says back to us. Oh, oh, little center of the universe. I didn't really call it giving you an opinion. Yeah. Ah, uh, speaking of the John is kind of humorous at times almost. So you said you should, I think you advised me last time to start learning and reading the gospels. Yeah. That's actually interesting. Cause recently I said, as Melanie, so what are you going to do today? She's like, Oh, I'm going to read the Bible. And she says, well, you know, I noticed I don't know anything about it. So I should at least know what's in it. So I will read the new Testament. I said, well, you know, go start with Mark if you it's the shortest one. And then you at least start with the gospels. So she's been reading, uh, Mark and Matthew and I've been reading Luke and John and John is just like the blind man. And I think it's the Pharisees who asked me like, yeah, who made you see? And it's like, well, it's just guy Jesus and this isn't that. And, and then I asked him again, like, so who made you see? Like, I just told you, like it's Jesus. Why do you also want to become disciples? Is that why you keep asking? This sarcasm in the story. And then later, uh, I think Jesus is talking to a bunch of people and also the Pharisees where, uh, he talks about the gate and the sheep and that, you know, as a gate and the shepherd and the sheep and the certain sheep go into, and the Pharisees don't get like, he's talking about sheep and you can almost hear Jesus go, right, right. So, see the gate, that's me. Right. And the sheep that's the speak, right. Do you get it? It's no fun if I need to explain the metaphor. And you can just imagine the guy at some point just gets really tired. Like, I need to keep trying. I need to keep trying to reach these people. So when, when the Buddha reaches enlightenment, Brahman comes to him and says, you need to teach others. And Buddha says, well, but they won't understand that's at least how one version of the story goes and Brahman says, but, but there might be some people who will like, there are some people with less sand in their eyes than others. And Buddha thinks, well, maybe if there are a couple, then I could go out and teach them, and then at least I've helped some people, I imagine Jesus had similar ideas like, well, and then the apostles start bricking, like, I'm going to be at the right hand of Jesus. No, it's going to be me. And like, well, you guys knock it off. You bunch of children. Like, well, you pick the, the, the illiterate fishermen. I mean, what did you expect that it's a, yeah, I don't know. Maybe, maybe I'm blaspheming by interpreting the stories that way. Paul, you're not the gospels are terribly hard on the apostles, which is an amazing thing since they come through them and they don't come off well in the, in the, in the gospels, the apostles basically come up as a bunch of knuckleheads and, and Jesus keeps losing his temper at him, you know, you have little faith. He keeps saying, he says, you know, how, and he says to his apostles, how long am I going to have to deal with you people? That's what he keeps saying to them. And that's, that's a point he explains to us and stuff, and they don't get it. And like, Jesus realizes they don't get it. Like, and they kind of want to ask a question, but they don't dare. Like, do you want to ask me a question about what I just said? Cause you're clearly not getting it. Let me try again. Please father, I'm trying. Yeah. Yeah. No, it's true. It's true. Yeah. It's a man. So, so yeah, we've been reading that stuff and we are listening to a Bart Ehrman on, on audible about the new Testament. Oh boy. No, it's historically, it's a historical. And so we also bought this book, how Jesus became God. But then we figured we also need the other one, which is called how God became Jesus. We figure we need to hear both sides. Oh, seriously. It's actually really funny. I should read. I, I, I'm going to read you some. For instance, the worship of a crucified and risen Messiah was definitely unique and incredibly scandalous to all audiences, whether Jewish or Greek. To Jewish audiences, worshiping a crucified man was blasphemy. It was about as kosher as the Jewish people. It was about as kosher as pork sausages wrapped in bacon, served to Jews for a jihad fundraiser to Greeks, worshiping a man recently raised from the dead was like doing obeisance to the first zombie you met in a zombie apocalypse. And it just keeps going in that sort of sarcastic way. Like they wouldn't do that, which is kind of what Wright says in a more academic way. Yeah. Yeah. Uh, but so it's, it's a nice counterpart to Erman's. Um, Oh, that's, I didn't know. I didn't know about these two books, but I see that they're just kind of juxtaposed to each other. That's fascinating. Yeah. So they have a very similar front as well. As you can see the illustration of this one is very similar, similar to Erman's. Interesting. Um, I didn't know, I didn't know about, I didn't know about, um, Michael Byrd's book. That's interesting. So they call, uh, they call, uh, uh, Erman, a celebrity skeptic. And I'm like, what, what is it with people calling other people with an opinion, celebrity, like celebrity, skeptic, celebrity, atheist, like celebrity pastor. Well, yeah. I mean, I could probably call Justin Brearley. I know you're watching Justin. I could call him a celebrity Christian probably. And you know, cause that's how that would work. I don't know why, why that celebrity atheist and celebrity stuff, like, okay, they're vocal people. We used to call them militants and now it's celebrity or career. Well, yeah, career, career atheist. And I call Justin Brearley, I'd call him a career evangelical because that's kind of, I mean, he does, he's not, he's not a pastor. He doesn't pastor a church, but he's, he's a big part of his persona in public is. And evangelical or a Christian posture, celebrity Christian. So I think that's, I think that's apt. I don't think it's a put down. Oh, it wasn't intended as such. I like what Justin does. Yeah. Well, so do I. I don't know a little watch this, but he's, he's on, he's on, he's on Twitter. So who knows? Yeah. Okay. So I, I wonder what you think of Erman. Erman's, Erman's interesting. You know, Erman, Erman is good for bringing up the, you know, everybody, everybody, every position needs a spokesman. So Erman is kind of the, kind of the, the modernist classical, when I say classical now, so when I say classical theological liberal spokesperson for, you know, for, for that school of, for that school of biblical studies, there are many, many people who, I mean, there's, there's, there's all these camps in terms of Bible scholarship and Erman is representing this one particular group. And you will find, I mean, Justin Briarley, I mean, his whole show is about you bring on Bart Erman and then you bring on the other side and you have him talk back and forth and you ask NT Wright what he thinks of Bart Erman and, and on and on. Erman's, Erman is in many ways, you know, I listened to the talk that he did with Sam Harris, which was very interesting. And the two main takeaways I heard from that were Bart Erman sharing his deconversion story, which didn't surprise me at all. And Sam Harris's real ignorance about the Bible. That's what really surprised me. I thought a celebrity atheist would know a little bit more about the Bible than he did, but he didn't know much. But, you know, Bart Erman, many people have followed Bart Erman's path in terms of he became a fundamentalist evangelical Christian with some pretty, I would say, fundamentalistic, modernistic approaches to the Bible. And they got deconstructed. The more complex, the more complexity he began to see in the systems. Now, there is a whole range of conversation in that area. Peter Enns is another guy whose name comes up often and Peter Enns is teaching at Eastern College. And so now there's a new wave of, I call them often progressive evangelicals, people like Rachel Held Evans, who grew up in a very fundamentalist group and then sees more of the complexities and the complex historical background of the Bible and kind of turns to a skeptical posture. There are a lot of people in that. See, I wasn't raised that tightly fundamentalistic in my tradition. We always understood that, you know, so my tradition comes through the likes of Herman Boving, you know, and Abraham Kuyper, both of whom in their younger years, at the end of that, embraced a 19th century modern theological liberalism and saw that as a dead end and then began to ask, well, then how can, how then does the Bible work? And so, you know, other movements came out of that. Karl Barth came out of that. That's more the neo-orthodox movement and the nebors. But Abraham Kuyper and Herman Boving, they're more the Dutch Reformed, they're more the part of the Dutch Reformed movement. And it was interesting when my grandfather was, my grandfather was born in the United States, his father was an immigrant. And when my grandmother was whittling down his library, the last four books he had were Kuyper's systematic theology in Dutch and Boving's systematic theology in Dutch. But he preferred Boving because he said he was sweeter. And so, you know, Christianity has been wrestling with these traditions for a long time because our culture sets us up with expectations for how the Bible should communicate to us. And the Bible communicates to us from its own culture and background. But when we try to fit it into make it, you know, contemporary history, they didn't know contemporary history. So then you have all these questions about historicity. And so that's where all this stuff comes out of. And I've often found that I don't like either extremes. The fundamentalists make me nervous because I think they try to make the Bible fit contemporary frames. But the modernists, I don't find them helpful in terms of what I want from the Bible, which is I want to I want to I want to inhabit it. I don't just want to say, oh, here are here's how the Bible here's all the Bible confirms all my preconceived notions of goodness. I can't go there. So I'm kind of like Boving and Kuyper in that I see the modernists and I understand their points. And I very much understand that the Bible does not communicate to us the way we would maybe want it to. But if I'm going to I still believe the Holy Spirit can use the Bible to give me a living faith that can actually give me do the kind of transformation we were talking about earlier in this conversation, that that through the Bible, God can change me into being the kind of person that exhibits the love and power of Jesus Christ. That's what I want. OK, I'm trying to work through it. Hang on. I mean, I want to engage what you just said, but it's a lot. Yeah, I might not understand it completely. You're saying you're trying to apply the Bible to the Bible. To your life where it makes sense or. I try to understand the Bible, but I read it as someone who was born in 1963. OK, fair enough. And in New Jersey and was the son of the father of the son of the mother of the father of in New Jersey and was the son of Jews hiding in Dutch Calvinism. And you know, but what do I want from the Bible? I want the renovation of heaven and earth. I want God to rend the sky and I want suffering to end. And I want, you know, I want the renovation of heaven and earth and I don't want anything less. And I want that to live in and through me. And I believe that. You know, the Bible is is how God is a big part of how God, the Bible and the Holy Spirit are how God gets in and changes me otherwise. So I was just watching Peterson's talk with the general McChrystal and Peterson talked about you need something out there. And I think that's exactly right. And so the Bible gives me direction out there. But it's it's it's the Holy Spirit using the Bible to change me. And so what I want what I want, nothing less than the than the redemption of all of human history and the renovation of heaven and earth. And I want God to use me for that. That's what I want. Now, there's lots of other questions along the way. Bart Ehrman can raise good questions and Michael Byrd and and Craig Evans can can get in that conversation. So it's smart of you to read both of them. But but fundamentally, see, this is another thing that you discover by virtue of who I am and that I have this brain and the education, the world I live in. I'm going to have to figure this stuff out. But I've seen God use other people that, you know, like the guy, the pastor who actually Uncle Tom was fashioned after or this this mentor that that Frederick Douglas have. I've been reading a biography of Frederick Douglas. You know, God uses people who know almost nothing. And that's where you have Mabel and Paul. So you have Paul, who's this incredibly brilliant zealot of a man and Mabel, a disabled woman in a nursing home. And God uses them both to to do to renovate this this sinful suffering world. And so part of what he's going to use me is wrestling with these issues. But that's not the real show. The real show is the redemption of heaven and earth. It's like you're a pastor, man. Yeah, I didn't scratch that. I have to scratch real hard to get me preaching. This this might hook into a question that you might not be able to ask, not be able to answer. So last time I said, so how do you get to Jesus? And I didn't phrase it properly. The question was, how do you how do you like how did you get there? Well, I think I think part of it, you know, my parents gave me Jesus and they gave me Jesus in who they were and how they lived. You know, that's and I can barely talk about that without crying because it's, you know, I watched and my parents were different from each other. But, you know, my father would would give the shirt off his back and the food from his table. And my mother said, no, but you're going to but I'm not going to let my children starve. And so they, you know, they played this dance in in Patterson. And loving the people, you know, that the black community of Patterson, New Jersey, that were desperately poor and and subject to all kinds of things going on. So Jesus got to me through my parents. Jesus got to me through through the church that I grew up in and through the Christian school that I went to. But but not just those things. Jesus also got to me individually. And, you know, we talked, you know, I've been talking about psychedelics a little bit. You know, Jesus got to me through dreams. Jesus got to me through people in my life. You know, I went to we always get accustomed to what we're around. So I was I was used to Patterson, New Jersey, and I was used to Dutch Calvinism and the Christian Reformed Church. But then I meet evangelicals and Pentecostals and and I'd see new aspects of Jesus in them that I didn't have. And so I wanted some of that. And then I went to the Dominican Republic and I saw I saw Haitian pastors that will never have a chance at at very much in this world and in this life. But they had Jesus. And so I you know, Jesus came to me through them. And then, you know, Jesus comes to me through the homeless and Jesus comes to me. And Jesus has come to me through Jordan Peterson and Jesus comes to me through you. So, no, Jesus. Jesus is a hunter and he will stalk you and he will have you. And and it's and C.S. Lewis talks in these terms that at some point, you know, we become his bride and we long to be ravished by him. So I know that's getting weird, but, you know, this is how this is why God is God and we are not. So. That hooks into that the talk you gave about axiomatic God and materialistic God. I think the reason I could integrate that too easily is because it's essentially what I didn't know then, but that that's natural theology. And God is in everything and God is in us as as we treat each other well. And God is love and business. And that, you know, that works because there's nothing outside. But. That's not what you believe. And I've seen you talk about natural theology, the one that Peterson is building. Yeah. And it is what I believe. But see, here's the problem with, again, being a theologian, because you tend to want to clean up that language because, you know, let's say that Isaiah, Chapter six, holy, holy, holy is the Lord God Almighty, which says God is apart from all of this. And he's holy. He's holy, holy, holy. The Old Testament sense and the whole earth is full of his glory. So so is God in? Yes, sort of. But there's also a way that God is separate. And that's that's where Christianity parts ways with pantheism, because the difficulty we have with with the God in type of language is that it can reduce God. And the holy, holy, holy means, oh, yeah, he's he's coming to you in all kinds of strange ways and in ways and places and things you would never expect. But he's also separate and acting in and through. So that's that's that's where, you know, is God in this? Sure. And that's why sometimes people say to me, this is why I give evangelicals hard time. Well, that's a God thing. I said what? As opposed to the rest of creation, isn't all of creation a God thing as opposed to humanity? So it's the theologians get fussy about language because they want to preserve distinctions. And but in our common talk, you know, you can say that because, yeah, of course, God is in. God is all over the place. He is everywhere. Well, what do we mean by that? So it gets complicated. But that's that's why to have an education means getting fussy about things. OK, darn. OK, so I guess I still need to I'm not sure I was going with the question. I was trying to figure out where the natural theology ends and the other part begins. But I guess that's fuzzy. And maybe I'm trying to control it too much. The distinction between it. I don't think natural theology is a bad enterprise at all. I think we need it. And I think that's us seeing God, seeing God's glory through what he has done. But Christianity has always said natural theology will only get you so far if if if God had to wait for us to make our way to him, we would never get there. And that's part of the point of the incarnation of Jesus, that God and the point of the whole Bible, God, God keeps budding in. But even that language isn't right, because it's not that he's been he's been absent. So it's just terribly hard to talk about. No, I imagine it is. And it because you also don't know how to interpret it and when when to distinguish it from whatever else is happening in in a system at work. But and at some point, it becomes all vague and metaphysical. And then for fake, he's like, oh, but did you think about this? No, I don't want to because. I mean, and the weird split brain experiments, you know, and at some point, you're like, you know, because like I've had enough worldview shaking for a while now. Seriously, I'm still trying to find ground. I'm trying I'm trying to reestablish my axioms and I keep finding them. That's really frustrating because like, well, I used to have some, but, you know, that it's like I'm in some boat and my nice atheism pedal broke. And now I'm just kind of drifting off. I go, let's see where this goes. Or maybe it's the current. Yeah, right. Yeah. That atheism paddle, that atheism paddle enabled a fantasy that you were steering your boat. That too. Yeah, I know you, you could say something like that. But the more I watch about about your videos, I think you you were dead on there. About OK, life definitely is a certain way. I know it is. And well, this is fun. Why again? And now it's just all sorts of fun, even though I am less sure of anything than before. But let's not go there. Stop amusing yourself. No, you're amusing me. Speaking of which, I finished Miracles. Oh, really? Yeah. And the epilogue. Lewis is such a jackass. Seriously, do you recall that epilogue? I'll read it for the rest of the people who might be watching this. Let's see. Because I was talking with Esther about this, so I shared it with her. I can't do the English accent, so I'll just read it. Perhaps, if I dare suppose so much, you have been let on at times while you were reading, have felt ancient hopes and fears are stirring your heart, have perhaps come almost to the threshold of belief. But now, no, it just won't do. Here is the ordinary. Here's the real world around you again. The dream is ending as all other similar dreams have always ended. For, of course, this is not the first time such a thing has happened. More than once in your life before this, you have heard a strange story, read some odd book, seen something queer or imagined you have seen it, entertained some wild hope or terror, but always it ended in the same way. And always you wondered how you could, even for a moment, have expected it not to. For that real world when you came back to is so unanswerable. Sorry. For that real world when you came back to it is so unanswerable. Of course, the strange story was false. Of course, the voice was really subjective. Of course, the apparent portent of the voice was very clear. Of course, the apparent portent was a coincidence. You're ashamed of yourself for having ever thought otherwise. Ashamed, relieved, amused, disappointed and angry all at once. You ought to have known that, as Arnold says, miracles don't happen. That guy is just having way too much fun with his audience. Seriously, you know, it's it's so yesterday in the video, in the video I made yesterday, I read some of C.S. Lewis's The Last Battle in in the Lewis, in the the group of people who study Lewis, there's a a vibrant debate about why on earth he wrote those Narnia books, because why should a single professor write children's books when he didn't even like children? He didn't get along with children. And. And Tolkien, of course, hated the Narnia books because Tolkien was such a craftsman and he crafts Middle Earth. And Lewis is like a kid and a kid and he's like Andy in Toy Story. He's bringing all the toys and throwing him in the story. And Narnia's like Tolkien's like, no, no, no, no, no, that's all wrong. And Tolkien's like allegories terrible. And Lewis is like, why The Witch of the Wardrobe? It's an allegory. And but why is why did Lewis do it? I think part of it, he didn't he no longer wrote these apologetic books like miracles. And I think he decided that Tolkien was right. Now, Lewis was no Tolkien. He wasn't he wasn't the kind of he didn't have that kind of power like Tolkien had. And his best novel is Till We Have Faces, which is a retelling of a of a of a myth. So so Narnia is, I think, probably his attempt at apologetic work because he understood that in many ways. Faith comes to us through the children that we are. And so he puts it in children's books and it's it's it's Louis, it's Lewis, it's the little boy, C.S. Lewis, that that, in a sense, we get in those books and. Yeah, yeah, no, he's quite a character. That that book that I think I told you about last time, Joy, about Joy Davidman. Oh, my goodness, what a what a pistol she was, too. And, you know, it's just a crazy life. But the world is crazy. I mean, we know this. Look at you. Look at me. You said that last time I made a note of it, like real life is so much crazier. And you're like, yeah, no, no kidding. There's all this stuff here. I did order the Narnian, by the way, because you you suggested it. It hasn't come in yet. But Esther is also saying you need to read Narnia. You need to read. And if you start reading Narnia yet, like, no, no, I'm going to read the Narnian first, it's like, well, that might have spoilers. And. But yeah, she says the Narnia books are also really good. They are and they aren't. You know, I read them, I reread them from time to time. And my when I was when we were when my when my when I was a kid, my father sat down and and read through them to us, myself and my younger sister. We were a little young. We didn't sit through my older sister, sat through them all. But. They're they're interesting books. They're very English, they're very mid century English. And so I'm surprised they've worn as well as they have. But there's gold in there. Do I at some point I'll probably read them once once I get through the pile of all the other books I need to read, I did order Auntie Bride Surprised by Hope, which seemed a good book. It's a lot thicker than I thought it would be. So, oh, boy. That's one of his best. Yeah, I think you recommended it to me. I think that's why I ordered it. Yeah, that's that's a helpful one. People, people get caught up in eschatology and times and, you know, life of the age to come and right goes into a lot of that there and cleans up a lot of stuff. So it's good. It's good. It must be very interesting. To be, this is always going to sound weird. I know it is because I'm trying to word that I'm curious, curious towards your perspective on existence because your perspective on existence is different from mine. Like you have this idea of a grand narrative or not even idea. You have a belief in a grand narrative, a purpose, a an existence out of you that I don't have. And I just wonder what, how that manifests itself as to what you do or what you how you interact with. It's a weird question because it's too vague, but it's something I keep thinking about. Like, what's a day, what's a week in your life look like? Well, I, I wish I could say that the grand narrative permeated my week more than you might observe that it did. You're right that I live, I live believing we are characters in a in the most unbelievable story, which is the story of this world and the story of humanity, and I'm, you know, it's this enormous book. And I'm just this tiny little page over here. But how does that manifest in in my week? Well, I think in many ways it helps. I mean, I have all the same things to do as anyone else. Now I have a particular kind of job. So I'm a pastor. Now I'm making YouTube videos and talking to people all around the world, which is a totally strange thing. But, but part of the part of the reason that is affordable in my life is because of the big story. You know, people in church, if people in church were bean counters, they might say, well, who are these Jordan Peterson people? And, you know, if they're not giving money to the church, you shouldn't meet with them. And and last night we had a meetup and and James, who had done a video with, he said, you know, I'm curious as to how what your church thinks about all of this, because a lot of churches would say, you know, you're meeting with 10 or 15 men. You know, the church is paying for the heat. The church is paying for the lights. But we're not having a Bible study. So does the church consider this a men's group? And I would say yes. And the reason the church sees that is because the church sees the big story. And so when we spend our evening talking about things that don't necessarily fit and turn inside a narrow church script, the big story helps us see that this is all part of something as are my videos, as are our talk right now. So. And I've noticed that. So so one of the interesting things is that if I talk to people about what I'm doing, who aren't Christians, they almost always ask me, well, you know, they always want are curious about the money angle of it. And so it would be, you know, well, if I'm going to talk to Joe, I'm going to talk to Joe for an hour and a half. So I'm going to have to charge him my almost a therapist fee for an hour and a half. It doesn't work like that. And my church, you know, my church sees my conversation with you as ministry. And what that does is it translates it into this grand story. And and the same for my father's ministry in Patterson, he spent hours and hours and hours helping people who never, ever would join our church and never did. But that's that participation in that story. And so what that story does is reorganize the economy. Now, I've still got I've got kids. I've got, you know, I know how people how do you have time to listen to audiobooks and do dishes are and you and YouTube's I have dishes to do. I have kids to pick up. I have errands to run. And usually the things that actually get in the way of my YouTube stuff are the other ministry stuff. I have to go visit someone. Someone's in the hospital. So but that's all part of the big story. And so now in my life, people say, well, you're a minister. So that affects you directly. Yes. But for laypeople, it's part of what they do is they support and contribute to this ministry and and that's part of it. That enables me to be freed up to do these things. But part of it is that they themselves see themselves in this story. And part of our tradition as well means that the rice farmer in Sacramento is growing food for people. That's part of the story. The state worker is helping the state, the state of California be a more just state. That's part of the story. And so whether you're designing software or growing rice or working in a state office, you're all contributing to this story. And and the way Christ shapes us changes. Again, you can look at Abraham Kuyper and Herman Bobbing for a lot of this theology, too. Abraham Kuyper says there's no square inch of this whole story that Jesus doesn't say, that's mine. And I am going to use this now. Then there's all the hard parts of the story. And you know, you don't have a good story without the hard parts. And the amazing things is Jesus comes in there and says, I will use that, too. And I will take the suffering and I will turn it into glory. And that's why the center of Christianity is this crucifixion and resurrection, because he takes suffering and turn it into glory. So so that's how ideally everything that I do, even the mundane things, gets brought into this big story that is the story of humanity in the world. I'm not sure how to respond to that. Yeah, I really don't. I'm trying, seriously. It's OK. It's fine. It's a lot to just dump into a conversation, I know, but that's I asked. Because I mean, and I think story is the right way. You have a story and what's happening in your life over the last couple of years is, well, your story has taken a surprising turn, a turn you could not have imagined. It's been a happy turn. Well, there'll be some sad turns. And and then you have to figure out what do all these turnings mean, the happy and the sad ones. And that's where we get into meaning. What's the meaning of all of this? So and I think, again, Louis is helpful. Actually, Louis didn't think of this. It was Dorothy Sayers, who was a fiction writer. You know, she was the one she probably not the first one, but she was the one who brought it to Louis and said, you know, think about God this way as the author and, you know, so I'm in the Gospel of Mark and I'm preaching through that and the people say we've never seen someone teaching with authority. What's the word of authority author? But what does that mean? That means Jesus is the author of that. So he's the author of you, he's the author of me. That's but again, we as secular people know I'm the author of me. Yeah, right. No, I mean, I pretty much got got walloped with the you think you have any say in all these things and you don't you kind of just have this you kind of drifting on the current, you sometimes kind of paddle with your hands and you think it helps. Yeah, speaking of Jesus, that's a way to start a sentence. He goes to anything. It's a look. It's it's in at least two gospels. He goes into a synagogue, starts preaching, takes the scroll of Isaiah, I think, yes, I am. So it's OK, this and this and that. By the way, that's me. Basically what he says, that's about this guy and he sits down, drops, drops the mic, sits down and people like, isn't it Joseph's kid? Now, what's up with them? Let's throw off a cliff. Well, especially in John, the Jews are like, it's like everybody carries a bag of rocks with them all the time, just like you said something rocks. It's very much like Twitter. They just well, but again, this is context because talk to people I've never been to Israel, but everyone I know says, you know, the reason everyone's stoning is because there's stones all over the place, you know, just look at stone. Yeah, it's. It the more you read about the guy. It's like if there's any any kernel of truth to it. And I was quite someone. It's like I'm going to stand here and that this year, that's me. Boom. And he's a Jew saying this. That's the crazy part. I mean, this is this is I mean, the Jews had monotheism beaten into them for five hundred years. And then Jesus comes along and says, Yahweh, I am. And people are like stone. Yeah, yeah. Yeah. And there's a lot of passages where like Jews are ready to grab the stones and they turn around and Jesus run off. And probably as a person should be like, all right, let's let's get them out of here because there's a stone in common. Yeah. We got 15 minutes or so. Yeah, a little less than I should take five minutes because my dog is whining at me because I think he wants to go outside and does something else. I'm going to have to clean it up. Yeah, that's that's that's yeah, that's your responsibility. Paul, let's pick up that cross. So you were listening to you were making a video for Vakey. I just finished your last one before before this talk started. I liked what he had to say about flow. Yeah. As a software developer, there's something we call the zone. And any software developer listening to this work, that's zone. I know what that is. We also call it the flow to zone. We usually think in data structures and logic and you build these whole data narratives in your head and you can when you're really. When you're really in the zone, you can you can string them in your mind as just you can see all the data go and all your and you can just code just flows from your fingers and it's a beautiful feeling like all of last week. Previous week, I just had done lots of managing, didn't really get the coding. So I told Mallory like this weekend, I'm going to code. I haven't been in the zone all week and I need to be in the zone for a while. And for fake stock, right. Why do we want that so bad? Yeah, well, I just figured there was a programmer thing. I mean, we're in an industry that selects strongly for people who can focus for a long time on very logical stuff. So we're full of nerds. That's basically what the industry wants. That's what we select on. Do you like puzzles? Yes. Do you like to do puzzles all day? Yes. Can work for us. You know, sit here, we'll feed you sandwiches and solve the puzzles. But yeah, of course, that's that's that that's the art. That's the writing thing. That's the building Legos thing. Anything we we can we can that the part of the brain likes to latch on to. Yeah, I'm sure that. I mean, you said you had ADHD and I'm sure I'm sure you have periods of that hyper focus that I've heard people talk about. I was diagnosed with ADD as a kid, so it's more the the distract. I was a dreamer as a kid. Worst like teachers didn't know what to do with me. I was always lost in my own little fantasy world. And then I read Freud because I was reading while I was reading Jung and Jung says, well, those daydreams, that's a manifestation of desire. Those are wants and desires. Like if I think about them, yeah, I was always like I was I was something somebody with power and competence in my in my childful daydreams. Like that's that's that's that ideal that you want. And that you hear Peterson, you hear Jung like. And then suddenly everything makes sense because there's meaning to work towards. And. It all connects, it's just. And then for fake, it's like, yep, then we have no idea about any of this. And then you you have very similar insights in. In in in that sort of metaphors and symbolism and, of course, Jonathan Pergeot. And it's a wild ride, man, all these videos. It is a wild ride. Please keep making them. It's it's. Yeah. And I wonder if Peterson's mystical experience. Was a similar breakthrough in that he was so deeply focused. On on what he was doing. What did you think that was? Well, he shared a number of them, really. Well, he shared the one that he had, the dream or vision that he had about the cathedral in Montreal. There is the one that he did on that on that podcast. There's the one of that he was going to fight the devil. And, you know, so he shared a number of visions and dreams that he's had. I, you know, I. I think people on one hand, we there are two. I'm very much like C.S. Lewis on this on one hand to dismiss them. That's just dumb. But to make them the be all and end all that's done to their their data. They tell us things, they tell us important things. And there's always experience and interpretation. And interpretation is always interpretation and experiences experience. So you take it and you look at it and you say, huh. And it's kind of what you do with the Bible, too. You look at it and you say, oh, here comes the next one. We're just talking about Peterson. Hello. No, come back. Oops. That's fine. No, I feel bad because I was like, I got to remember to lock the meeting so that they don't just have that panic, tortured look like there's people in here. Oh, yeah. OK, well. Yeah. So I listen to them and I think some people are I think that's I think that's a big part of that's a big part of Peterson, it's a big part of why he always leaves the door open when Sam Harris demands that he not go there. And Peterson say, I can't I can't shut that door, Sam. I can't just dismiss all this. There's something there. I may not be able to explain it, but I can't deny it. And I think that's just I think that's just being honest. And it ties in with what you said about psychedelics. Maybe there's something to it. Maybe it's all just the brain talking to each other like. Freaky also said. And at the one hand, that's kind of the the the the fallacy of always being in the mean, like never making a reel. But about these things of which we know so little, I guess there's not much else we can do. Yeah, yeah. Just drift along on the current. I think I think there's a I think there's a maker. I think someone has made the current. And I think that's why I said that's why the story, the story metaphor, the story narrative helps me because is there is there an author? And I, I. To to have there not be an author. That if I would truly believe that that would be hard. Because I think that would then change how what I do every day. Oh, coming from the other side, it changed everything. And I. I'm not willing to say there isn't one anymore. But. All the other, you know, you know. I'm sure we'll have another conversation about this. I'm sure we will. I'll let you go. Walk the dog. Say hi to John for me. All right. And hey, hopefully see you in March. Yeah, should work out if if if everything goes well. Thanks again for for delightful conversation, man. Really good to see you. Well, thank you. It's good to see you. Say hi to your wife for me. I will. Bye bye. Take care. Bye bye.