https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=YVe_KJlR2dc

 I'll start recording. John, you and I have never spoken before, so why don't you tell me a little bit about yourself and what you're into. Yeah, indeed. Well, thank you very much, Paul. I appreciate the opportunity to get to chat a bit with you. And yeah, so by way of introduction, most people know me because I have a modest political reputation. I was a nominee for Congress in 2014. I was Vice Chairman of the Republican Party in Los Angeles County for about a year and a half after that. But I'm a fancy myself a writer and a public speaker. I have articles that have appeared in Colette and Ariel Magazine and a bunch of other publications over the years as well. Then a lot of commentary on racial issues, cultural issues. I think there's a theme to my political and intellectual It is less about policy advocacy, although that's something I have a toe in, and more about creating space for profitable dialogue and collaboration to unfold between polarized and disparate groups. And so that focus of my work is really crystallized in my role with an organization called Better Angels, which is a national bipartisan nonprofit dedicated to the cause of political depolarization. And I've talked about that quite a bit in other areas. But anybody who's interested in the work of creating understanding between the two sides of our political divide and healing our democracy might be interested in checking out Better Angels. So again, those are the those are the bullet points about John, would you? Okay, and I'll put your if you send me a link, I'll put that in the show notes and I'll put your your Twitter handle Twitter handle in the show notes. How did you so you worked, you know, so I grew up in I grew up in in Patterson, New Jersey, very much my father, very much an African American community, my father's church, although we're white, mostly African American church, my church here in Sacramento, probably 40% African American, most of the leadership is African American, almost all Democrats. And you're one of these infamous black republicans. What what what happened to you, man? What's what what happened? Something must have happened. Yeah, I know it's a real it's a real traumatic traumatic thing in my in my past. I was walking around one day and suddenly it started trickling nickels from the sky. And I thought, oh, hey, trickle down economics. I bought myself an ice cream cone. Republican ever since. No. Well, okay, so that is a story in and of itself. I grew up a Democrat myself. And by the way, your background is very interesting to me because I mean, you want to call me an anomaly. Rather rather frosty looking white guy yourself. Black church community. You don't get that too often either. That's true. That's true. I think we we are inverse mirror each other in some sense. But my family on both sides, traditionally speaking, were Democrats, although I've always had Republicans and conservatives of both colors in my in my family. Well, so the story is this I grew up in a biracial multicultural family. My father is a is white man born in 1950 from the south originally, and my mom born in 1963, African American from inner city Los Angeles. And when I was running for Congress, this is a line some may have heard me say before, but when I was running for Congress, I had I was running in the 43rd District of California, which was Maxine Waters District, right against Congress over the waters and a diverse area, though very left leaning. But there's a pocket of white conservatives in the district because the district lines were redrawn. Not enough to change the political balance, but enough for there to be a, you know, a conservative corner in the community. So I don't open in line conservatives in California, you kind of have to spread them around a little bit so they they don't tip our California politics. Exactly. You can't hold a bunch up enough to win anything. That's right. That's it. You got to love gerrymandering. Yeah, that's right. That's right. But the I had a sort of a canned line that I would use because I was 26 when I started running. And I would say, you know, whether I was speaking to a white tea party group in South Bay or to a black church and black democratic church in South Central Los Angeles, I say the same thing. I'd say people ask me at the age of 26, why I feel qualified to represent a district is complex and diverse as California 43rd. And I'd simply tell people I come from a unique sort of sort of background. My mother is a liberal black democrat from inner city Los Angeles. My father is conservative white Republican from Tennessee. I grew up explaining my father and my mother and my mother and my father. And that's why I think I can represent a lot of you. I usually got that that kind of a reaction. Yeah, I love it. Now, the truth was a bit more nuanced, as my dad is always quick to point out. So my father comes from a kind of a prestigious family background in the record business. I come from a music family. My father is a jazz pianist. My mother is an R&B singer and she used to dance on Soul Train. I know someone else who used to dance on Soul Train. Oh, is that so? She's a minister in our denomination. Really? Well, nomination ability. So depending on when he was on Soul Train, he and mom might know each other. We might try I'm gonna send this video to her. So we'll see what happens. Right, we might be able to make a make a reunion here. That's right. But my grandfather was a major record executive back in the 1950s. First thing he did for which he was well known was he started a radio show and he sponsored a radio show on the mail order record shop, which sponsored a radio program called the Randy's Record Shop. And that was the first national first radio program to broadcast rhythm and blues and gospel basically black music to a national audience. I think my grandpa was white. This is my father's father. But he loved black music, love black culture. And it was a big thing. And on a clear night, the signal would travel clear into the Caribbean. Bob Marley recorded some of his early hits at a recording studio called Randy's, which was named after the record shop and indirectly after my grandfather. And then after the success of the record shop in 1956, my dad was six years old, he had an older brother and older sister, my grandmother, they moved out west to Bel Air, and where grandpa founded a record label called dot records, which you may or may not be familiar with. That was the biggest independent record label in the 1950s. Dot had 15 million sellers. I'm sorry, 36 million sellers, including 15 from dots number one artist was Pat Boone. And just for context, the number one biggest selling pop artists of the 1950s was Elvis Presley, number two was Pat. So, you know, that was a that was a big, big entity. And so on my mother's side, on the other hand, you know, we have people who, who my grandmother's, you know, fought their way up, migrated out from the south decade, decade or two before my, my father's family did. They came from Mississippi. Now that now that she's passed, I can, I can tell this, I can tell this story. There's a myth in my, in my family that I just caught wind of recently that my great great grandmother had to move out to California from Mississippi because she was being assaulted or pushed around by a white man who she wound up stabbing to death or something like that. Realizing like, okay, it's time to, time to get out of Dodge. Yep. That's right. But she came out here, worked several jobs, bought a beautiful house. And, you know, much of that side of the family has done fairly well ever since. But of course, I've got a much larger sort of circles on that side of the family who folks who, you know, tended to be poor and live in inner city, live inner city life and so forth. So growing up, I grew up in multicultural middle class Culver city. On the weekends, I'd go hang out with my black family who lived in inner city Los Angeles. And over holidays, I'd go see my father's family who lived in, you know, upscale La Jolla, California. My grandparents recently passed have had a home that set not far off the water, a million dollar view of the ocean, house that set, you know, just a block or two down the street from Mitt Romney's house, the one with the car elevator that used to get, you know, criticized for during the campaign. So, you know, that's the that's the window dressing of my upbringing. I was always bouncing back and forth from social different racial and socio socio economic environments. And so even though my dad and my grandfather, grandpa was a Kennedy Democrat, he knew John Kennedy, he was good friends with Pat Brown, also good friends with Richard Nixon, Democrats and Republicans, but grandpa was a loyal Democrat. But my and my father was a registered Democrat. But I was always raised with the sense of very kind of conspicuous sort of focus on the value of tradition, traditional American values. Now, for my family that did not necessarily mean religious conservatism. I mean, we were culturally Christian at best. I didn't come to think of myself as a Christian until I was 22 years old, I think. But I grew up hearing stories about Daniel Boone and Davey Crockett and learning about, you know, American history and the founding fathers and more than anything, just sort of seeing in my grandfather and in my parents sort of musical legacies of participation in the rich cultural tradition of American popular music. And so for my dad, he had this which a tradition which in my dad's view things started declining once he hit 1970 and went on with once, you know, multi track recording and disco and then eventually hip hop and gangster rap and all of these, you know, in my father's view, sort of blasphemous, you know, perversions of real music artistry set in. With that came kind of a change in social context too to where everything, you know, people like Pat Boone and, you know, to varying degrees, Andy Williams, Bing Crosby, a lot of the cultural icons of the past, John Wayne, we're kind of seeing this resuscitated now. A lot of people my father looked up to in his youth and who I was sort of raised and looked up to as well were suddenly looked at as retroactively having participated in a social sort of legacy of white supremacy and patriarchy and exploitation of African American artists and et cetera, et cetera, et cetera. So all this kind of turned my dad to the right a bit. Now that wasn't so that I started to catch wind of this sense from the left that everything white and traditional and, you know, sort of, you know, rooted in a sense of the United States as being a country with a heritage and certain unique ideals that are to be celebrated as opposed to sort of cast aside, you know, I kind of caught the whiff of the idea that suddenly it wasn't cool to be proud of being an American in a real conspicuous way on the left in some of the circles that I grew up. I didn't like that and that really pushed my father in another direction. It's a deeper story. But in my own case, I did work for Barack Obama's campaign in 2008. I was very inspired by Barack Obama. I was a liberal activist through high school and I was done with politics when George W. Bush got reelected. I got cynical at an early age, got pulled back in when Obama came along because there was so much in his story that I could relate to. But in the process of working for his campaign, I thought this idea of hope and change is all about creating understanding between people of different colors and different races. I considered myself a student of Martin Luther King Jr. And so I thought that Obama's campaign was an extension of that. And so I thought if I'm going to be a part of the transformational movement, I need to really get to know Republicans and conservatives. So as my dad was shifting right, I know a lot of things are going on at this time in my life. I'm about 2008, I'm about 22 years old. I had just gotten married. My wife had joined the army. I had just started reading the Bible very thoroughly. And several things happened at once. We moved to a military community. I moved from Los Angeles to Colorado Springs. And you know, Colorado isn't super conservative, but compared to LA, you know, might as well be, might as well be LA. Might as well be Mississippi, I guess. You know, I started living with soldiers, married my wife, started, you know, found a faith-based community for the first time in my life. And I started reading books that I'd never read before. I read Atlas Shrug by Ayn Rand and Wealth of Nations, Adam Smith, and, you know, in an effort to understand conservatives so as to empathize with them, I came to discover a great deal of resonance within myself for much of conservative values and whatnot. And so for all of that, I don't know if I would have registered a Republican. I might have just been quietly conservative as a Democrat or an independent if it weren't for the fact that ultimately I wanted to apply my newfound knowledge and conviction to a political campaign to actually expand people's sensibilities and pursue new solutions for community problems in the black community in particular. And looking at the history of the black community, I felt that, you know, a kind of monolithic adherence to a single party orthodox, they hadn't served the black community well. So I came back home. I lived in South LA at that time. My wife, by the way, is from the Jordan Downs Projects in Watts where I lived for about a year or so after we came back. It's another story. But I came back and I ran a, you know, sort of a religiously conservative but bipartisan campaign in South Central Los Angeles. And, you know, we didn't win. But it was an opportunity to make, you know, in addition to getting some media coverage and all that, nothing too huge, but it was an opportunity to make many friendships and many relationships with people on both sides of the aisle and across the district. And it was also my first prolonged exposure to black church life, really. I settled into a ministry in South Los Angeles. And so a lot of the degree which I can relate to maybe some of your experiences being in the black church, I mean, granted, we're separated by space and time. But, you know, but the spirit of the black church wound up really kind of sinking in with me in many respects. And that comes from that part of my life, not so much my early upbringing, you know, I could count on one hand the number of times I went to church between the ages of, you know, zero and 20. Wow. Okay. Okay. And so, yeah, that's that was the political conversion. It overlapped with the religious conversion. But the religious conversion was kind of a thing unto itself. I'm not good at short answers, Paul. I like your answers. I should have warned you going into this. Again, I'm a pastor. I love hearing people's stories. And your story fascinates me for lots of reasons, partly, again, because of my particular rather unique upbringing. My father, there was the, I'm trying to think of her name, The Warmth of Other Sons. What a beautiful book. I can't think of the author's name right now. But so by so my that the great migration of African Americans up from the Jim Crow South, I mean, that was part of what I grew up in, in Patterson, because folks fled the south and folks from different parts of the south went to different areas in the US. So of course, Patterson, New Jersey, a lot of folks from the Carolinas went up to went up into Patterson, New Jersey, and the Dutch who had come in a generation before Patterson is one of these places where you just have successive waves of immigration coming through. And so the Dutch were in Patterson, New Jersey, and they, you know, came there with not a lot and worked hard and slowly just kind of moved their way up to better neighborhoods. And so then other successive communities would come in, well, the black folks came in after the Dutch folks, because of course, World War Two and World War One kind of cut off Dutch immigration, black folks moved up from the south, the churches because people move out quicker than their churches, the churches tend to stay in these neighborhoods, the neighborhoods change, hard to pack the whole church up, you know, that's right. So, so then the, so then there's always a few mission minded people that are looking around and saying, oh, these folks, these folks are struggling. And then we got to do something for them. And of course, the ways that they want to help are more expressions of their own culture than necessarily the culture of the people. And so they started this little gospel mission thing where they help people with clothing or food or whatnot. And that went on for a couple of decades. And at some point, you get donor fatigue, and they're like, this really ought to become a church, and not just this little, you know, helping station. So they called my father, who had been the son of a minister grew up in the depression Midwest, who I, I, I never got a chance to ask my father this question, but I'd be curious to first, the first black person he ever saw was probably a, a, a, you know, a porter on a train in the Midwest or something, you know, going to Grand Rapids, Michigan, the home of Christian reformity, but he gets this, he gets this call to minister in Patterson, New Jersey. And, you know, he had zero cultural experience with the African American community, but what he did have was a warm heart and willing hands and a love for people. And so he spent 36 years there just serving people and kind of converted this kind of helping station mission type thing into a church. And there were always some white folks from the Dutch Calvinist people who wanted something a little different from their Dutch Calvinist churches. And there are always some black folks who wanted a little something different from their black churches. And that happened then basically at the same time as the, as the, as really the civil rights movement was happening. So what became kind of an, an oddity also had eventually kind of a cause connected to it. And people intentionally wanted to come to that church because unlike what Dr. King had said, the most segregated hour on Sunday on the week there in Northside Chapel in Patterson, New Jersey, black folks and white folks were getting to know each other, getting to know their cultures. And of course I was just a kid. I grew up in the middle of it and I thought it was normal. Didn't everybody live this way? Yeah. Just like, just like I thought my upbringing was normal. That's right. Yeah. And had to get older to get some distance and say, wow, that's kind of a weird way to comparison to, you know, that's right. And so when I, when I hear about the kinds of things you're doing, I very much understand it because, you know, a lot of folks, if you don't, if, if you haven't had a lot of personal contact in depth with the community, especially when you have it as a kid, because it, it doesn't really, I would say it doesn't matter, but a little, you know, a little one little white boy in the midst of a black community. Well, he's always white, but he's a kid. So, you know, you don't have those, so folks will be themselves. And so you, you kind of grow up and, and people, and then that's just Paul, he's okay. Yeah. Yeah. You know, and Stan, we love Stan cause Stan helped me out and everybody knew Stan's heart and still to this day, you know, Patterson, New Jersey, how many, well, they're dying now, but how many people just that loved my father, deep love for my father, for everything that he did there. But then when, as I watch, as I watch the, you know, very much at the heart of the, of the race conversations in the 60s and 70s, but as I, as I've watched it develop, part of me, part of me watches it and says, a lot of these folks talking don't know the other side. They don't know them in depth. Yeah. And so, and so I listened to all this new language developing and I'm thinking, you know, okay. So most, most black folks usually vote Democrat for some very real reasons, but the African-American community is per capita, the most Christian community in America. And many of them are socially quite conservative. And, and it's these, these high resolution facts that now suddenly we have this very pluralized, you know, pluralized, not pluralized, polarized situation. It's like this, this doesn't work. This doesn't make a lot of sense when it comes to real people and real relationships. And, and the problem is that people are being educated into this kind of false polarized mythology. And that's going to bear bitter fruit for, for years to come. And so, and so I very much grew up in the era that said, one of the, one of the best things we can do to help people understand each other is in fact integration. If we live together and we live together and we gain higher resolution, firsthand, individual knowledge of each other, all of these stereotypes that are right now causing a lot of this polarization, that can at least be realistic or so I, I really, so I don't know. That's my impression. I'd love to hear what drove you then to this. Well, I just listening to your story, of course you don't want people polarized, you know, they're both sides of your family. Yeah, right. Well, yeah, that's something that I've, that I've said, you know, for, it seems like the default kind of perspective for so many, you know, in particular Democrats and Republicans these days is to look at, you know, is to look at Republicans as the enemy if you're a Democrat or vice versa if you're a Republican. But for me, Democrats and Republicans have always more or less just been mom and dad, you know. And, you know, so yeah, I mean, it is, it is kind of organic to my basic sort of social posture to want to create understanding on a broader sort of level because I grew up feeling like I was in that position. I mean, my parents separated at an early, you know, when I was still fairly young, they divorced when I was, I think, eight years old. They split when I was seven. Okay. And it wasn't over politics, but there were just generational and cultural differences between them. And, you know, they sort of just, they sort of just met in a whirlwind and, you know, they got married because I was on the way and that's not really the recipe for the most functional of relationships, you know, and there's the bitterness that often comes with, you know, separations, you know, the, you know, kids sort of left getting different versions of events and trying to figure out, you know, how to think about things for themselves. But I always felt that not just between, you know, well, certainly between my parents in particular, but just between the two sides of the family. And, and, you know, it just, and extrapolating that out to as I grew up, kind of increasingly being conscious of the ways in which, say, the black kids who I went to school with, particularly the ones who were bussed in from the inner city to come to my school district, because I was in a middle class sort of district, but most of the black kids, you know, were bussing in from south, south central LA. The ones who weren't, the ones who were from middle class areas typically tended to be culturally a bit more similar to, you know, the Jewish kids and, you know, maybe Asian kids. So I was going to school with and so forth. So contemplating, you know, why there were sort of differences in the way people behaved across these color lines, the reasons why the white kids felt scared of the black kids or why the black kids would feel condescended to by some of the white kids or some of the teachers or authority figures and so forth. And, you know, in general, everybody gets along and loves each other in the area in which I grew up. But I can also identify the friction points. And I would sort of notice for myself how it was sort of a strange thing, how I could more or less feel at ease on one side or the other. And yet, sort of be able to perceive the fact that there were, you know, there are points of tension when we brought these sides together that I myself didn't necessarily feel going from, you know, the company of one group to the next. And so, you know, analyzing those differences and trying to figure out sort of how it is these two groups could kind of understand each other. And I'm simplifying it the way I'm explaining it to you because it's not really just two groups, like it's just black and white, it's middle class and it's and it's inner city. And it's all the surrounding ethnic groups and all white people are definitely not the same. You know, the kids who would mess with me when I was growing up were usually black kids from the inner city part of town. They tended to be physically more dominant. They tended to be, you know, more, you know, they tend to be more aggressive. They tended to be quick to quicker to, you know, to sort of get in your face about things. And I was scared of that, but I also sort of admired it too, because I kind of wanted to be a bit more like that myself. But the one kid who was just really my tormentor in elementary school was this white kid who's kind of a trailer park kid who somehow found his way into that school district. But, you know, but he clearly was from a rough kind of, you know, a rough kind of trailer park sort of background. And that guy, man, he was crazier than anybody. And, you know, I've known white dudes like that as well. And so, you know, we could get into this, you know, larger conversation about environment and sociological effects and so forth. But the, you know, the real kind of upshot of all this for me was that it produced a great deal of empathy, I think, in me for the ways in which different people have different challenges. I don't really blame people for their challenges. I think that we all have a responsibility to overcome them. But there's a difference in my mind between recognizing where it is responsibility is located, and, you know, sort of feeling inclined to blame people for their circumstances. You know, I fall frequently between the major kind of partisan narratives in my sort of social analysis of, or cultural analysis of social problems. Because on the one hand, I do feel as if, as if when it comes to the black community, that, you know, this theme of our needing to inculcate a deeper sense of personal responsibility and agency and ownership of our ability to sort of solve problems on a communal level, on a broader level, needs to be emphasized because that is empowering. And I'm concerned about the impact of the sort of, you know, what a person like Larry Elder might call the victim mentality and victimology that I sometimes see, you know, pushed by the left. But on the other hand, I tend to agree with the left more than the right, or at least I have a similar focus as the left in wanting to zoom out a little bit and say, well, look, we may have cultural issues, but these cultural issues are very much a product of historical sociological factors that nobody in the black community had any, you know, responsibility for, or any part in making the case that nevertheless, you know, had a largely determinative influence on the dysfunction that, you know, is taking place in the black community. And that I think persists across the way many institutions operate today. I mean, you know, I tend to have a lot more sympathy for than most people on the right for people who complain about things like institutional and structural racism. That may not be my preferred term for describing that phenomenon, because I think that when you use the word racism, you tend to be implying intent. But I do think that structures continue to operate in ways in our society that sort of reinforce the marginalization of various groups of people and particularly African Americans, because they just descend from a system that was designed that way, you know, and it can be hard for people to see that. So, you know, just all that to really point to, you know, what is kind of top of mind for me, in some sense, and that's kind of like my role as a Christian in sort of pursuing this kind of reconciliation, because, you know, the problem with ideological conversations, and one reason why, you know, mastering your ideological point of view is not really a way to create social progress in a political or civic community, is because of the fact that, you know, our ideological presuppositions tend to be self-justifying in an ongoing way, because if I'm making a claim as to the validity of my ideology on the basis of a set of variables that I, whether consciously or unconsciously, select according to my own, the biases of my own experience, then I'm always going to be able to prove myself right and yourself wrong without ever being able to connect on any sort of a deeper truth that lets us move forward. But the thing that really sort of made me fall in love with Christ, and I'd love to share that story with you, is the fact that in Christ, I see a pathway for us to connect with each other on a deeper level of, I guess you can call it metaphysical or spiritual, but on a deeper level of moral truth, that if we were to find agreement on this way of perceiving things, would allow us in many respects to just kind of skate by the frictions of our political differences, because we would have humility enough to be able to say, okay, I'll give a little here, you'll give a little there, but because we're committed to each other on a human level, we're going to make the best out of each the other's solutions or approaches to a given problem, because we are each of us humble enough to know that we are wrong and willing to forgive and be forgiven for the ways in which we wrong each other in the process of coming to collective decisions. And so, you know, everybody else seems to be looking for the sort of the bulletproof intellectual argument for solving our politics. For me, this is a question of spiritual transcendence fundamentally. And so it's funny because, you know, as a young person, I still thought of myself as a liberal activist. I grew up, you know, greatly admiring and hoping to one day sort of emulate the example of Martin Luther King Jr. And I fell in love with Dr. King in his, I fell in love with Dr. King as a young person only really having gotten to see his kind of secular rendering through the narrative of the, you know, the progressive kind of educational system I grew up in. And that was enough to make me feel like an acolyte of King. But in reading the scripture and in coming to a, albeit perhaps in some sense, highly particularized vision of Christianity that Jordan Peterson has spoken to in my later years in ways that have been significant to me, I've come to see King in sort of this archetypal sense as representing an incarnation, again, you know, in the flawed being that he was, as we all are, but as representing sort of a great human triumph in the project of imitating Christ and then applying the implications of that imitation or the substance of that imitation to actual living, breathing, social, and political and cultural issues, you know. And so in coming to faith and then revisiting the legacy of Martin Luther King Jr., I suddenly looked at that and it filled out my appreciation of King and King filled out my appreciation of the gospels in some sense, because suddenly I realized like this is not, the lessons of the Beatitudes and so forth, this is not merely academic. I can see the power that there is in the word when it is applied to our tangible societal sorts of problems. And so my goal for myself as a Christian in seeking to emulate Christ has been also to sort of try and be something of an exemplar of a transcendent morality that can serve as a bridge in terms of the communication of the gospel to people who may not be used to hearing it in a certain way, but on the other hand, to be a person who can communicate the substance of the gospel in my actual sorts of social activism and so forth, such that we can find a way to transcend the pettiness and the short-sightedness of partisan politics as I've always seen them exist. So yeah, so all of this ties into faith for me in a very real way. So tell me how you came to faith, a little bit flesh that out. Okay, gotcha. This is gonna be another download, Paul. I'm good, I'm good. Yeah, and well first of all, let me just come right out the gate and confess, I'm probably a bad Christian. Jordan Peterson just in Sydney said that there was only one Christian, that's Jesus, and people listen to that and think that's scandalous, but I thought, no, that's right, that's right. We're all trying to reflect him, that's exactly right. I didn't hear him say that, but thank you for telling me, because that actually is kind of the way I feel. I came to Christianity through, oh geez, I came to Christianity through, starting from birth, 20 years of background mysticism by way of my mother and foreground agnosticism by way of my secular sort of liberal educational upbringing. Through, in my, at the age of 20, an immersion in classical Greek philosophy and then a pivot into new age spirituality and then in meeting my wife, who comes from a traditional black Baptist or black Protestant background, a relationship with the black church and kind of a series of revelations, I suppose is the proper way to put it, that led me to sort of a conviction as to not merely the reality of God, but the idea that I had sort of a calling within that broader reality. Important to all of that was my real religion growing up and the impact that that had on me and the way I see the world, and that's music as a religion. I mentioned, excuse me, a little bit about my family background. The way this looked for me was this. I remember growing up, my mother was a person who, she went to a black Methodist church growing up, but she was not really Christian in any way that most self-identified Christians would probably recognize, but she had a deep spiritual and life and a deep life of prayer and so forth. And my mother was a person who would have, she would say things that eerily would seem to come true. A week or two later, she would have dreams that she would tell us about that would then seem to be born out of things that would happen later on. She would have some spooky intuitions and experiences that would unsettle people when they heard the stories and so forth. And my mom was very enmeshed in psychic readings and this sort of thing. This is all stuff like going to other church environments and it's like, oh, hit them with some holy water. But that was something that I would hear my mom talking about. I would have dreams and experiences that themselves seem to be highly synchronistic and would be difficult to explain in any conventional means and things that I would tend to chalk up to coincidence ultimately because growing up as a person who felt himself to be kind of an intellectual secularist, I ultimately figured, well, there's a lot of weird things in life, but what would be stranger is if they were attributable to anything that you could think of as supernatural and therefore what seems to be unnormal has got to be sort of, with the neat tool of Occam's razor, you can just sort of slice it up and throw it into the category of the coincidental and so forth. But I was only ever about 51% sure of that way of looking at things. I always felt that there was sort of something behind the veil, if you will. And my mom's sort of visions and experiences and my sorts of experiences put aside the reason why that seemed, you know, seemed to be the case with me was the fact that music, there's something about music which seemed to imply that the nature of reality is less an arbitrary thing in terms of the way in which our senses kind of interact with the sequences and patterns of our experiences and observations with the physical and the social world. It's less an arbitrary sort of, you know, series of interactions that yields kind of some orderly kind of shape of personality and more something to where your personality kind of molds and adapts itself a little bit to the kind of, to the poetry of experience, if you will, that there is a logic to the kind of sensual nature of our personal and emotional interactions with one another certainly, but also just with the natural world and our subconscious and so, and our imaginations, I should say. And so, you know, the world optimally understood always seemed like a musical place to me. And you've probably heard Jordan Peterson say something along the lines of, you know, reality is much less like, you know, like prose in a textbook and much more like a symphony. Well, that resonates very deeply with me. But I applied that particular way of seeing things to my relationship with Greek philosophy. So I took a community college course in philosophy about the age of 20 or so and from there really sort of developed this long-running interest in philosophy and in the philosophical history of western civilization. But I've always had a particular, there was always particular resonance for me with the, with Plato and Socrates and the classical thinkers. What really hit home for me in studying Plato and Socrates in particular, obviously we come to Socrates by way of Plato, but well, there was one thing that made me stop in my tracks and that was Socrates' debates with the sophists. The sophists, you know, they claimed that there was no ultimate sort of value system or anything like that. That human values were entirely subjective. But that what there was were different ways rhetorically of being able to communicate of being able to communicate one's values and that, you know, the optimal thing to do was to apply rhetorical techniques to the pursuing the advantage of one's own self-interest. Socrates came along and said, no, that is not quite correct. Well, what you have are different ways of expressing values and moral truths across different cultures. And so one culture may have one conception of fairness or another conception of courage that expresses itself in different ways, but you have conceptions of moral truth of these various particular virtues that exist from one culture to the other. So the expression of them may be relative, but the truth of them is absolute. And when I read that, that sort of, that turned a key in my mind, because suddenly I started thinking about musical reality and I thought, you know, it's interesting. I can meet people who people have different tastes in music. I can meet a lot of people who love, you know, Beethoven and a lot of people who don't. I can meet a lot of people who, you know, love Metallica or Tupac and a lot of people who don't. But one thing I never meet are people who can listen to the Moonlight Sonata and as they're listening to it, start bumping their head back and forth like they're listening to a, like they're listening to a, you know, or something like that. If you know how to appreciate the Moonlight Sonata, it brings you sort of calm and an effervescence and so forth. Whereas, you know, if you're listening to a lot of sort of rock or rap or high adrenaline stuff, you're going to have a physical kind of reaction that locates itself in both different parts of your body and in different parts of your psychology and so forth. So I pursued that metaphor in the background of my mind as I'm reading Aristotle's, you know, words about virtue in the foreground of my mind. That virtue kind of exists as the mean between extremes and in reading the Allegory of the Cave and this, you know, this kind of illustration of what the progress of essentially, you know, classical enlightenment looks like. You go from seeing the shadows on the wall cast by the light of the fire behind you, you're one of these prisoners in the cave. You see the shadows, you think that they're the real thing, but then you're unchanged and you stand up and you walk out the cave and suddenly you get hit by the light of the sun and it's so wearing that, you know, you can't look right at it. So you've got to look at things that the light shines on. And in pursuing music as kind of a prism for understanding morality, because that's what ultimately wound up sort of happening with me, I came to think of morality not so much as what you do as a consequence of what you think, but as sort of the virtues that you embody as a consequence of what you feel. And how is it that you feel a certain way to where you can kind of walk in moral synchronicity with the higher sort of conception of virtue? The most beautiful feeling that I know in my life, something that is communicable in music, but that goes beyond music, is that feeling of just unconditional and unadulterated love exists and can exist between the person in the world and certainly between a person and the other people in his or her life that love him or her. And it's funny, I have a friend and mentor who told me that the, you know, the kids who are, and I'm not putting this forward as any sort of statement of fact, I just think it's interesting. He said that he's got multi-ethnic children. And he said that in his experience, biracial kids, they go through a lot of social challenges having to adapt to the complications of their upbringing, but they also tend to be incredibly sort of well-loved because the only reason they exist is because, you know, not because it was convenient, it was because, you know, it was tended to be because there's a great deal of love between the parents and the rawness of that love had to compensate for the fact that there's no sort of clear social or cultural lane for them to kind of fit into. There's a lot that you have to make up for in terms of, you know, kind of fittedness of the larger environment to the growth process of a, you know, biracial or bicultural sort of individual through sheer force of affection in some sense. And so for me, I would, you know, as a person who was raised as a musician, so I'm pretty rusty now, but I was raised as a singer and a trumpet player and, you know, improvising the bandstand at the age of 12. That's when I started performing with my father and my brother and whatnot. In order to play jazz right, in order to improvise correctly, you have to sort of be able to create the music inside of yourself before you express it, you know, through the horn or through your voice or what have you. There has to be a vision and kind of an internal embodiment of what it is you're creating that then comes through the gates of your expression, right? And you can't really be in sync with the chord changes writing underneath the music that you're playing unless you put out of your mind the sorts of distractions that come from every other part of your life that come from your insecurities about this, that, or the other. Or you have to integrate your frustrations or your, you know, your anguish or your hopefulness or whatever it is into a communicable thread of sounds and phrases that, you know, when articulated, makes sense on a subconscious level because that's what music is. I mean, music doesn't always have words to it, whether it does or doesn't. It makes sense on a deeper kind of level. It conveys an emotional reality that is a spiritual reality, right? And so what I, so in coming to see virtue through that kind of things, I began the practice of thinking what does the truly moral individual look like? What does the truly selfless individual look like, not just in terms of his external, his or her external actions, but in terms of their internal universe? And I tried to put myself, so, you know, naturally I thought of the most moral people I could imagine. And, you know, reading about Socrates and Plato, but, you know, thinking about Gandhi, thinking about Dr. King, and thinking about Jesus of Nazareth, even though I didn't have any religious attachment to the idea of Jesus. In fact, to tell you the truth, I always thought of myself as anti-Christian, essentially, not anti-Christian in the sense that I did not like Christians, but, you know, I thought of Christianity as a force for intellectual backwardness and social aggression in our society, and certain versions of it I still probably feel that way about more or less. But the figure of Christ himself, the figure of Jesus himself, even if it was, even if he was just kind of a character and a fairy tale to me at that time. The idea that there could be a man who could live his life from beginning to end, loving selflessly and speaking the truth, only to die voluntarily at the hands of people who hated for him as he prayed for them, and as he prayed for their well-being and salvation, you know, even as a person who did not accept the historicity of that story at the time, I was nevertheless a person who was admiring of the moral purity of that tale, right? And so I began this process of trying to emulate within myself, within my imagination, what does the thought process of Socrates look like, of Gandhi look like, of King look like, of Jesus look like? And there was this a priori love that seemed necessary. It seemed like for me to really sort of live out, you know, the implications of a truly optimized kind of moral and ethical disposition, I had to love people as a matter of preemptive conviction as opposed to as a condition of the goodness of others, right? And so I sort of cleared out, I adopted a practice of meditation. Nobody really taught me how to meditate except that in being raised as a jazz musician, in some sense, I felt like I already knew how in a way. My mother meditated, you know, and I would see her but I adopted a practice of meditation and I tried to sort of hone that way of thinking within myself. And then I came to another sort of, as that developed, and I started to feel my capacity to sort of love people, unconditionally expand, and I saw how it sort of allowed me to see people in a different way as kind of being victim of the vicissitudes of the world as opposed to being people who should be blamed for their shortcomings because of how they responded to the world. I came to another feeling on top of it. I came to think maybe the way to God, maybe what God is, if morality is something that, and virtue is a real thing, if in other words it is not merely subjective as the sophists say, but if it rides the current of the objective truth of the transcendent sort of spiritual and emotional kind of reality that you can see reflected in music, but that goes beyond music, goes beyond the grace of music and art to even include the grace of our own internal universe and the grace of our own kind of moral imagination when it is truly in line with more sort of enlightened ethical presuppositions. In order for me to come to that moral perspective, I had to assume it was justified before anybody gave me a reason to think that it was justified on the basis of their actions. And so maybe God is like that. That's what I came to think to myself. Maybe in order to see God as God is, you have to sort of take it for granted that he's there. And what I challenged myself to do was to think to myself, if God were real, what would he say to me now? And not God as just kind of a raw sort of abstract concept, like if there's a white guy in the sky, looks like a buff Paul Vanderclay pulling the strings over all of us, what would he be like? But if God genuinely is this sort of transcendent spirit of this personified omnipotence of benevolence and intelligence with goodwill communicating itself through a real personality with whom I might have a relationship, what would such a God seem to say to me if he were real? And so I gave myself permission to imagine God speaking to me. And this is the point at which, if Matt Delhansy were here, he might say, this is the point at which he became an insane person. And I was thinking about too, even at the time, I wanted to run the experiment. I gave myself permission to imagine what God would be saying to me if there was a God present to say anything to me. And what happened was something I was never able to reverse. And that was the fact that God began speaking. And I told myself, I'm going to imagine this as if it were true. And in imagining God as being there, as if he really were there, God has never really left me since. And from that came really a couple of years worth of intense meditation and prayer. And I should put a bookmark here really quick just to say that there is something strange about, and really this is the beauty of the conversations that Jordan Peterson is inspiring and that you've been having with people and that really kind of the digital space is allowing us to have. One thing I think that, and by the way, the other thing I was doing at this time in my life was I was, interestingly, this was also the precise time in my life when I became a huge fan of Christopher Hitchens. Because in studying, as I felt my spiritual kind of world, the beginning to formulate, I wanted to check that against someone who could pull me out of it if I genuinely was kind of losing my mind. The way in more recent years I had come to start listening to Jordan Peterson, kind of, you know, saying all his speeches and debates and videos and really kind of taking in so much of what he was saying. You know, Christopher Hitchens is my first kind of YouTube teacher and mentor, you know. Even if it was in the context of him existing in my life as a critical voice in my mind. I mean, really Christopher Hitchens sort of played in my imagination as devil's advocate every time God would say something. I would listen to the voice of God speaking to me in a certain way and I hear Christopher Hitchens, you know, and I hear Jason say, well let me tell you why this is bullshit. And I love Christopher, you know, it's very sad that I won't get the chance to meet him in this life. But, you know, he... Uh-oh. Uh-oh. See if John comes back. There he is. That happens sometimes. Yeah. So, you're talking to God and you've got Christopher Hitchens as kind of your lifeline. It's like, well, you know, pull me out of this God thing if, you know, it gets too weird. Exactly, exactly. Yeah, I did not give my... I wouldn't give myself permission to believe anything that I did not feel I could... I wouldn't... I told myself I didn't have permission to believe, to adopt any belief that I did not feel I could defend if Christopher Hitchens were sitting there in front of me to argue it out of me, you know. Okay. And so, you know, I felt at each step, each step that I took was a step that I felt I could intellectually justify. Yeah. And so I ultimately came to a relationship with God. And the thing that I was going to say before was that, you know, the conversations you've been having with people have been remarkable as a product of the change in technology and also to a fair degree as a consequence of the sorts of conversations Jordan Peterson has been having with people. You know, one thing that I think a lot of new atheists, some of them understand this, but many of them don't, I think, is the fact that for any atheist or new atheist who is confused as to why it is such obvious kinds of secular arguments only seem to be able to go so far and sort of, you know, shifting superstitious people like myself out of, you know, belief in God or a conviction that faith is a justifiable sort of, you know, cognitive vehicle to sort of ride through life with, for anybody who is frustrated at the limitations of powerful polemics to sort of change people's view of things, you know, there are millions of people around the world, and I'm one of them, who have had experiences that I think we would like to explain, like to communicate, and frankly, you know, I'd like to be able to talk about some of the things I've seen and been through in a way to where even if you could really show me how it is I am out of my mind, I'm still open to it. I'm still open to knowing how it is I'm crazy and so forth. But so long as our conversational ecosystem does not allow for us to sort of be able to be open and honest about the things that we've experienced that do not seem to fit neatly into the sort of, you know, into the material paradigm. And as a quick aside, I'll say very quickly that, you know, I've never stopped trying to reconcile these things. As a technical matter, I don't really believe in the supernatural, per se. I believe that what we call supernatural is that for which we do not yet have the tools or means by which to explain how it is natural. So in other words, I believe in God and I believe in miracles. But I imagine that if we knew all there was to be known about miracles and the way the universe works, we would discover a scientific explanation for it. That's very Peterson-esque. It is very Peterson-esque. And it's also part of the reason why, you know, if I'm around secular people, it can be difficult for me to have this conversation because, you know, I start traipsing into metaphysical territories where they have a tough time going. But then if I'm around conventional, you know, a lot of religious folks, it can be very difficult to have those conversations as well because I seek reconciliations that many of them just are not interested in because a lot of folks want to put a categorical sort of divide between, you know, the realm of the holy and the realm of the worldly. And while I perceive the spiritual distinctions, I do believe that truth is kind of holistic, ultimately. That, you know, if you were to perceive the greater truth, you start to see how the different categories of knowledge and cognition that we have ultimately have to sort of weave together around, you know, something of a common kind of, something of a common conceptual center. There should be a way in which the spiritual can be translated into the material. The material can be translated into the spiritual that does not sacrifice anything at the heart of either. Now, you know, that is a lane of discourse that, obviously, we would have to unpack a lot of that to do that conversation justice. But it is, you know, Peterson asked. And, you know, those are the lines along which I have been thinking since this time in my life. And so when Peterson came around, I was one of those people who listened to him. And, you know, the whole thing about, you know, his fight against political correctness and, you know, postmodernism and cultural Marxism, I'm with him on a lot of that. You know, I think that I have more empathy for a lot of the left-wing social perspectives than he does. But, you know, on the politics of things, as a general rule, I'm pretty much with him, you know. But the thing that really excited me about him was the fact that in talking about archetype, the evolution of archetype and the psychological sort of, well, the way in which biological evolution is compatible with the evolution of these conceptual archetypes, which seem to evolve in such a manner that houses and optimizes the growth of our spiritual and moral beings, that maps precisely onto my sort of view as virtue and spiritual and emotional sort of optimal reality, as riding the currents of kind of, you know, this musical metaphor, which sort of illustrates the hierarchical sort of transcendence that you can pursue up to sort of a peak, you know, up to sort of a pinnacle point in internal sort of spiritual and ethical understanding that culminates with us loving our neighbors as we love ourselves and loving God and loving love, and God is the spirit of love, right, with all of our hearts and all of our souls and all of our mind and refracting from that, having that sort of animate all of our actions and all of our thoughts going forward. His schematic just sort of fit perfectly. It added something new, but it fitted, you know, just perfectly into the way in which I had already tended to see things, you know. So when Peterson, in listening to Peterson, I felt like, okay, here's a person who's speaking a language that I, as a person who now feels himself a Christian, now I'll complete that story, but I as a person who now feels himself a Christian, but who is also still feels himself very much interested in pursuing the material truth to the bottom, and a person who is uncomfortable with the idea that the material truth and the spiritual truth could be disconnected in any ultimate way, as opposed to sort of, you know, conditionally differentiated in the context of our spiritual awareness, as a person who's not comfortable with that, who therefore still sympathizes with people like Matt Dillahunty and Richard Dawkins and so forth, in terms of their desire to understand the world more fully on a mechanical level, and a scientific level. You know, Peterson was in a geography, was in a terrain that I, that they wasn't aware of anybody like that. I thought that I was sort of the only, I mean, I knew there are other people who felt that way, but among, you know, and in new age communities, you see this a lot. Like I could talk about Greg Braden, Bruce Lipton, and these people, but you know, but among Christians, I just, you know, and Peterson, I know we can talk about, is he a Christian, isn't he? I like his definition, which you articulated, and so in any event, but so at this point in my life, though, I had come to believe in God, but I had not yet come to think of myself as a Christian. I thought I had a sense, very much so, of sort of who Christ was, in some sense. Like he clearly was a person who had ascended this hierarchy of spiritual and ethical understanding to its peak point. And, but I still sort of looked at the Christian Bible as kind of being an anchor for prejudice and bigotry and narrow-mindedness and all of these sorts of things. And then, you know, a couple of years later, I wound up meeting a woman who, this is a story I would tell on the campaign trail as well, especially in church, I wound up meeting a woman from a traditional Black Baptist background. We were doing political fundraising for the Democratic Party, ironically enough, at the time in a call center and, you know, got to talking to her and, you know, she was attractive and I liked all sorts of things about her, but she's very traditionally religious. And I was very traditionally Christian and I was a sort of a new age philosopher type, you know. So we would have these philosophy versus theology sorts of confrontations. And then on one occasion, I said something to her along the lines of, look, I believe in God, I believe God is real, but if God is real, then God can't be about all these rules and dogmas and commandments and so forth. God is real. God has to be about positive energy. He has to be about love. He has to be about kindness and understanding and so forth. And she sort of nodded her head and she said, that's right. She said, for though I speak with the tongues of men of angels but have not loved, I have become a sounding grass or a claiming symbol. Though I have all faith and knowledge to remove mountains, if I have not love, it profits me nothing. If I give my goods to feed the poor and if I give my body to be burned, if I have not love, it profits me nothing. So I listened to her say that and I nodded my head and, you know, she actually got the verses right when she said them. And I listened to her and I said, wow, that's beautiful. Did you write that? And she said, no, she said that's from first Corinthians. And literally, I did not really realize that outside of, you know, a few things Jesus said in the Gospels, I didn't really realize that there are any verses like that in the Bible. Because as much as I was a reader and was proud of, you know, had read Plato and Socrates and at that point, you know, Kant and Hume and Nietzsche and all these people, I had not really given the Bible a read. So I thought, okay, both for intellectual reasons, so I can comment on Christianity more credibly. And so I can keep talking to this girl who I kind of like, let me go and read, let me go and read this Bible, you know, I'm gonna read this book, just say I did it. And so I went from I'm about, I guess I'm 21 or 22. At this point, I went and read, you know, first chapter and verse in Genesis. I'll start at the beginning. Yes, exactly. I said, well, I'll tell you really quickly, I did try to read the Bible when I was about 13 years old or so. And even then I was a pretty gracious reader. But I started, you know, King James, and, you know, got through about five or six chapters of Genesis, and the language was just so inaccessible to me, that I thought, well, let me just, you know, jump somewhere in the middle, and see what I land on and see if I can't find something that makes a little more sense. So I just opened the book, literally just to the middle of this King James book, and landed right on Job, where, you know, the first the first couple chapters basically read, Job was a good man who loved God and did everything that God wanted him to do. And to reward him, God said, Satan wants to go ahead, go ahead and ruin this man's life if you like. So Job left his wife and kids died, he lost his house. And at that point, I'm just like, no, no. I am good on that. Confirms all of my, all of my suspicions about this. My first effort was was aborted. But so yeah, but at this time in my life, I, you know, over the course of nine months, I went from the first chapter and verse in Genesis, the last chapter and verse of Revelation, and came out the other side of that, thinking, calling myself a Christian. Because this time around, in through the prism of all the other experiences I had, I felt that I felt that I had come to know God's Spirit in powerful, in sort of in powerful ways, and that through the Spirit that I had come to be acquainted with, I could now sort of understand what the different stories in the Bible were actually teaching and how it is that they sort of folded into a longer narrative that culminates sort of with the appearance of the death and resurrection of Christ, and the significance of the kind of change in in spiritual emphasis that occurs from the, you know, from the Old Covenant to the New, you know, and, and now, you know, one of the keep in mind, I'm, I wasn't just listening to Hitchens, I was also watching Harris and Dockins and Hitchens, which is kind of my, my go-to guy. So, but, you know, the course of things, I'm always asking myself, well, how does this, how does this square with, with evolution in particular, how does the square with what we know, what we think we know about the Big Bang, so on and so forth. I came to look at the Christian canon as essentially telling an evolutionary story, in some sense, in a real sense. I looked at there as being sort of a spiritual evolution that takes place, you know, from, from Genesis, from the Torah, from a period in the history of, you know, the people of Israel, where folks were, in my reading of it, not at a point maybe to where people in general could sort of intuitively apprehend the finer dimensions of the personality of God. And so the law was there to make the nature of God communicable, while not being sufficient to allow people to become like God in and of the power of the law itself. But that rather it was a guidepost by which men could be moral and in deviating from it could discover the ways in which their faith had fallen short. And that as the Old Testament story progresses and the law shows itself less and less able to sort of keep God's people kind of anchored to the core sort of, you know, to his core will through sin, we also come to discover the ways in which we fall. So we come to discover that obedience is more important than sacrifice, that mercy is something that, that there's a spirit to the law that transcends the letter. And so Christ in coming to fulfill the law shows us the work of God animated in the flesh, that the law is not to no import or no significance, but that in fulfilling the law, we are not as, you know, ideological political partisans are sort of prone to act now in the thrall of a certain dogma. But rather, those things that we believe religiously are an outpouring of the, of this, what, what I would say is what Peterson is getting at when in his conversation with Sam Harris, he talks about this a priori axiomatic sort of framework through which that needs to be established before we can kind of, you know, properly sort of evaluate the implications of religious belief and interpretation, that it is from that a priori sort of unconditional love, not just that we have for God and for others, but that God has for us, first of all, which triggers our sense of debt and gratitude that leaves us sort of emotionally and intuitively inclined to pay that forward in self-sacrifice on behalf of others, that this is the true nature of God. And it's not truly communicable in its deeper essence through written words. That's why the word had to be made flesh. This is what I'm coming to think as I'm reading the scripture now through these, you know, through my new eyes, so to speak. As it says in the Bible, you know, the kingdom of God is not in word, but in power. So I came to appreciate just what that power looks like. And the way I read the Bible was to think that there is literally sort of an evolution in man's, in the cognition, I guess, of God's people in some sense, that God's people were brought to a point to where the time is right for Christ to come into the world and to embody what at that time was, you know, how many thousands of years worth of lessons, you know, into the life of a single man, the spirit of God made flesh. And that in demonstrating, you know, God's being through his own, through the being of Christ, we come to see beyond the commandments etched on stone tablets, just what the personality of God really is. And look, Jesus was a descendant of David, he came from a physical life, right? And so, you know, if you're, and if we're talking about the evolutionary history of the species and so forth, I mean, you know, one thing we have a sense of is how it is that progressive generations and iterations of species and organisms accumulate lessons that then become reflected in the adaptations that they wind up adopting to be able to survive in changing environments and even at the heart of that, to learn how to more effectively cooperate with one another so as to actually establish communities that preserve our ability to optimize our biological imperatives and so forth, which is to say our need to survive and reproduce. But of course, the real glue at the heart of that, you know, at the heart of our biological and our sociological evolution is our capacity to treat each other well as human beings, right? And so I love listening to Jonathan Haidt, Brett Weinstein, and Heather Haing, Brett and Heather, I've come to be friendly with. I haven't had this conversation with them, so they might listen to me talk to you. I hope they do. This has been, I mean, this is, I know you've got to stop coming up here, but this has been wonderful. Well, yeah. I'm curious how you found Jordan Peterson though. Yeah. I was asked that. I came, well, actually listening to Sam Harris. I came back to, Sam Harris has been a big influence on myself as well. I didn't think much of Sam back when I was listening to Christopher Hitchens early in the day and there are reasons for that. But I think I caught Harris again after discovering Dave Rubin. And then I started listening to Harris's podcast and I just thought every episode just was so valuable. And then I read and started reading in comments under Harris's videos, people saying, you've got to have Jordan Peterson on. And then other people saying, Peterson is a lunatic. Why would Harris talk to a guy like him? And then when Harris and Peterson have that first conversation, you probably listen to it, where they got dug in over what seemed like a very basic epistemological question over what is the nature of truth. I listened to that conversation and I came away from it thinking, first of all, I had an image of Jordan Peterson in my mind of looking much more like Dan Dennett or something. I just found it like he was like this portly old dude with like sitting by a chimney with a pipe or something. Visually I was totally off. But I listened to that conversation and I thought, well, if I'm scoring that as a debate, Sam wins the debate. But I understand exactly what this guy is talking about. Yeah, I would imagine you did given what you told me. Right. Yeah. I mean, it's just to say that all truth is phenomenological, I think, ultimately. And that goes for, you know, that essentially holds for material truth and the spiritual truth as well. So we abstract things in order to talk about them. But ultimately, there is nothing that we can contemplate or discuss that we are not simultaneously experiencing. Right. And so I thought that that's essentially what he was getting at, because there's kind of moral implications to everything we think, say and do, if we just stop to kind of recognize it enough. And part of the reason for that is because even if we can isolate a thing that we do and say, okay, well, this is a morally neutral act, in reality, everything exists in the context of everything else we do think and are, you know, just like every note in a song is not wasted in a piece of music that is properly designed. Right. And, you know, so that I thought was essentially what he was trying to express. You know, I went on to start listening to him more after that second conversation they had, you know, progressively just became more and more engulfed, like, oh, this guy is really real. You know, he's really saying some things that I've been maybe waiting to hear a little bit. So, you know, yeah, so that's how I came to be familiar with him. So, you know, yeah, so, I do feel myself to this day in some sense a little bit out of place and I feel myself a little bit out of place in my Christianity and I feel myself a little bit out of my out of place in my rational humanism and so forth because I still very much think of myself as an enlightenment individual. You know, I still consider myself a proponent of that project. You know, I mean, the pursuit of truth is the pursuit of truth, I think. Yeah. And there are very few places, Paul, where I can have the conversation with you that I've had right now. Honestly, this is me publicly saying a lot of things that I've never said to anybody before. And, you know, I'm sure there are people who look at me as maybe a little bit differently. For heaven's sake. But nevertheless, I do think that, you know, I could be wrong about anything. But I do think that we are living this life as a product of our natures that are reflections of the nature of reality and I nest something called God at the heart of that reality. It's the intentionality that, you know, spawns forth the little bits of awareness and, you know, presence and mindfulness that you and I are and that everyone you know happens to be. And so, you know, if I'm going to be honest and I have to say the things that are really in my heart and my mind to say it, part of my work is about making the conversational and social world safe for us to be honest about what we believe in a way that also allows us to empathize with each other. With respect to what we believe. And I believe that that is good critical work as well as good Christian work. And that's the way I view it. Yes. Yes. Oh, I love the way you put that because when I look at it, one of the things we have long enjoyed, it's a funny dynamic that it's hard to say certain things in front of certain people. Yeah. That evokes within us the knowledge of the economies and realities that are not immediately obvious physically even though we know they actually govern us and our actions. Yes. And so what polarization tends to do is, and I see this all the time, people will say things but, you know, you can't let anybody know I really think that. Well, when that happens, we as communities are impoverished. And I learned that in racial contexts often because the thing is when you drive the bigots underground, they don't stop being bigots and they don't stop acting in bigoted ways. You just, so it's better, let's, okay, let's put our cards on the table. And in church, that's always been the case. I always tell any small group that I do, I say, I want you, you can say anything in this group that is honest and obviously not an attack on another individual in the group. But if there's something, if you think that God is so and so and you have a belief that's heretical, please just say it. The problem is in church that you lose status when you say certain things. But that's the way it is in every group. Right. Even if you're operating on the assumption that certain people need to change, you need to allow them to show who it is they really are if they're ever going to have the chance to change in the first place. That's right. And so on every level, yeah, more, a more open and honest and empathetic and sympathetic society is something that accrues to the benefits of people across the religious and ideological sort of spectrum. It should be what we all want. But it, you know, it requires us embodying certain virtues like humility that, you know, harken us back to the value of, you know, our philosophical foundations and the gospel teachings to begin with. Yes. Yes. So, you know, that's where I tend to return. Yes. Oh, I agree 100%. I know you have to go, but this has just been a delight for me. I have so enjoyed this. I've so, I thank you so much. I feel like you hardly said anything, man. I didn't have to. You said it all. I've got a real problem with that, man. I just really enjoyed, well, it was selfish of me because I already know myself. So you're undiscovered territory. And it was just a joy to hear your story and to hear your heart and to hear your beliefs and how you came at them. Such an interesting story. And I think, you know, when I post this, people are going to, people are going to love it because just given all the conversations I've had, I know many, many people will listen to your story and identify with it and or profit from it. So I think this has been just a delight. So. Well, thank you, Paul. And it's just really encouraging for me to know that you're in the world and doing what you're doing now, because I mean, just so people, I mean, I reached out to you and I felt like in watching your videos, I don't know, man, I felt like, like this guy, he's good. You just sort of feel like you're an uncle to a lot of people who've never had the chance to talk to you. And, you know, I just felt like, you know, if I'm going to, you know, show my heart a little bit on these issues, this would be a good guy to maybe start with here. Other friends, Esther O'Reilly had a conversation with her. She's wonderful. You know, this is an exciting time for these kinds of conversations. And I think that the space you occupy is really critical to whatever it is that God is doing at this, you know, in this moment in time. So I thank you. Thank you. Well, I hope you have the rest of your day as a wonderful day, John, and thanks for carving out this time. Yeah, I hope I can do it again. Okay. Thanks a lot. Take care. You too. Bye bye.