https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=X1XSWvhJXaQ

 It's like it's like having the TV talk back then suddenly it's like I should see a doctor So I'm recording this as is my practice and I will If you're okay with that and we'll just decide to do whatever I don't want it to get in the way the conversation I do this because often people Afterwards if I don't record it if we said something they're like, what did we say? Do you have a recording of it? Right. You just record it anyway. Yeah. Yeah So, how are you? I'm doing alright I'm a musician and I am Delving deep into the intellectual dark web I Just it's you know, there's so many people out there who are talking about this stuff and I just don't seem to have any Of them around me That's why I started meetups because that's I hear that all the time I Opened like I opened up the meetup app to see if there was anything going on And of course anything that would be even remotely interesting conflicts with a gig that I have Yeah You know, so you're professional musician. Yeah. Oh cool musician play playing all the time saxophone and guitar mostly, okay Well, I invite you to move to Sacramento and you can play in my church. There you go We can't pay you but you can play Big churches can pay I know They can and I have I have friends that do that yeah, I'm not I'm not among them Well, we don't have a lot of time so so what what's on your mind well, I was So I was listening to the Sam Harris and Jordan Peterson debates. Yeah as we all are and There were I was thinking about the problem with Sam's morality as There's so many problems with it but one of the one of the big issues that I have with it is Worship It doesn't take The idea that people are worshiping all of the time into account And that If you're allowed to choose your own form of well-being What you end up with is polytheism There's people will fight to the death for their gods whatever they are, yeah Yeah, and people hate it when you poke them in the axioms, yep. Yeah, that's true. So How can What are your thoughts on worship and Why doesn't What do we have to Get Sam to understand about worship so that he starts to think about it just a little bit more. I I think You are probably more attuned to this because you are a musician and What has happened? If you go into almost any Big box evangelical church the portion of the service that people call worship They associate with music. Yeah, and that is a pretty severe reduction of What the word worship means, you know, it's so much broader than just Worship is in Christian theology worship is your entire life Right all of your choices are a response to God And in all my sermons, I have misery deliverance gratitude The whole all of the stuff we do is supposed to be in that gratitude part Which means when I go to work, I'm worshiping and not just because I'm a pastor when I'm When I'm cutting the grass Worshipping when I'm fixing the fence in other words all of life is supposed to be worship and I can't think of the hymn right now But we have a hymn in our denominational hymnal that talks about you know, basically worship 20 You know, that's when all of our life is worship that is what we are designed to do, but you're exactly right because well-being There's just little control on that. Yeah, so it's it's I'm just skeptical about his system. I'm I'm severely and now in all fairness, I should probably read his book, but I just can't all the other books out there I want to read I just can't bring myself to put that on top of the priority list. Yeah Yeah at the top of the list So if there's a huge Sam Harris fan out there that wants to send me the book I'll take it. Yeah, I'll page through it, but I haven't been impressed by what I've seen so far Right, I mean because if he if you think of what he's doing as in service of that book and If you look at what Christians do in the service of their books You know, I'm not impressed by what he worships basically, he's worshiping his rationality and You know that Caused him to be He causes him to respond to Jordan Peterson in a very dismissive way because he's saying your your rationality is incomplete and then he just doesn't He doesn't hear it. He doesn't engage with it Because it's the same he's a fundamentalist rationalist. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah You know, so anything that goes against what he perceives as rational He just dismisses the way that fundamentalist Christians dismiss Yeah, big bang and stuff like that. It's That's been my impression. He's very dismissive he's not terribly open and I as a conversation partner You know, I like watching those videos for what Peterson has to contribute, but I don't see Sam bringing a lot to the table I I liked what Brett Weinstein and and Doug Murray brought to the table too, but Sam just keeps Dismissing yeah and knock it down and and then well, but I think yeah so I I just keeps going back to a fundamentalist thing. I think that he's afraid of Because he's so fundamentalist in his rationality. I feel like he's afraid that everyone is fundamentalist all the time People that believe In Nationality I I often think that when he's talking about Christians, I think Christians aren't really like that. They're way too inconsistent to be like that Not the real world Sam no, no, no So do you do you do you know anyone else in your circles that has watched these debates or you just kind of feel? isolated in watching them there's Every once in a while I I notice that some people are responding to videos they put up their little They put their memes up and then it's like with Jordan Peterson hashtags You're on my team Yeah, so so what do you think So are you are you a Christian or not a believer or where do you stand with respect to god? I've i've been through a lot of different stages of Christianity. Okay, I've been I've been everything from Um This conflicts with science. What do I do? to missionary Of sorts. Wow, I've run the whole And where are you at now? i'm um um right now where I am is believing but also Having conflicts consistently on sunday mornings Like I went I actually went to church yesterday, uh, but not my church I was on vacation With my girlfriend who is a catholic? And so we went to a catholic church in the area that we were in yeah and The catholic situation is weird. I don't understand the need to kneel It's worship And then there's the uh and with your spirit that I don't understand either But I I don't I don't look at the things that he's looking at and see terrible evidence Well, but but the thing is people don't most people don't believe most things on hardly any evidence at all And then there's that yes It's like believe things on evidence like Most people just don't believe things on evidence. Yeah And then there's that yes Believe things on evidence like Most people just do stuff They just know they hear it. They say I believe this. Well, I don't believe that That's just what people do and so right not only do I think you don't know christians I also think you don't know people people are not like that People are a mess. Oh, yeah, whatever they want When you're gonna fix this with what a sermon i'm in that business it doesn't work Yeah, he was like you can just tell people Uh the the facts and then it'll just unlock their mind and then they'll just They'll just like no they won't have you ever explained to a smoker that can't do the thing I don't care. No, you can't just change somebody's mind like that. No, no I Get I get that all the time with church people It's like they'll come up to me and say pastor You should preach a sermon about that because they're annoyed with someone who's doing something in the church and it's like But when I tell you not to do the things that are annoying other people you don't stop Well, what makes you think if I tell these other people they'll stop because I know they won't because it's just your example is the great One it's like smokers, you know, you really shouldn't smoke. Yeah, I know Really should I told my kids not to smoke right exactly I do as I say not as I do. That's right. We are human beings sam We pick up beliefs like velcro picks up lint. That's how we are That's true That is that is a good analogy Believe all kinds of stuff on no reason at all and sam's gonna trot in you need enough evidence. Well, yeah sam Okay I don't even believe that's true of you much less anybody else. It's not how we're wired exactly and of course it's psychologists who know this because the Psychologist will sit in the room all day and listen to people talk and I could never be a psychologist because I just have the Eye roll all the time. They'll tell me something You too Right as a pastor, I really have to control myself, but the rules are a little looser for a pastor Sometimes it'll be nice and pastoral and patient but you get to a point I knew a pastor would just hide in his office because it was a good thing because if anybody actually came in his office He he'd just tell him exactly what he thought and they'd leave his church and it'd be a mess Yeah That is a mess Oh, man well um Let's see so Okay, so I went to church With my girlfriend who is fiercely intelligent. And so I was talking to her about this potential conversation and um I think that You know with sam's sam's idea that we can all just agree on well-being We sat and pondered that for a little You know like what what came out of that discussion between the two of us though Was it ultimately? if you're not If you're not aiming at the creator you're aiming at the created And if you Like I said people like people will go to war for whatever is their highest priority you can't Rationalize an alcoholic out of drinking. Yeah, you can't Tell the smoker. Hey, that's that's dumb. And then there's oh right. It's dumb. I'll just throw these out. Yeah. Yeah But There has to be There has to be something above things that we can all aim at That can unify us Even if that's jordan peterson's version of god one It's that you just have to say okay, so we're going to aim at The ideal of man's like the the perfect man Regardless of whether we call that person jesus or not At least we know that we're all aiming at the same thing and then we can de-emphasize all of these Material objects and pleasures and feelings and created things And then we don't have to fight each other over them. Yeah, because nobody's going to war for their second most valuable object They're not going to risk their life for it And that's that's jonathan. I mean before I ever found jordan peterson. I read jonathan height's books and And I thought he he really nails a lot of that stuff. That's that's how we are I was listening to the unbelievable conversation between michael russ and jon Lennox and and michael russ made the point he said, you know if we were chimps Then they were there in a large room and said there'd probably be just looking around There'd probably be about five females in heat and you know None of you know, none of this could ever happen because it would be oh it'd be chimp warfare Over the five females in heat and that would be it and and we're amazing creatures that You know in jonathan height as you know, you put up a flagpole and you know people will circle around it and you say well You know and and the thing is we live in the united states this large huge powerful nation But if you live overseas, you know, you live in a I gotta be careful what I say here You live in a little country With and and you you look around you think there's just a there's not that many people here and It's you know, their national story is kind of ridiculous and their hymn is really wormy and you know But hey, it's their country. They love it. They'll die for it Right. That's people Right exactly doesn't matter how backward your tribe is you'll don't you you'll defend it. That's right They're your tribe and there's this great scene in a buster keaton movie where this husband and wife are fighting And and the husband starts roughing up the wife and buster keaton steps in and slugs the guy And and turns around and the wife slugs him That's oh man, you know, I hate my husband he beats me but don't you dare touch him he's still my husband These things happen Yeah All the time all the time all the time all the time so what kind of venues do you play in? Um Oh i've um, oh as a musician i've played Uh everything i've i've played uh hole in the wall bars um up to You know like regional theaters Up to um, i've played across the country and back on tour. I've been to england and scotland on tour Um, so you get a chance to watch people. Oh, yeah, i've seen a lot of people um, and oddly enough um It's they're not that different like they they are because you know, if you don't understand the culture They're gonna say things and you're just like what why would you why would you think or say any of that? um But if you boil it down It's such a world of people. Yeah. Yeah um and The the us tour that I went on Was with an alternative rock band and so we were playing with a lot of punk bands and So there are a lot of people that are What just to so far to the left that you can't even see them anymore And just screaming into microphones about things that I can't say on recordings And And then I know on the other end of the spectrum, you know, i've done I've performed in churches all over the place. I i've got a band with a guy That band's called saving faith and he writes his own original christian music So i've got I go all the way in both directions Um Do you always know you wanted to be a musician i've always been a musician Like that's just not yeah. Yeah, you know like originally I you know, I told myself that I probably wanted to do music education And then I found out that I don't want to teach Well, you are one of the lucky ones because I know a lot of other folks who would love to Be a professional musician, but you know So well, it's one of those things like if you if you're in it for the wrong reasons, it's not going to work If you if you're in it for fame Just stop If the music doesn't drive you You don't have it. You don't have enough to keep going Because they're never going to pay you enough to keep going Yeah, and the crowd is not going to follow you enough to keep going. Yeah The label is not going to find you and you need to just keep playing music anyway, wow And so that's what i'm doing. That's cool. That's cool. I love it. Yeah, I love it Well, we got about we got about seven eight minutes left so And sorry, sorry for that. I mean because i'm getting more and more of these requests and so Sometimes there's only a little half hour you can you can push in and you can I intentionally went over the half hour because I wasn't sure that I had An hour's worth of discussion Have you watched my videos I can talk an hour. No problem I appreciate that and I like i'm like a week behind on your Because well because normally the other thing that I do is I prepare instruments And I work at night mostly and so I can put on whatever I want in the background and let's spit a lot of your voice Talking through stuff But you know and i've also Started going with think club and obviously i've i've i took two of jordan's classes Like I took his whole maps of meaning and personality class. I took one of them twice um And i've just been eating youtube content like crazy. Um But this last week they needed me during regular hours so I decided not to subject the entire store and all of our patrons To nothing but philosophical debate. I was like, yeah, let's just let's just put some music on Well that that those what you just described as as many of the people who listen to me Because how else are you going to deal with that much content but it's such a weird world because many people have no time to listen To any of this but depending on the profession some people have Hours of time to fill. Oh, man I wish I wish that I had This While and like a smartphone when I was commuting to college because I was commuting for two hours a day From out of long island into the city for college Wow listening to four hours of podcasts a day Yeah, but like I wasn't I wasn't really able to do anything because I get motion sickness on trains and if i'm driving And I can't be doing homework while i'm driving So i'm just idle for like four hours a day and this would have been fantastic Well, I do get emails from truckers and commuters and runners and oh, yeah, so But because otherwise it's like yeah, I talk so much but People keep listening. Apparently that's what youtube says unless lots of people are just Clicking play and then going out for coffee or something and right everybody lets the burglars think someone's home This guy in this house. He's got a big voice. He talks about god and jordan peterson all the time What kind of a crazy person lives there? That's right, that's right. This is not the house to burgle Imagine someone queuing up my playlist for the vacation hours on end He just talks just 24 7 that's right he just doesn't stop it's crazy doesn't the guy sleep I mean don't you I mean don't you Have time to sleep and generate all this content Oh, I I have learned the art of being efficient with some things and I could not do this channel if I didn't Um, I I have to do videos efficiently and that's why there's no there's no fun intro. There's no editing It's all Here it is If you want it, there it is Yeah stuff on a shingle I'm at it It's working it's working really it's working and to me it's just been you know meeting people like you and that's the fun of it To me is is you know? Hearing your story watching your um your interviews that you're doing with everybody Else and all of their oh wonderful. It's been wonderful. It's fascinating. Isn't it? It is I talked to a guy this afternoon and i'll send it to him and And it's up to you I mean I i'd be happy to post this if you want me to or I can send it to you and you and your Girlfriend can decide if I should put it up. It's up to you um But I talked to I had a great conversation with a guy this afternoon and um I I just feel enormously blessed by this whole thing. Um, yeah, you know what what a What what an amazing what an amazing thing? So it's really cool so yeah But i'm about out of time john but um, jfk, huh? Cool cool initials Yeah, I uh, I borrowed them from uh from a president I have it on all of my stuff like I so that people don't steal it. Uh-huh. I got jfk Little stickers on everything And everyone is initially very confused Like why is he so hardcore about kennedy? Who just puts kennedy stickers all over everything like No guys No, and I I have a band one of my bands that I actually started and write the music for and headline is jfk and the assassins cool Cool name. Yeah, some people think it's cool. Some people think it's really offensive well, you know that someone will be At something it's well, yeah, that's why I just decided to go with it anyway Yeah, and originally I was gonna write songs about conspiracy theories And I I wrote a song about how the world is flat Or from the perspective of someone who thinks the world is flat, but that ended up not being Everything that I wrote about and so there's like i've got like an albums worth of serious songs that people could listen to and then like an ep worth of nonsense like how the world is flat and Uh, I have a song about uh a woman who likes to look into people's houses To see how they're decorated. Uh-huh, but it's but the the chorus of that song is your mom's a peeping tom Yeah, so So it's you know, there's some silliness on one end and then on the other end i've got like I I did a song where the whole Bridge is about the epic of gilgamesh really Yeah inspired by peterson and it's just like the ninth tablet of the epic of gilgamesh paraphrased into Rhymings that worked. That's awesome. Well, i'm sure folks will google you and find you and I think that's fun. I gotta drop out because I got another bucko right on after you. So sounds good Hey, thanks for the talk. It was fun. Oh, thank you. Thank you paul for having me and we'll we'll talk to you some other time Perhaps we'll see we'll see. All right. All right. Bye. Bye You